aS aes 05 2 
a igaiac: 
rirst: 


eras 
Seatees 


Avirsete 
Danko Sf 


fate sete die 
Paty B 





Ss 
ac 


211 4 
2(SA 2 
aia 


<AELIBRARY. Oc 
Wadi iv). 30™ 


Mp, 


<SNEUNIVER 
NY 


& 
OWA” 


SNEUNIVERS/7 
a 


YOr 


YQ 


Wigs iW3-4 


= 
Es 
g 


sp LOS ANGELES: SS 
suns” 


HOST -40 
OF CAUFORy, 
Hm 
S = 
Z fe 
“OUWuaNANY 


Of eZ 

== 

E 
MOS 


NE-LIBRARY-Ge 


VaOslWI-3 





= w/ Va 
“Auosmva-410 
OPAL FORY,, 

5 


erat: 
LOS-ANCELES. 


sys 
2 
= 
5 


AUVUGIT” 


sp lOS ANGELES 
CISMIAINNAYS 


0 
N 
2 
S 
% 


% 


o 
“GISUIAINN: 
JOS ANCELEs 


oOo 
Wsaninna 


CALIF 
%OAVEEM 





coer ~ *S fh VS 
Goannnas” —“aoanva40™ 
_SOSANGHLEDy, gOFCALFORy, 
S S 
S E & 
Ss = 2 = 
g s & 5 
WSHIAINN-Y YOM 
E-LIBRARY.O; <N\EUNIVERS, 
ACP yy 
wom = — eravsor 
OF-CALIFO <VEUNIVERS 
S4 O $s % 
S ee e 
O.AMVUAIYY “Tayo 
hae 
ua if het } 
3 zed 
S 00 f 
TQANINI 2 WOAIT¥)-40 
Microsoft Cor ora 
Sp HOSANCELES, go -CALIFOR 
S 5 & B 
3 = 2 z 
s % & 
Ws xaninn yw ORNL 
AREUBRARYOS, SHEUUVERSy, 
2 Ss & = 
= = 7 Oo 
“noavy0 Serna 
OF CALFORY, ——_SHEUNIVERS/p 
= 5s -£ 8 
= z ¢ S 
2JLe gg 
OETA “rr son 


at 
a 
“a 


ye 
a 
rro 
_——} 
5 
y 


NY 
af 
= 
=I 

%, 


AE-LIBRARY.O- 
WHOAWI-40° 


WELIBRARY.O, 


OF-CALIFORy 


SHE-UNIVERS/p,, 
SITINV-SOLSS 


3 
<= 
= 
we 
% 


2 
= 
E 


= 
8 
4% 


SAE-LIBRARY-Oe 
AAO) -40° 


AELIBRARYQ 
2 


: 
is 


= 
] 
> 
S 
> 


LOSANGELE 
SHININNA 


Bits 


/ 
= 


Py 
2 
2 
= 

€ 


fea) 


STHINV-SOV 


<SNEUNIVERS, 


S 
: 
= 
% 





FCALIFORY, 


Q 
A 


ES 


SEUNIVERS/, gps 1OSANGELE 
>) a 


$ 
= 


Ss 


RN 
— 
= 


OF CALIFOR, 


— 


OF-CALI FORK, 


ES 


NEUNIVERS/p 
lof F 


3s 


Ss 


)F-CAL FORy, 


papi | os 


? 


NELIBRARY Oe, 


| 
; 
] 
) 
J 
7 


SHANDY 


AAOATIND-JO 


SUTAINAIA 


fh 


{OF CALFORY, 


YOABVUAIT® 


a" 
- 


yLOSANCELES, 


S 


USAIN” 


$0 


STIIINY 


W 


OANVUAN 


mom 
egies 


= 


= 


5 
i lie 


= 
§ 


<QE-LIBRARYO- 


a 


SuIAINTAY 


SP 


< HEUNIVER 
THONV'S 


E-LIBRARY. 
a 
2 
s 


aX 


‘enannysors™ 
<EUNIVERS)p 
Oo 


E-LIBRARY. Qe 
J 


aN 


Hagan) 


STIINV-SOV 


E-LIBRARY. 


Sp 
Neg 


LOS-ANGELE 


“4404 MVI-30" 


<Q OFCALIFORY, 


USHININNA 


d, 


< AMEUNIVERS, 
STTINV-SO! 


YOAV HATA 


z 
E 
S 


-LIBRARY:-Q- 
(O4N1¥}-40" 


sr” s 
CSAINNIDS” 


QEUIBRARY Os 
= 


ss lOS-ANCELES: 


oe 
SHINING 


28 
2 5 
=a 
S 
RS 


fj - 


OAWV aT 


<SHEUNIVERS 7, 


<“SIONV-SOT 


Z 
5 
= 
$ 


AUVUSITAYS 


a 
2 
= 
2 
= 
“0 


OF CALIFORY 


23 
aA 
= 
S 


OF-CALIFORY, 
ORHAN 


WW 


SS 
& 
= 
—_ 
—_ 


E-LIBRARY. 


4 


LOSANGELES: 
CISHININAIYS”” 


<QE-LIBRAR 


WVasOsV)-40° 
OF CALIFORY, 
S = 
So a 


= 
ss 
z 


% 
5 
= 
5 


F-CALIFORy, 
ABVUGITIOY 


* 


WAOAIVI-40' 
OF-CALIFORY, 


sys0! 
sys 


UNIVERS/>_ 
onv-sors 


eSHEUNIVERS 


ME 
S74 


Omvualia® 


<UEUNIVERS, 
gine 


LIBRARY: 
VOANTVI: 


we 
sy 
“STNV-SOF 
<HEUNIVERS 7, 


0 


aE UBRARY. 
“Hugaiv) 


STINY SOV 


<QEUBRARY.O 


Es. 


MSHININ IY” 


ys lOSANGEL 


MaAOdIV)-40° 
OF CALIFORY, 


. 


E-UNIVERS 
STIONY-SO1 


S ; 
YOAMVHANI 


SNE-UNIVERS 
i=) 


Ye 


J 


40d NVI 


‘maonysors™ 
<HEUNIVERS/p, 
. oO 


J 


SAE LIBRARY Ge 


N 
“Haoaiw) 


STUINV-SO 


At LIBRARYO, 
gman, 


LOS:ANG 
JAINN I 


OF-CALIFORY, 


* 


Onvuana®” 


% 


F-CALIFOR4, 
z 


OVA 


39 


USININVAS 
sp lOSANCELEy 


C/SUIAINT- WS 


3 


ZO AWVHAN 


~ 


WELIBRARY.O, 


> 


SS 
= 
S 
uu. 
Co 


ss lOS'ANCELES 
W/SHaAING-IDY 


% 
= 
3 

© 


SHEUNIVERS 
“STIIONV-SOV 


<< 


: & 
OANVHaITAS 


€ 
3 
= 
& 


OF-CALIFORy, 
YO.ANVHATIAYY 


bo 


* 
. 


Surin Wy 
agp OSANGE 


GS 


7 & 
ASHIAINAAWS 


& 


AUVHEITS 


OF-CALIFOR, 


a 


E-LIBRARY. 
gn 


j 


\ 


LOS:ANGE 
dgAINN 


A 
mm 
= 
= 
= 


aAELIBRARYO¢ 


X\ 
S 
= 
3 
= 


Ufo 


WELIBRAI 


ps LOSANCELES,» 


4aOsIV: 
OF CALI 


Ui 


NEUNIVERS/y, 


Ss 
~ 
c= 
<r 
c 
co 


ye 
= 
Cnn} 
= 
= 
<= 


AE-LIBRARY.O¢ 


= 
eg 
= 


= 
es 
= 
= 
=< 


a 
pre 
=, 
= 
“a 


<QELIBRARY: 


WELIBRAR 


slOSANCELES 


OF CALIF 


Sf 


“AMMA 


AME-UNIVERS, 


<< 


+ AMEUNIVE 


S 

‘ 
aS 
est 


a ee 
i ied 


f 
j he hg : 





annala RIoshachta Eireann. 


ANNALS 


OF 


THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND, 
BY THE FOUR MASTERS, 


FROM 


THE EARLIEST PERIOD TO THE YEAR 1616. 


EDITED FROM MSS. IN THE LIBRARY OF THE ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY AND OF TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN, WITH 
A TRANSLATION, AND COPIOUS NOTES, 


BY JOHN O'DONOVAN, LLD., MARTA, 


BARRISTER AT LAW. 





‘“‘Olim Regibus parebant, nunc per Principes factionibus et studiis trahuntur: nec aliud adversus validissimas gentes 
pro nobis utilius, quam quod in commune non consulunt. Rarus duabus tribusve-civitatibus ad propulsandum commune 
periculum conventus: ita dum singuli pugnant universi vincuntur.”—Tacitus, AGRICOLA, c. 12. 





SECOND EDITION. 


VOU. VL: 


DUBLIN: 
HODGES, SMITH, AND CO., GRAFTON-STREET. 


BOOKSELLERS TO THE UNIVERSITY. 


1856. 


. DUBLIN: 
jBrinted at the Aniversity Press, 
BY M. H. GILL. 


annala rioshachca eiReann. 


1839306 


annala RIoshachta eiREaNN. 





COIS CRIOST, 1589. 


Qap Cniorc, mle, ctice céd, octmogat, anaoft. 


Masurohir cuconnact mac conconnact (.1. an comanba), mic concon- 
nact, mic bmain, mc pilip mic tomaip vo écc 17 Wun TIS(pna an Tiodnacal 
veaccailpib, 7 oollamnaib oampanb, 7 oanpadab paoi poslamta pmocnamac 
ianom 7 1 nEZaoweilec e1pide. Tan nécc meguidin cuconnact po bad 001% la 
concobap puad mac concobain mesuidin Zomad lap TiZeapnap cine ap aoi 
rimnpipeacca. 6a plo vo pumenrac an lucc naile F0omad é mac mésZuioin 
(aod) no bad wTiZeapna ofip a atan, co mbatapn 1 pppitbeant pm a pole amlaio 
rin. Ro paoid aod cleta Dionnpargio a bhnatan oomnall mac aoda mic Mazs- 
nupa uf domnaill (sé oa pala (coppa ma pin) via Cuingid pam teact dia 
puntact 7 ola poImitin amenl ba spépac la a pmopfpaib consnam la phoct 
pilip mic tomaip mesumoip. Ni bai oo cenel cconall an can pin nec ap an 
mo a paoileccain via Cabaip may an oomnall hi pm uaip ba hanglonn 7 ba 
cTucincems cata eiplum, 7 ni clop a opuim pm a eccnarccib iccip. Nin bo 
hfiplfoac po pneccnad puigle na cceaccad pm la vomnall uain po tionoil 


’ Servants.—The Irish annava is the same as_hathe his horse and his two boyes and two 
the Latin calones. They were the attendants hackeneys, or one hackeney and two chieffe 
on the gallowglasses. Sir Anthony Sentleger horse at the leste.””—See Battle of Magh-Rath, 
writes in 1543: p. 350. 

‘Ther ys no horseman of this lande, but he * General in battle.—This means nothing more 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 





THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1589. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred eighty-nine. 


Macutre (Cuconnaught, the son of Cuconnaught, namely, the Coarb, son 
of Cuconnaught, son of Brian, son of Philip, son of Thomas), died on the 17th 
of June. He was [truly] a lord in his munificence towards churches, ollaves, 
soldiers, and servants’; and a learned and studious adept in Latin and Irish. 
After the death of Maguire (Cuconnaught), Conor Roe, the son of Conor 
Maguire, thought that the lordship of the country should be his, by reason of 
his seniority ; while the other party thought that Hugh, son of [the deceased] 
Maguire, should be lord after his father ; so that they were thus in opposition 
to each other. Hugh sent messengers to his relative, Donnell, the son of Hugh, 
son of Manus O’Donnell (although they had previously quarrelled), to request 
of him to come to his aid and assistance, as it had been usual with his ancestors 
to aid the descendants of Philip, the son of Thomas Maguire. There was not 
at this time any one of the Kinel-Connell from whom he [Hugh] expected more 
assistance than from this Donnell, for he was a mighty champion, and a general 
in battle’; and it was never heard that he had at any time* turned his back on 
his enemies. The words of the messengers were treated with indifference by 
Donnell, for he immediately mustered all the forces under his command, and 


than that he was wont to lead his father’s forces. signifies ‘‘indeed,”” and sometimes “at all,” as 
* At any time.—The word itzip sometimes in this instance. 


har 2 


1876 anNaza RIOSshachta elRECANN. 1589. 


pide ma mbaoi ina cumang po céd6ip,7 po Paotd a teacta do mdiIp1 50 haod 
via pad pup bhc pon a ccionn as pcéit sabpa an ctpammd amail ap oéine 
comcpad. Cudpium san eappnadad 5an enpuipeac tia tucnt Luincc la hon 
loca henne 50 name sur an margin pempaice. Caimec concobap puad co 
matibh uaccaip pfpmanac an la pram sup an 1onad ccéona, 7 po paccaib a 
1onncomapoa 1. Lapp in ou pm po daly anma TIZeEapna oo Faipm ve an a 
banach. Oo act aod Sup an 1onad enoalca hipin,7 puaip vomnall 6 vomnaill 
an acionn. lap prior pccel vo vomnall sup b6 hé Concobap po paccanb an 
comapoa pemebeptman acbent na biad ba vepde, 7 50 mad € aod no biad 
1 monad a atap conad ann pin po Zainead a saipm flata po cédoip oao0d 
magzwoip la oomnall ua noomnaill, 7 la mazib a tine. 

Mag matsamna Roya mac aint, mic bmiain na morceinse, mic Rémamn 
mic Zlaipne vécc. GSman mac aoda icc, mic aoda, mic Slain bude tTIZeanna 


oantpaise oinsiall,7 eimlp mac conulad tigeapna plpnmaige, 7] oeapbnacain 


» Precisely, an tramps. This phrase occurs Four Masters should have told us nothing about 


very frequently in the sense of precisely, exactly, 
punctually.—See note ™, under the year 1586, 
p- 1856, and note *, under 1588, p. 1866, supra. 

© Sciath-Ghabhra.—This place is shewn on an 
old map in the State Papers’ Office, London, 
under the name of Skea Castle, situated near 
the east side of the Upper Lough Erne, to the 
The site of this 
castle is still pointed out at the little town of 


south-east of Enniskillen. 


Lisnaskea, in the barony of Magherastephena, in 
Fermanagh, and about nine miles to the south- 
east of Enniskillen. 

“ One slipper, \eaz-ayy, i.e. one of a pair of 
slippers: “ Upa «1. bnoga.”—O’ Clery. When 
leat, which literally means half, is thus pre- 


fixed, it signifies ‘‘ one of two,”’ 
? too) ’ 


such as one ear, 
one eye, one leg, one hand, one foot, one cheek, 
one horn, one shoe. 

¢ Profit 64 1. maiz.” —O’ Clery. 

' Dartry- Oriel, i.e. the barony of Dartry, in 
the west of the county of Monaghan. It is more 
usually called Dartry-Coininnsi, from the town- 
land of Coninish, now divided into several sub- 


denominations. It looks very strange that the 


the fate of Hugh Roe Mac Mahon, who was the 
brother and heir of the Rossa mentioned in the 
text, and of whom local tradition remembers so 
much. Camden, ad ann. 1590, Fynes Moryson, 
and Cox, have given very impartial accounts of 
the abominable treatment which this Hugh re- 
ceived from the Lord Deputy, Sir William Fitz- 
William. The Editor is tempted to lay before 
the reader the following account of this horrid 
transaction,—which was the main cause of the 
frightful war which ensued,—as written by 
Fynes Moryson, who fairly translates Camden, 
adding a little of his own feelings, which are 
admirable, considering the murderous age in 
which he lived, and the virulent anti-Irish feel- 
ings of the class to which he belonged : 

** About this time Mac Mahown, chieftain of 
Monaghan, died, who in his life-time had sur- 
rendered this his country, held by tanistry the 
Irish law, into her Majesty’s hands, and received 
a re-grant thereof under the broad séal of Eng- 
land, to him and his heirs males, and for default 
of such, to his brother, Hugh Roe Mac Mahown, 
with other remainders. And this man dying 


1589. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1877 


sent back his messengers to Hugh, to desire him to meet him precisely? at 
Sciath-Ghabhra‘ with all possible expedition. He then proceeded, without 
dallying or delaying, through the territory of Lurg, and along the margin of 
Lough Erne, until he arrived at the aforesaid place. Conor Roe and the chiefs 
of the upper part of Fermanagh had gone on the day before to the same place, 
and there left a token (namely, one slipper*) that the name of lord should be 
conferred on him on the day following. Hugh arrived at that particular place 
[appointed], and found Donnell O’Donnell there before him. When Donnell 
received intelligence that it was Conor that had left the token which we have 
before mentioned, he said that it should not profit® him, for that Hugh should 
be [installed] in the place of his father ; upon which Hugh was immediately 
nominated chief by Donnell O’Donnell and the chieftains of his country. 

Mac Mahon (Rossa, the son of Art, son of Brian of the Early Rising, son of 
Redmond, son of Glasny) died ; upon which Brian, the son of Hugh Oge, son 
of Hugh, son of John Boy, Lord of Dartry-Oriel', and Ever, son of Cu-Uladh, 


without heirs males, his said brother came up 
to the state that he might be settled in his in- 
heritance, hoping to be countenanced and che- 
rished as Her Majesty’s Patentee ; but he found 
(as the Irish say) that he could not be admitted 
till he had promised to give about six hundred 
cows (for such and no other are the Irish bribes). 
After[ wards] he was imprisoned (the Irish say 
for failing in part of this payment) and within 
a few days again inlarged; with promise that 
the Lord Deputy himself would go settle him 
in his country of Monaghan, whither his Lord- 
ship took his jorney shortly after, with him in 
his company. At their first arrival, the gen- 
tleman was clapt in bolts, and within two days 
after, indicted, arraigned, and executed at his 
own house ; all done (as the Irish said) by such 
officers as the Lord Deputy carried with him 
for that purpose. The Irish said he was found 
guilty by a jury of soldiers” [‘gregariorum mi- 
hitum vilumque hominum judicio subjecit.’— 
Camden], ‘but no gentlemen or freeholders ; and 
that of them four English soldiers were suffered 


to goand come at pleasure, but the others, being 
Irish kerne, were kept straight, and starved till 
they found him guilty. The treason for which 
he was condemned was because, some two years 
before, he, pretending a rent due unto him out 
of the Ferney, upon that pretence levied forces, 
and so marching into the Ferney in a warlike 
manner, made a distress for the same (which by 
the English law may perhaps be treason, but 
in that country, never before subject to law, it 
was thought no rare thing nor great offence). 
The greater part of the country was divided be- 
tween four gentlemen of that name, under a 
yearly rent to the Queen, and (as they said) not 
without payment of a good fine underhand. The 
Marshal, Sir Henry Bagnol, had part of the 
country; @aptain Henslowe was made seneschal 
of the country, and had the gentleman’s chiet 
house, with a portion of land; and to divers 
others smaller portions of land were assigned ; 
and the Irish spared not to say, that these men 
were all the contrivers of his” [Mac Mahon’s | 
‘« death, and that every one paid something”’ [ to 


1878 
# 


QNNaca RIOshachta elReEaNN. 


(1589. 


an ti pin clpoa 1. aod puad vo bit acc impfyamn pé poile pa ciIZeapnap na 


Tipe. 


Elinona instm iapla ofpmuman .. Semup mac Slam, mic tommy, mic 
Semuip mic soit bf uf puainc, 7 bth mfic 1apla upmuman «1. eouanod mac 
Semuip mic Pianaap puaid mic Semaip, mic emammn vo écc. 

Contaoip conncae an cleap una mgm coinpoealbars mic mninceantars mic 
vomnaill mic caidce, mic Toippdealbarg, mic mupchard na partmse, b(n 1anla 
cuadmuman .1. Concobap mac vonnchard, mic concobaip, mic coinndealbons 
mic tadce ui bmain do Ecc pan celap mop. 

Oomnall maz consail eppcop pata bot vécc 29 Sepcemben. 

Toippdealbac mac taldcc, mic Soncobain mic coippoealbarg mic cTa1dcc 


uf bmcan 6 bEL ata an compaic vécc. 
annpin. | 


Ro bad vamna eccaoine an ti tlpoa 


Cadce an otinaid mac vonnchald mic muinceantais, mic Donnchaid, mic 
muipceantais, mic an ballong prmpeanp cucite na peapna (.1. conca baupemo), 


7 pleacca an ballang véce, nip cin 1 ccopp ina compe a comcalma ima com- 


focnarb. 


the Lord Deputy] “for his share. Hereupon 
the Irish of that name, besides the former allega- 
tions, exclaimed that their kinsman was treache- 
rously executed to entitle the Queen to his land, 
and to extinguish the name of Mac Mahown, and 
that his substance was divided between the Lord 
Deputy and the Marshal; yea, that a pardon 
was offered to one of the jury for his son, being 
in danger of the law, upon condition that he 
would consent to find this his kinsman guilty. 

‘“* Great part of these exclamations were con- 
tained in a complaint exhibited against the Lord 
Deputy, after his return into England, to the 
Lords of her Majesty’s Council, about the end 
of the year 1595, in the name of Mac Guire 
and Ever Mac Cooly (one of the Mac Mahowns, 
and chief over the Irish in the Ferney)’”.—Edi- 
tion of 1735, vol. i. pp- 24, 25. 

The guilt of Fitz-William is rendered still 
darker by the fact lately published from the 
State Papers by Mr. Shirley (Account of Far- 


ney, p. 88, 91, 92, 98), that in his correspon- 
dence with Burghley he expresses his anxiety 
for a speedy resolution of Mac Mahon’s case, 
“« That either the olde Mac Mahon maie be par- 
doned and sett at libertie, or a new one made, 
or that title extinguished and the territory de- 
vided.” 
wickedness of Fitz-William’s proposal to make 


The reader will at once perceive the 


anew Mac Mahon, when he considers that Hugh 
Roe was his brother’s heir, according to the 
law of England, and that large bribes had been 
offered to the corrupt Chief-Governor to raise 
“one Brien Mac Hugh Oge” to the chieftain- 
On the 2nd of March, 1589, Fitz-Wil- 
liam wrote to Burghley and the Lords of the 
Council a long letter in which he mentions this 
fact as follows: .“‘ Some indede attempted me for 
him” [Brien Mac Hugh Oge] ‘ with large 
offers; but as I never benefitted myself by the 
admission of him that is now in durance, so did 
I meane to convert his fall wholie to the proffit 


ship. 


1589. ] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1879 


Lord of Farney, and the brother of the deceased, i.e. Hugh Roe, were con- 
tending with each other about the lordship of the territory. 

Elenora, the daughter of the Earl of Desmond (i. e. of James, the son of 
John, son of Thomas, son of James, son of Garrett), who had been the wife of 
O’Rourke, and [afterwards] of the son of the Earl of Desmond (i. e. of Edward, 


the son of James, son of Pierce Roe, son of James, son of Edmond), died. 


The Countess of the county of Clare, Una, the daughter of Turlough, son 
of Murtough, son of Donnell, son of Teige, son of Turlough, son of Murrough 
na-Raithnighe, and wife of the Earl of Thomond, 1. e. of Conor, son of Donough, 
son of Conor, son of Turlough, son of Teige O’Brien, died at Clare-more®. 

Donnell Mag Congail", Bishop of Raphoe, died on the 29th of September. 

Turlough, the son of Teige, son of Conor, son of Turlough, son of Teige 


O’Brien of Bel-atha-an-chomraic’, died ; 


lamentation. 


and his death was the cause of great 


Teige-an-Duna, the son of Donough, son of Murtough, son of Donough, son of 
Murtough, son of Ballagh, the senior [of the Mac Mahons] of Tuath-na-Fearna* 
‘ (i.e. of Corca-Bhaiscinn'), and of Shocht-an-Bhallaigh, died. There lived not 
in his neighbourhood in his time so brave a man. 


of her Majestie and good of this state, nothing 
regarding mine owne privat: I speak it in the 
presence of God by whom I hope to be saved !”— 
Account of Farney, p. 89. 

® Clare-more, i.e. the town of Clare (near 
Ennis), from which the county was named. 

» Donnell Mag Congail.—He assisted at the 
Council of Trent in 1563, and died at Cealla 
Beaga, now Killybegs, in the west of the county 
of Donegal, in this year.—See Harris’s edition 
of Ware’s Bishops, p. 275. The name Mag 
Congail is now common in the county of Done- 
gal, and anglicised Magonigle. 

i Bel-atha-an-chomhraic, i.e. mouth of the 
ford of the confluence, now Ballycorick, 4 town- 
land situated on the confines of the baronies of 
Clonderalaw and Islands, in the county of Clare. 
—See the Ordnance map of that county, sheet 
50. There is a family of the O’Briens still liv- 
ing at this place who inherit a small estate. 


K Tuath-na-fearna, i.e. the district of the 
alder, a district coextensive with the parish of 
Kildysart, in the barony of Clonderalaw, and 
county of Clare. The Rev. Dr. Kenny, of Kil- 
rush, in a letter to the Editor, dated 6th April, 
1847, states that ‘‘ the residents never call the 
parish of Kildysart, in the vernacular, by any 
other name than papdupte guar na pedpna.”— 
See note >, under the year 1575, p. 1683, supra, 
where the Editor has described Tuath-na-fearna 
as in the barony of Islands, by mere oversight. 

! Corca-Bhaiscinn.—This should be “ of East 
Corca-Bhaiscinn.” In the Description of the 
County of Clare, preserved in the Library of 
Trinity College, Dublin, E. 2. 14, this Teige 
is mentioned as chief of the ‘‘ Baronie of Cloyne- 
deralawe, conteyning East Carkewasken,” and 
proprietor of the castles of “* Dangen-Myburke” 
[i. e. Oamgean moige Ouilc, now Dangan, a 
very large castle in ruins, in a townland of the 


ANNAta RIOshachTa EIREGNN. ~ [1589. 


1880 


Copbmac mac taidcc mic D1apmavda, mic copbmaic o maiglaitim vécc. 

Masgnup mac cumn mic an calbaig, mic magnuya mic aoda oulb ui dom- 
nail vo mapbad laim Lé pinn 20 Sepcemben Llé plan mac Magnupa ig mic 
magnupa, mic aoda Ouib uf oomnanll. 

Oomnall mac eogain an loca mec puibne conpapal mupcpaige vécc pean 
po bad mat cpeabaine, 7 cl§ naoiolo,7 pob 1onmolca 1 prradnaips sall 4 
saoweal an ci cfpoa ann pin. 

bincais joccapaca 6 tip amalgad prap oo vol ap a ccomed ap noralcad 
blit pa bnit an Zobepnona 1. Sip Ripoepo biongszam. Mongipcip bpan vo dol 
a hucc an sobepnopa co nopumns mop vo pargoiuiib salloa 7 saoielca vo 
paisid na mbancac pin can bealac an oiotpuibe pan. Ouncars an ccabanpic 
amapp poppapom, 7 a ccpat na tnooa vo tinoad vo maigipcip ban po 
ppaoinead via parsxoruimb 7 po ofcfnoad é plin, 7 oomnall o valangs ouine 
uapal eipide aga mbaoi cfhoup cooa vo na paigoiuimb pin, 7 Remann oce 
mac Remaimec mic Sain a bane na bfinne,7 pochaide mop vo na pargoitiib 
Ro ba moive bnig 7 bonnpad na mbuincac on bpm pm, 4 
Oo cmd tha ploct 


a moulle pniu. 
po sabpac pon adannad ma nodibence ap a haittle. 
oluenoup mic Slam a bane 6 tip amalgond ma ccommbaid, 7 muncin ouboa 
0 tip placnac mucaide, clann noomnanll sallocclac wle, Mupncaoh na couag. 
mac paudcc, mic mupchand uf plartbeancans, 7 muincip plaacb(pcong 7 Seooans 
ina pocamp plum, co nap pan aon po ba ion aipme 6 pinn 1aptanac loppeup co 
Thais eotuile co macaine luigne, co conann, 7 co macaipe connact gan vol 
m aon pann 1 nash an sobepnona. Ro gabrac na vibf(nccars pin ace 


same name, in the parish of Kilchrist, or district 
of Tuath-ua-mBuilc, in the barony of Clonde- 
ralaw, and adjoining the barony of Islands]; 
“* Cloynetheralla”’ [now Clonderalaw |; ‘‘ Caher- 
con; Ballamacollman” [ nowColmanstown ]; ‘‘and 
Derecrossan” [Derrycrossan :] ‘ all in the ter- 
ritory of East Corca-Vaskin, Contemporary with 
this Teige-an-Duna was Turlough Mac Mahon, 
chief of the territory of West Corca-Vaskin, 
and proprietor of the castles of Carighowly” 
[now Carrigaholt], ‘“‘Moyartha, Dunlicky, and 
Dunsumayne.” 

™ Magh-Laithimh, now Molahiff, near Castle- 


maine, in Kerry.—See note *, under 1581, 
p- 1757, supra. 

" Went on their defence, i.e. took upsarms to 
defend themselves. 

° Bealach-an-Diothruibhe, i.e. the road or pass 
of the wilderness. This was undoubtedly the 
name of the ancient road leading from the 
abbey of Ballintober to Croaghpatrick, in the 
county of Mayo, for the position of which see 
map to Genealogies, Tribes, 5c. of Hy-Fiachrach. 

P Came to a close fight, literally, ‘‘ at the time 
of the pressing of the fight by Master Brown.” 

4 John Burke of Ben, i.e. of Benmore Castle, 


1589. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1881 


Cormac, the son of Teige, son of Dermot, son of Cormac oe Carthy] of 
Magh-Laithimh”, died. 

Manus, the son of Con, son of Calvagh, son of Manus, son of Hugh Duy 
O'Donnell, was slain near the River Finn, on the 20th of September, by John, 
the son of Manus Oge, son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv O’Donnell. 

Donnell, son of Owen of the Lake Mac Sweeny, Constable of Muskerry, 
died. The deceased was a man who had good tillage, and kept a house of hos- 
pitality, and was praiseworthy in the eyes of the English and Ivish. 

The Lower Burkes from Tirawly westwards, after having refused to remain 
under the jurisdiction of the Governor, Sir Richard Bingham, went on their 
defence’. Master Brown proceeded, by order of the Governor, at the head of 
a large party of English and Irish soldiers, westwards over Bealach-an-Dioth- 
and at 
the time that Master Brown came to a close fight”, his soldiers were routed, and 
himself beheaded, as were also Donnell O’Daly, a gentleman who had the com- 
mand of a party of the soldiers ; and Redmond Oge, son of Redmond, son of 
John Burke of Ben’, together with a great number of the soldiers. The vigour 
and fury of the Burkes were increased by this defeat ; 


ruibh® against these Burkes. The Burkes made an attack upon them ; 


and they became more 
The descendants of Oliver, the son of 
John Burke of Tirawley, went in alliance with them, as did the O’Dowdas of 
Tireragh of the Moy; all the Clann-Donnell Galloglagh ; Murrough of the 
Battle-axes', the son of Teige, son of Murrough O'Flaherty, together with [all] 
the O’Flahertys and the Joyces; so that there was not one man worthy of note, 
from the western point of Erris to Traigh-Eothuile’, to Machaire-Luighne’, to 
Corran, and to Machaire-Chonnacht’, 


violent in their insurrection after it. 


who did not unite [on this occasion] 


in the parish of Grange, barony of Loughrea, 
and county of Galway.—See note °, under the 
year 1553, p. 1532, supra. This Redmond Burke 
was one of the Earl of Clanrickard’s followers, 
who assisted Bingham on this occasion. 
"Murrough of the Battle-axes, §c., O’ Flaherty.— 
He is called Sir Morogh ne Doe by the Eng- 
lish writers. He was very faithful to the Queen 
till 1586, when a party of the Governor’s sol- 
-diers plundered his people.—See p. 1849, supra. 


See also Chorographical Description of Iar-Con- 
naught, p. 394, et sequent. 

° Traigh-Eothuile, a great strand at Ballysa- 
dare, in the county of Sligo.—See it already 
mentioned at the years 1249, 1282, 1367, 1562. 

t Machaire-Luighne, i. e. the plain of Leyny, 
a barony in the county of Sligo. 

u Machaire-Chonnacht, 1. e. Campus Connacier, 
a great plain in the county of Roscommon already 
often referred to. 


i ae! 


GNNdZa RIOshachta €lREGNN. 


comillead Coiccd connacc 00 16 7 Dadhad pm pé aneappas. Oaipm can 
pm do Cuaid dap mac mupchad na ccuace ui plactb(ptag .1. tadcc 7 upun, 
7 mac veanbnatan vo Mupchad «1. vomnall mac Rucop ui ploantbfpcas an 
lonopang1o pa leitimel conmaicne, 7 an macame mrabongs o1dce capcc vo 


1882 (1589. 


ponnad. baccan a 06 n6 acpi do cévaibh d1olmumeac ap an cupup pm. Ro 
Zabpac ag vénam oinccne 7 edala iomda peacnon an cine topac laoi Domnais 
capee. Tanaic an tip an Zac caob ina ccopaigeace. 6a ipin o1dce peime 
pin tangaoan banna no 06 do pargoluimib Fan Flop san capiuccad d1iomcoiméd 
an tine, 7 60 cualaczan allguc an opovanaip, 7 canpm(pta na ccolcc buon 
ay na Mapac do Cotcap 1 neanac 1omcumang nan bo hupapa oionsabeal noe vo 
pena nomall an cplag Zaowealans. Puanat capcadcc 6 plaitbeancans via 
Ro 
léiccplott na pargoiuimide pnaypa pelén po topac an cplHs Zaodealars Zo 
cToncaip cadce ua plaicb(pcans oon concainn pin, 7 upun va plarcb(pcang, 7 


Paso 1 ccopac an cplos, 7 amumnzip ma ccipe comdluta ma cimcell. 


Taocc 6cc mac TaMIDce Ui platbeantals co nopuIns mop ora luct lfhamna ina 
ccimcell vo maitib cpice peodac 7 clomn ovonnchaid, 7] an mid na po manbad 
von ced pnaip oon cplos Zaorvelac po masgyplcs san pecfinm san pecat, 7 ni 
po lad 1ace peaca pm. Ro cnpochad ona eman mac Mupchad na ctouace 
ui ploatbeantans baoi illarm1 ngcallim po cfd tm la ian manbad caidce, 4 
muna cuicicip an clann pn manchad na ccuag ui plaictb(pcas pop posanl 7 
pon vibfince in acchad pmonnpa Saran po badpecel mon a nodead amlad pm. 

Olapmaic 6cc mac DiIapmaca, mc Denp, Mc DIAnMata, Mic concobamp 
(1. eppuce luimms), mic munchad an oana ut dfohad dvécc, 7 a adnacal 1 
noip(pc cola ma bonle pin ccpiocac céd ceneoil ppfamaic m uaccan oval 
ceaip. 


“ Conmaicne, i. e. Conmaicne-Cuile-Toladh, Loch Cime.—See Genealogical Table in Hardi- 


now the barony of Kilmaine, in the south of 
the county of Mayo. Machaire-riabhach is a 
plain in the adjoining barony of Clare, in the 
county of Galway.—See note *, under the year 
1469, p. 1064, supra. 

* Precisely, 00 Ponnnad.—This phrase might 
well be omitted. 

* Clann-Donough.—These were a branch of 
the O’Flaherties, descended from Donough 
Aluinn O’Flaherty, the brother of Rory of 


man’s edition of O’Flaherty’s Chorographical 
Description of Iar-Connaught, p. 362. 

* Conor, Bishop of Limerick.—He succeeded 
in the year 1400, resigned the see in 1426, and 
died in 1434.—See Harris’s edition of Ware’s 
Bishops, p.509, where this bishop is mentioned 
under the name of *‘ Cornelius O’ Ded.” 

* Disert-Tola, i. e. St. Tola’s desert, or wil- 
derness, now Dysart O’Dea, in the barony of 
Inchiquin, and county of Clare, where there is 


1589. | ANNALS OF THE. KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1883 


against the Governor. These plunderers continued to ravage the province of 
Connaught, by day and night, during the spring. It was at this time that two 
sons of Murrough of the Battle-axes O'Flaherty, Teige and Urun, and the son 
of Murrough’s brother, 1. e. Donnell, the son of Rory O'Flaherty, went upon a 
predatory excursion along the borders of Conmaicne™ and Machaire-Riabhach, 
precisely* on Easter night. They had two or three hundred horse-boys on this 
They proceeded to take mweh booty and spoils throughout the 
The [people of the] country 


On the night before a company 


excursion. 
country early in the morning of Easter Sunday. 
came from every quarter in pursuit of them. 
or two of soldiers had come, privately and unperceived, to protect the country ; — 
and these, upon hearing the loud report of the ordnance, and the clamour of 
the armed troops on the following day, retired to a narrow pass, which could 
not be easily shunned or avoided, and there lay in ambush for the Irish host. 
They saw Teige O'Flaherty approaching in front of the host, and his people in 
close ranks about him. The soldiers discharged showers of balls at the van of 
the Irish host, and slew by this volley Teige O’Flaherty, Urun O’Flaherty, and 
Teige Oge, the son of Teige O'Flaherty, together with a great number of their 
followers who were about them, of the chiefs of Joyce’s country, and the Clann- 
Donough’. Such of the Irish host as were not killed by the first volley went 
away without panic or fear, and were not further pursued. Three days after 
the killing of Teige, Edmond, [another] son of Murrough of the Battle-axes 
O'Flaherty, who was in prison in Galway, was hanged ; and, were it not that 
these sons of Murrough of the Battle-axes O'Flaherty fell in the act of plunder 
and irisurrection against the Sovereion of England, their death after this manner 
would have been a great cause of lamentation. 

Dermot Oge, the son of Dermot, son of Denis, son of Dermot, son of Conor, 
Bishop of Limerick’, son of Murrough-an-Dana O'Dea, died, and was buried in 
his own town of Disert-Tola’*, in the cantred of Kinel-Fearmaic, in the upper 
part of Dal-Cais. 


a church of considerable antiquity and archi- 
tectural beauty, dedicated to St. Tola, who died 
in the year 732, and near it a beautiful round 
tower.—See Colgan’s Acta SS., p. 793. There 
was another church of this name in the parish 
of Kill-Uailleach, barony of Delvin, and county 


of Westmeath. Lanigan, in his Hcclesvastical 
History of Ireand, vol. iii. p. 171, not knowing 
that O’Dea’s seat in Thomond was called Disert- 
Tola, has come to the conclusion that there was 
but one church of the name in Ireland, and at- 
tempts to reconcile authorities by placing Disert 


ices 


1884 ANNACA RIOSHACNTA EIREANN. 


[1590. 


QOIS CRIOST, 1590. 


Cloip Cmorc, mile, curce céd, nocac. 


bupcais roccanaca, 7 clann noomnaill sallocclac vo commcionol 7 ve 
épummiucchad an po péopac vo daoinb (amanl pemebencman) hn pposman 
7 1 ns5fmpead na bliadna pfmainn co na baci aon nob 1onaipim o copppliab 
na plspa co cfnd 1apzanac roppaip,7 umanll san ool led 1pm commbang ym. 

Sluaicchead lap an ngobennoin Sip Ripofpo Gingzam, 7 la Mapla cuan- 
muman donnchad mac concobaip, mic vonnchaid uf bain co lion a cooiclp- 
carl an céo mi oon bliadain pr 1. mi Tanuapn oo dol an bancachaib co po 
pmdi5lo campa congcupeac chtfpnlionmap hi ccunga leo, 7 baccan bapcans 
In ppoplonspopt an a ccomain von caoib Tap, comne sac laot (conpa 50 
c{nd coictldip) co na po pédad a pioduccad m ainfo pm. Tmallad an Zobep- 
nop, 7 an cianla hi.ccfnd na pee pin a ofic no a 06 DEcc dO banoab do dol 
can bealgib ipteac do Cop cuanta 1 ccipn amalgaio,7 1 moppup. Oo deac- 
accap bapears La a ccaob, 7 bacap ace polmaape a bpobata acc beapnang 
na Faoite, ap a aoi ni oempsenpac, 7 po léiccfO an conain von Fobenno, 4 
ovonianla Oa von cup pin do binad a tpnoig on ale amac vo mac william 
Ro pill an gobepnoin tan a ap 50 conga, 7 po piodais phn, bancars, 
7 clann noomnanll pe poile 50 po cuppiot a mbpaigve an Lam an sobennona. 


bune. 


Oo cod an Zobepnomn 50 baile ata luain, 7 po pcecaolpiot pip comnact o1a 
Topi. | 

Stucncchead lanmop lap an ngobepnoip bi mip mapcta vo dol ap ua puaine. 
bao vo lionmame an cploig pin co po léice an gobepnomn oponga oipime oa 
caipcimb 7 va commpcib co pliab campnpe hi ccfno muinzine heolaip,7 opons 


Tola in the barony of Garrycastle, in the King’s 
County, on the frontiers of Dal-Cais and Meath ; 
but his conclusion is totally erroneous, because 


the two names still exist, and the memory of 


St. Tola is still venerated at both, though even 
the grave-yard of Disert Tola, in Delvin, has 
been effaced by the progress of cultivation. 
©’ Dea’s Castle stands in ruins a short distance 
to the north-west of St. Tola’s church. This 
castle is mentioned in the Description of the 


County. of Clare, written in 1585, and now pre- 
served in the Manuscript Library of Trinity 
College, Dublin, E. 2.-14, as the residence of 
‘“* Donell Moel O’ Dea.” 

> Bearna-na-qaoithe, i.e. gap of the wind, 
now Windy-gap, a remarkable gap on the south- 
east boundary of the parish of Addergoole, ba- 
rony of Tirawley, and county of Mayo.—See 
Genealogies, Tribes, and Customs of Hy-Fiachrach, 
p- 480, and the map to the same work. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1885 


. THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1590. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety. 


The Lower Burkes and the Clann-Donnell Galloglagh mustered and col- 
lected all the forces they were able [to command] in the summer and winter of 
the preceding year, as we have stated before ; so that there was no one worthy 
of note, from the Curlieu mountains to the most western point of Erris and 
-Umhall, who did not join them in that confederacy. . 

A hosting was made by the Governor, Sir Richard Bingham, and the Earl 
of Thomond, Donough, the son of Conor, son of Donough O’Brien ; and they 
marched with all their forces against the Burkes in the first month of this year, 
i.e. January ; and they pitched a camp of many troops of kerns at Cong ; and 
the Burkes were encamped on the west side, opposite to them; and there were 
daily conferences held between them for a fortnight, but they could not agree 
At the expiration of this period, the 
Governor and the Karl proceeded, with ten or twelve companies, to go through 


on terms of peace during that time. 


the passes into Tirawley and Erris. The Burkes marched in a parallel line with 
them, and intended to attack them at Bearna-na-Gaoithe’; but, however, they 
On this 
The 
Governor returned to Cong, and he, the Burkes, and the Clann-Donnell, were 


did not do so, but the pass was ceded to the Governor and the Earl. 
occasion the son of Mac William Burke lost his foot from the ankle out. 


reconciled to each other ; and they delivered their hostages into the hands of 
the Governor. The Governor then went to Athlone, and the men of Connaught 
dispersed for their [respective] homes. 

In the month of March a very great army was mustered by the Governor 
against O'Rourke. This army was no numerous, that he sent a vast number 
of his captains and battalions to Sliabh-Cairbre® to oppose [the inhabitants of ] 


* Shabh-Cairbre, i. e. Cairbre’s mountain, now 
Sheve-Carbry, otherwise called the Carn Moun- 
tains, comprised principally in the parish of 
Killoe, barony of Granard, and county of Long- 
ford. According to the tradition in the country, 
with which the Tripartite Life of St. Patrick ac- 
cords, this mountainous district received its name 
from Cairbre, the brother of Laeghaire, Monarch 


of Ireland in St. Patrick’s time; and tradition 
adds that the mountain was cursed by St. Pa- 
trick, because, when he came to preach the 
Gospel to a place there called Aghnagon, he was 
presented with a hound served up in a dish for 
his dinner. According to the ancient Irish to- 
pographical work called Dinnsenchus (Book of 


Lecan, fol. 231), the conspicuous carns on this 


1886 QNNGCa RIOshachta EIRECGNN. (1590: 


ele ouciplib a ploy 50 opocle Sug1s1 oon caoib Tiap vo parsid na bpneipne 
50 po sabrac na ploig pin acc lopecad 7 acc léippecpip,"ag manbad, 7 ag 
muducchad ma mbaoi pop a ccionn ip in ccpic 50 coitclnd 0 poctain 1 cc{nod 
anole von cplog. Ro oibpfo ua Ruainc oon puatap pin co na pucip a dion 
no a ofotn co pamicc vo na tuathaib 1 ccfhd mec puibne na couat 1. Cosan 
6cc mac eogain icc, mic eogain, mic vomnaull, 7 baci ma Pocaip Fo cpioc- 
nuccad na bliaona po, 7 Zac aon nac veachald an 1onnapbas oa oacimb tan- 
Zaccap apceac an cTamipeacc1 cc{no in sobepnona. Oat vomnall mac tas 
mic bmoin ui puaine, 7 aod occ mac aoda salloa ag congnam la $allonb 
ua puaipic Datcup 7 Dionnanbad. Ro bai an tip etip papac 7 aitiuccad an 
cumap an sobepnopa co péil micil ap ccind co ccaimec cigeapnan ban mae 
hmain mic eogain ui Ruainc, 7 bman (1. bman 6cc) na pamtac (Mac an 
i Ruane pin vo hhonnapbad) von cip 1 ccimcell na pele mcil. Oo cHopiot 
pin 7 pmeaohada na bpeipne 7 muinzipe heolany, 7. na puancac bat plmpa 
ipm Tip 1 naghand an sobepnona, 7 baccan ag millead Fac nit sup a pan- 
saccan im gallaib 50 cmocnuccad na bliadna po. 

Oainghm mop nac o(pnad a ionnpameal Lé hachawd mefin vo venam lap 
an ngobennoin e cin Loc cé 7 loc apbach. 

Mac ui nell 1. Good sfmleac, mac Slain donngailig mic cuinn bacags 
mic cumn, mic en, mic eosain vo cnochad la hianla cine heogamn 1. aod mac 


mountain were anciently called Carn Furbuidhe 
and Carn Maine. 


erected near Lough Foyle, and has long since 
been levelled. The inhabitants of Boyle shew 


4 Such of his people, literally, ‘‘ every one of 
his people that did not go into banishment.” 
© Who remained, literally, ‘‘ who were before 


% 


them,” i. e. those families of the O’Rourkes who 
submitted to the authority of Sir Richard Bing- 
ham, and were permitted to retain their lands. 
£ A great fort.—On an old map of the county 
of Roscommon, made by L. Browne shortly 
after this period, this fort is shewn as situated 
centrally between Lough Key and Lough Arrow, 
which are about one Irish mile asunder. The 
Editor could not find any trace of this fort in 
the position shewn on L. Browne’s map. It con- 
sisted evidently of earthen ramparts, like the fort 
erected soon after at the Blackwater, and those 


the remains of an English fort close to that town, 
which they think is the one erected by Bing-. 
ham ; but the Editor thinks that the authority 
of the annalists and of a contemporaneous map 
is sufficient to prove its exact position. 

© Hugh Geimhleach, i. e. Hugh of the Fetters. 
He was one of the illegitimate sons of John 
O’Neill, surnamed ‘an diomais,” i. e. of the 
pride, or ambition. Fynes Moryson states that 
the Earl of Tyrone, the son of Matthew O’Kelly, 
who was the son of a blacksmith of Dundalk, 
hanged this youth, “‘ hardly finding any, in re- 
gard of the general reverence borne to the blood 
of the O’Neyls, who would do the office of hang- 
man ;” and Camden, who was living at the time, 


1590. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1887 


Muintir-Eolais ; and another party of the chiefs of his army to the west of the 
Bridge of Sligo, to invade Breifny ; and these troops proceeded to burn and 
devastate, kill and destroy, all before them in the country, until both met toge- 
ther again. By this excursion O’Rourke was banished from his éerritory ; and 
he received neither shelter nor protection until he arrived in the Tuatha, to 
Mac Sweeny-na-dTuath (Owen Oge, the son of Owen, son of Owen Oge, son 
of Owen, son of Donnell); and with him he remained until the expiration of 
this year ; and such of his people* as did not go into exile came in and sub- 
mitted to the Governor. Donnell, the son of Teige, son of Brian O’Rourke, 
and Hugh Oge, the son of Hugh Gallda, assisted the English in expelling and 
banishing O’Rourke. The [whole] territory, both waste and inhabited, was 
under the power of the Governor until the ensuing Michaelmas, when Tiernan 
Bane, the son of Brian, son of Owen O’Rourke, and Brian-na-Samhthach, i. e. 
Brian Oge (the son of that O’Rourke who had been expelled), came into the 
territory. These and the tribes of Breifny, and of Muintir-Eolais, and of the 
other O’Rourkes who remained‘ in the country, opposed the Governor, and 
continued spoiling every thing belonging to the English, to which they came, 
until the end of this year. 

A great fort’, the like of which had not been erected for a long time betore, 
was made by the Governor between Lough Key and Lough Arrow. 

The son of O'Neill, i. e. Hugh Geimhleach®, son of John Donnghaileach, son 
of Con Bacagh, son of Con, son of Henry, son of Owen, was hanged by the 
Die consti- 


states, that it was said that the Earl hanged him tur testes producturum confirmat. 


with his own hand; but P. @’Sullivan Beare 
says that he procured a Meathman who per- 
formed the office of hangman. P. O’Sullivan 
states, that Hugh Geimhleach offered to prove 
by single combat that what he had charged 
against the Earl was true. His words are: 
“Prorex et consilium Ibernie in Sradbaliam 
Vitoniz oppidum Dubhlinna profecti Tironum 
in ius vocant qui crimen obiectum incunctanter 
negat, subdens Compedito” [Cloo Seimleach | 
‘“‘inimico suo non esse fidem habendam, Compe- 
ditus, se singulari certamine crimen probaturum 
asserit: Sed ipse et Tironus ingredi prohiben- 


tuta, qua testes producantur, Tironus, datis 
vadibus dimissus Compeditum inquirendo de- 
prehendet, et custodie mandat, iussusque a 
Prorege Dubhlinnam mittere, imperio non obe- 
diens laqua suspendat Midhiensi homine tortor: 
nam pietate et amore in Onellam familiam et 
Ioannem principem nullus tota Tirona potuit 
varibus vllis deduci ut Compedito mortem in- 
ferret.”—Hist. Cathol. Iber., fol. 124. 

Camden gives the following account of the 
hanging of this Hugh, and of the after conduct 
of the Ear], in his Annals of the Reign of Queen 
Elizabeth, A. D. 1590: 


1888 


GQNNGZa RIOSshachta €IREGNN.- 


[1590. 


pipoonca, mic cumn bacans. Ni bai pfp a aera lé hathaid vo cenél eosain 


mic neill po bad m6 eccaome ina an Taod pm. 
Mac uf vomnaill 1. comnall mac aoda mic magZnuya, mic aoda ourb, mic 
aopa pucd mic nell soupb mic coippoealbangs an fiona vo bit ag vol an 


‘In Hibernia anno superiori Hugo Gaveloc” 
[Semmleac] “ita dictus quia in compedibus diu 
detentus, filius naturalis Shani O-Neal, Hugo- 
nem Comitem Tir-Oenize accusaverat occultos 
sermones conseruisse cum Hispanis quibusdam 
naufragio MDLXXXvil. in Hiberniam ejectis. 
Comes accusationem prevertens illum ex insi- 
diis interceptum strangulari jussit ; cumque ex 
quadam observantia erga familiam O-Neali im- 
manes predones vim afferre recusarent, ipse 
resti ad gulam frangendam manum admovisse 
perhibetur. Hinc in Angliam jam vocatus, cri- 
men supplex apud Reginam deprecatus, veniam 
impetravit, coramque ipsa ad Regiam Green- 
wichi honorem, ut nobiles solent, potestatus, 
sanctissime in se recepit, pacem cum Turlogho 
Leinigh vicinisque singulis observaturum, datis 
eo nomine obsidibus: nec O-Neali titulum, nec 
authoritatem in nobiles vicinos assumpturum ; 
regionem Tir-Oeniam in formam Comitatus re- 
dacturum, a populo subdito pensitationes Hiber- 
nicas (Bonaghty vocant) non exacturum, nemi- 
nem nisi ex lege morte jam inde mulctaturum, 
annonam presidiariis Anglis ad Aquam Nigram, 
sive fluvius More non interclusurum, Monachos, 
Fratres, Moniales, et rebelles in territorium non 
admissurum, incolas Tir-Oeniz ad humaniorem 
cultum quantum posset, adducturum; & id 
genus alia; ea tamen conditione interposita ut 
Turlogus Leinigh & finitimi Dynaste itidem 
fidem ad pacem cum ipso colendam obstringe- 
rent, ne ipse quietus turbulentorum injuriis 
exponeretur, In Hiberniam remissus, hac eadem 
se facturum coram Guil. Fitz-Williams Prorege 
& Regni Consiliariis, asseveranter confirmavit, & 
sane aliquandiu nihil omisit, quod ab obsequen- 
tissimo subdito expectari poterat, pleraque vir- 


tutis adumbrata signa pre se ferens. Corpus la- 
borum, vigilie, &inedie patiens, industriamagna, 
animus ingens maximisque par negotiis, militia 
multa scientia, ad simulandum animi altitudo 
profunda, adeo ut nonnulli eum vel maximo Hi- 
bernie bono, vel malo natum tune preedixerint.”’ 

Whether this Earl, Hugh, was an O’Neill or 
not,—and the Editor feels satisfied that Shane- 
an-diomais proved in England that he was not,— 
he was the cleverest man that ever bore that 
The O’Kellys of Bregia, ‘of whom this 
Hugh must have been (if he were not of the 
blood of the O’Neills), were descended from Hugh 
Slaine, Monarch of Ireland from 599 till 605, and 
consequently of as royal lineage as the O’Neills 
themselves, if not more so, though brought low 


name. 


by the English at an early period. Connell 
Mageoghegan says that “there reigned of King 
Hugh Slaine’s race, as monarchs of this king- 
dom, nine kings,” and that ‘ there were many 
other princes of Moy-Brey, besides the said 
kings of the family of O’Kelly of Brey.” We 
may, therefore, well believe that the blood of 
Hugh Slaine, which was brought so low in 
the grandfather» found its level in the military 
genius and towering ambition of Hugh, Earl of 
Tyrone. Mr. Moore, who has formed so low an 
estimate of the character of the Anglo-Irish 
Earl of Desmond, writes of this Milesian Earl of 
royal lineage as follows: 

‘** But a new claimant of political distinction 
had now begun to attract attention; one who 
was destined not only to rally round him the 
hearts of his fellow countrymen, but to shew 
for once to the world an instance of Irishmen 
conquering in their own cause. 

* This remarkable man, Hugh O’ Neill, was 


1590.1 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND: 


1889 


Earl of Tyrone, Hugh, son. of Ferdorcha, son of Con Bacagh. There had not 
been for a long time among the race of Eoghan, the son of Niall, a man more 


generally lamented than this Hugh. 


The son of O’Donnell, i.e. Donnell, the son of Hugh, son of Manus, son of 
Hugh Duyv, son of Hugh Roe, son of Niall Garv, son of Turlough of the Wine 


the son of the late Matthew, Baron of Dungan- 
non, and being, by the law of English descent, 
the immediate successor of his father, was 
thereby entitled to the earldom of Tyrone. In 
the late wars against Desmond, he had com- 
manded a troop of horse in the queen’s service; 
and having distinguished himself highly as a sol- 
dier, was, at the time we have reached, petition- 
ing the Irish parliament to be allowed to assume 
the title, and take the possessions of the earldom 
of Tyrone. 

“While thus affecting to look to a peerage, 
as the sole object of his ambition, he was already 
contemplating purposes of a far higher aim, nor 
yet had made up his mind as to which of the 
two paths, now opening before him, he should 
commit himself: whether, as a peer, he should 
still court distinction only through English 
channels; or whether, placing himself at the 
head of his powerful sept, he should renounce 
the hollow loyalty he had hitherto professed, 
and assume openly the national title of The 
O’Neill. Meanwhile the position he held be- 
tween the two rival parties was such as to 
enable him, without much apparent duplicity, 
to turn to account the credit and influence he 
had acquired with both. The English autho- 
rities were proud to claim, as attached to their 
service, an officer known to stand so high with 
his own fellow countrymen ; and the chieftains 
of Ulster, then the stronghold of Irish patriot- 
ism, forgave willingly his seeming adhesion to 
the cause of the enemy, as long as they saw 
reason to believe that his heart was wholly 
their’s. But, however favourable to his ambi- 
tious views was this double aspect of his poli- 


tical character, it naturally fostered in him 
those habits of evasion and duplicity, which 
notwithstanding his great public merits, brought 
much discredit on his after career. 

‘“* The rank and title of the earldom of Tyrone 
were, without much difficulty, conceded to him; 
but the possessions, he was told, must depend 
on the pleasure of the Crown. He, therefore, 
resolved to appeal to the Queen ; and repairing 
immediately to the English court, succeeded, 
by his address, frank manner, and well-disguised 
subtlety, in obtaining the object of his petition. 
The princely inheritance of his ancient family 
was restored to him, without any reservation of 
rent; and, among the conditions required of him, 
the only one that savoured at all of distrust was 
that which stipulated that he should claim no 
authority over the lords bordering on his coun- 
try.”—History of Ireland, vol. iv. pp. 99, 100. 

It appears from Rot. Can. H. A. 29 Eliz. 
that it was provided in the grant to this Earl, 
that the bounds of Tyrone should be distinctly 
marked and defined; that two hundred and 
forty acres should be reserved, adjoining to the 
River Blackwater, for the use of a fort to be 
there erected ; that the new Earl should chal- 
lenge no authority over the neighbouring lords; 
that the sons of John [the Proud], and Tur- 
lough [Luineach], should be provided for; and 
that Turlough should be continued Chieftain of 
Tyrone, with a right of superiority over Ma- 
guire and O’Kane, two subordinate Lords or 
Urriaghs to the O’Neill. This power, ceded to 
Turlough Luineach, and afterwards to the Earl 
Hugh, cleared the way for the confiscation of 
Ulster. i 


liz 


\ 


1890 annaza RIoshdachtd elReEaNN. (1590. 


bélanb a atap (iap nool 06 1 neneinte 7 m imnloncce,7 1ap mbit oiat mac ele 
ileam m at chat) 50 ccapacc oomnall ma mbaoi 6 Shliab ano 1 ccip Conall 
po anfhe 7 po a cumaccanb «1. 6 beapnar 50 opobaoip, baoiseallarg 7 baz- 
amg beop. 6a paot mon 47 ba salan mfnman La hingm cpemaip mic vomnanll, 
oomnall vo bAt pon an abaine pin ap oman-lé a poccam 1 cecfnoup cenel 
cconall an bélaab a mfic aod puad bai illaim in at chat cecib tan no 
DEONMISPAad 1a 00 TOCT @ CuIMpeEac conad ape pm po Tiondilead lé a mbaos 
pomamaiste dia plop vo cenél cconaill 1. O vocaptasy co na tionol, Mac 
puibne na tcuat eogan occ co na pocnaice, Mac puibne panaz co na pocnaive 
50 pochaide moin valbanchonb a maille pia. Jap prior pecel vo vomnall 
ua domnaill an coicfpcal pin vo bfit aga venam cuicce, Ro tionoil poe pon 
accion. 6Oaccaniac po eins(ccan lony Mac puibne basaineac vonnchad 
mac maolmuine, 7 opong vo cloinn tpubne na muman mm tpian mac eosam 
mic maolmuipe mic donnchaid mic toinpodealbarig co na pocparve, 7 6 baoisill 
Tadcc Occ Mac TaIdcc mic ToInndealbais co Lion a Tiondl. ba hann vo pala 
do mhac uf Domncall bAE epp cine bogame alla map vo gl{nn colaim cille, 
Zur na montib pm ina pocain. Ni po hanad lap an luct naile 50 pangatcap 
cm da pm dia parshd, 7 po pis pecan cpoda Ccoppa-avra 7 anall, 7 
canlaicp(e na halbanaig parte paisfcc a plodbacaib pobayitaca co po Zonao 
| co plo cnectnaighead (an .14. Septembep) oponga ovipime led, po bad 
ob poe Mac ui oomneall podéin co na bat ma cumans Cngnam no uppclaioi vo 
dénam co po manbad an ou pin ag an ooipe Lftan la taob cua teilioncc. 
ba handam mam map an can pm a bud aga biodbadaib cen sup bo biod- 
bada ivcip mm lucc lap a cconcain (conoup pala (coppa oon cup pm) 7 sion 
sup bo hé an vomnall pin ope a atanda ian ppiop nip bo vimiad do Tip 


" Bearnas, i.e. the Barnismore mountain, in the county of Donegal. The place is described 


the barony of Tirhugh.—See note *, under the 
year 1522, p. 1355, supra. 

' Boylagh and Tir-Boghaine, i. e. the inhabi- 
tants of the baronies of Boylagh and Banagh, in 
the west of the county of Donegal. These were 
the O’Boyles and the Mac Sweenys of Banagh. 

« Gleann Choluim Cille, i.e. St. Columbkille’s 
glen, or valley, now Glencolumbkille, the name 
of a parish and remarkable valley in the west 
of the barony of Tir-Boghaine, or Banagh, in 


as follows, in O’Donnell’s Life of St. Columb- 
kille, as translated by Colgan, Trias Thawm., 
p. 391: 

‘*‘ Locus is est Tirconallensis patrie, Occidenti 
proximus, in Oceanum procul excurrens, in 
arduos incultosque montes assurgens, in horrida 
demum promontoria desinens, Columbe, a cujus 
asceterio celebris habetur jamdudum sacer.””— 
libs worl, 

' Doire-leathan, i.e. the broad derry, or oak 


1590.1 . ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1891 


attempted to depose his father, after he had grown weak and feeble [from age], 
and after his other son had been imprisoned in Dublin; so that Donnell brought 
under his power and jurisdiction that part of Tirconnell from the mountain 
westwards, i. e. from Bearnas” to [the River] Drowes ; and also the people of 
Boylagh and Tir-Boghaine’. It was [a cause of] great anguish and sickness 
of mind to Incenduy, the daughter of James Mac Donnell, that Donnell should 
make such an attempt, lest he might attain the chieftainship of Tirconnell in 
preference to her son, Hugh Roe, who was confined in Dublin, [and who she 
hoped would become chief], whatever time God might permit him to return 
from his captivity ; and she, therefore, assembled all the Kinel-Connell who 
were obedient to her husband, namely, O’Doherty, with his forces; Mac Sweeny- 
na-dTuath (Owen Oge), with his forces; and Mac Sweeny Fanad, with his 
forces; with a great number of Scots along with them. After Donnell O’Don- 
nell had received intelligence that this muster had been made to oppose him, 
he assembled [his forces] to meet them. These were they who rose up to assist 
him on this occasion : Mac Sweeny Banagh (Donough, the son of Mulmurry); 
a party of the Clann-Sweeny of Munster, under the conduct of the three sons 
of Owen, the son of Mulmurry, son of Donough, son of Turlough, and their 
forces ; and O’Boyle (Teige Oge, the son of Teige, son of Turlough), with all 
his forces, assembled. The place where the son of O'Donnell happened to be 
stationed along with these chieftains was [Doire-leathan] at the extremity of 
Tir-Boghaine, to the west of Gleann Choluim Cille*. The other party did not 
halt until they came to them to that place ; and a battle ensued between them, 
which was fiercely fought on both sides. The Scots discharged a shower of 
arrows from their elastic bows, by which they pierced and wounded great num- 
bers, and, among the rest, the son of O’Donnell himself, who, being unable to 
- display prowess or defend himself, was slain at Doire-leathan', on one side of 
the harbour of Telinn, on the 14th of September. Seldom before that time had 
his enemies triumphed over him; and the party by whom he was slain had not 
been by any means his enemies until they encountered on this occasion ; and 
although this Donnell was not the rightful heir of his father", it would have 


wood, now anglice Derrylahan, a townland in south by Teelin harbour. 
the parish of Glencolumbkille, barony of Ba- m Of his father, literally, ‘to his patrimony 
nagh, and county of Donegal, bounded on the or his father’s territorial possessions.” 


ho 2 


1892 


aNNaza RIOshachta E€lREaNN. 


[1590. 


conall a omdnedd puippe dia leicett ora parshio f. Concpaccan don cait- 
ropsail pm 1 Ppappad vomnall an cTMap Mac pin eosam mic maolmuipe mic 
donnchad 50 noib cévaib a maille pra 1 ccimcell oomnanll. 

Uacen ciocaé a bance mac plam mic oiluenaip vo Ecc tap ploducchad 00 


Ve sallanb. 


Mag coclcn a. Sfan mac apc mic copbmaic v0 écc, 7 ni baot pln a 


omMmtce vo pliocc copbmarc cap po bad peolca Pfpccaipe cute, caupceotl, 
7 poptada padaile map, 7 a mac Sfan d6cc do oiponead ina 1onad. 


Maolpuanad mac an calbars mic vonnchaid mic Slam ui c{pbarll vo Ecc. 


Mac mumpip ciapparge 1. ToMmap Mac emaimn mic Tomaip, mic Emainn 00 


ece cfhoaige piona, eac, 7] ealadan pob plpp opion a inme 4 @ atapoa PEM 
baof WG moga oupmop an can pin, 7 Pacparccin a ope vo bhi ilam in 


at chat an tan pin. 


O Loclaim uatne mac maoileaclaim, mc Ruopaise mic ana d€cc, 7 a 


mac 1. Ropa,7 mac a meic 1. uaitne vo bhe implpnac pé a porle 1mo 1onao. 


Somaple buide, mac alaptpainn, mic e6m catanargs mec vomnarll-vo ecc. 


" Of his property, i. e. a man of the same ex- 
tent of territory, i.e. a lord of a single barony. 
Mac Coghlan, Chief of Dealbhna-Eathra, was of 
the race of Cormac Cas, the ancestor of the 
O’Briens of Thomond.—See O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, 
part iii. c. 82. The castles of Streamstown, 
Kincora, Garrycastle, Faddan, Clononey, Esker, 
and Coole, were in his territory. 





See note ’, 
under the year 1519, p. 1346, supra. 

° Thomas, the son of Edmond.—See Lodge’s 
Peerage by Archdall for a curious notice of this 
Thomas. 

» Sorley Boy.—He was the first of the Mac 
Donnells that totally vanquished Mac Quillin, 
chief of the Route, in the county of Antrim, 
and became, the founder of the Earldom of An- 
trim.—See note Jj, under the year 1570, pp. 1641, 
1642, supra. As this chieftain makes so con- 
spicuous a figure in the Irish annals, the Editor 
is tempted to give in this place a brief outline 
of the history of his ancestors, and of the man- 
ner and period of their first settlement in the 


Glynns, and afterwards in the Route, in the 
present county of Antrim. Lodge traces his 
ancestry imperfectly; and, besides, in the ac- 
count he gives of his descendants, has commited 
some mistakes, the chief of which consists in 
making Sir James the second, instead of the eldest 
of his sons. It may be here mentioned that there 
are several lines of the Mac Donnells of Scotland 
and Ireland given in the MS. Book of Bally- 
mote (compiled about 1380); and many curious 
genealogical poems in manuscript, in the Irish 
language, from the sixteenth century down- 
wards, tracing the filiations, and commemorat- 
ing thé privileges and achievements, of this 
warlike race. 

I. Somhairle, Thane of Airer-Gaidheal, or 
Argyle [slain A.D. 1165, see Scotochronicon, and 
Chalmers’ Caledonia], the common ancestor of 
Mac Dubhgaill [Mac Dougall], Mac Donnell, 
and Mac Rory. He married a daughter of the 
King of Man [Sée Chron. Man.], and had 

II. Randal, fl. 1213, g-v. He had a son, 


1590.) 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1893 


been no disgrace to Tirconnell to have elected him as its chief, had he been 


permitted to attain to that dignity. 


In this conflict were slain along with Don- 


nell the three sons of Owen, son of Mulmurry, son of Donough [above men- 
tioned], together with two hundred others, around Donnell. 
Walter Kittagh Burke, the son of John, son of Oliver, died, after having 


concluded a peace with the English. 


Mac Coghlan (John, the son of Art, son of Cormac) died. There was not 
a man of his property", of the race of Cormac Cas, who had better furnished 
or more commodious courts, castles, and comfortable seats, than this John. 
His son, John Oge, was appointed in his place. 

Mulrony, the son of Calvagh, son of Donough, son of John O’Carroll, died. 

Mac Maurice of Kerry, i. e. Thomas, the son of Edmond’, son of Thomas, 
son of Edmond, died. He was the best purchaser of wine, horses, and literary 
works, of any of his wealth and patrimony, in the greater part of Leath-Mogha 
at that time ; and Patrickin, his heir, was at this time in captivity in Dublin. 

O'Loughlin (Owny, the son of Melaghlin, son of Rury, son of Ana) died ; 


and his son, Rossa, and his grandson, Owny, were contending with each other 


for his place. 


Sorley Boy’, the son of Alexander, son of John Cahanagh, died. 


III. Domhnall, or Donnell, the ancestor from 
whom the Mac Donnells have derived their sur- 
name. He had a son, 

IV. Aengus, or Angus More. He is men- 
tioned in Patent Roll, 40th of Hen. III. A. D. 
1256, under the name of Aengus, filius Dove- 
naldi. It is doubtful whether he or his son be 
the ‘* Angus of Ilay and Kintyre” of Barbour’s 
almost contemporaneous poem on the wars and 
adventures of King Robert Bruce. 

V. Aengus Oge. He was probably the Mac 
Donnell, Lord of Arygyle, slain at Dundalk 
in 1318, g. ». He married Agnes, daughter of 
Cumhaighe O’Cahan. There is on the Chancery 
Rolls, A.D. 1338, a safe conduct for Agnes, 
mother of John, Lord of the Isles, to go from 
and return to Ireland ad libitum. He had two 
sons, 1, John, Lord of the Isles, and 2, Marcus, 


the ancestor of the Mac Donnells of Leinster.— 
Seenote ad an. 1570, pp. 1691, et seq. 

VI. John of Islay, or Eoin nah-Ile. In 1337 
there is a safe conduct on the public records for 
him under the name of Johannes de Insulis; and 
there are letters patent appointing the Earl of 
Salisbury Royal Ambassador to him; and a letter 
of King Edward, beginning ‘“ Rex, nobili et po- 
tenti viro Johanni de Insulis amico suo charissimo 
&c.” He died in 1387, according to these An- 
nals, and this date is corroborated by a letter in 
Rymer’s Federa, ad an. 1388, empowering the 
Bishop of Sodor to make a treaty, “‘Cum strenuo 
viro Godefredo filio Johannis de Yle, nuper 
Domini Insularum cum Donaldo filio Johanni 
de Yle nuper Domini Insularum cum Johanne 
fratre ejusdem Donaldi.” By the daughter of 
Rory Mac Dougall, Chief of Lorne, he had, 1, 


1894 


€osan mac an of§anarg vo Ecc. 


ANNaca RIOshachTa ElREGNN. 


[1590. 


Clod Ruad ua vomnaill ovo bic bi ccurmpeac m at chat pm pé clona 


mbhadan, 7 teopa mip. ba coépad mop mihman lap a bAE amlard pin 1 


Ronald, ancestor of the chieftains of Clann 
Ronald and Glengarry; 2, Godfrey; 3, Aengus. 
By his subsequent marriage with Margaret, 
daughter of Robert II. King of Scotland, he had, 
1, Domhnall, or Donnell na h-Ile, ancestor of 
the Earls of Ross and Lords of the Isles; 2, 
John Mor, ancestor of the Antrim family ;, 3, 
Alexander, the ancestor of the house of Keppoch. 

VIL. John Mor. He married Mary Bissett, [rec- 
tinsne Margery ? | the daughter [and heir] of Mac 
Eoin Bissett, according to Duald Mac Firbis [ Lib. 
Geneal, 341], who states that the Bissetts are of 
Greek blood, and came in with William the Con- 
queror [quere, William the Lion? ], and that it 
was by her the seven tuaths of the Glinns, to 
which belonged the island of Rachlainn, came to 
the Mac Donnells. Mac Firbis goes on to say 
that the Mac Donnells owned the Glinns fortwo 
hundred and thirty-seven years previous to the 
year 1649, in which he compiled their pedigree. 
On the Rolls of Scotland in 1400, there is a safe 
conduct ‘“ pro nobili viro Johanni de Insulis 
Domino de Dunwage et de Glynns, et pro Do- 
naldo fratre ejus.” See State Papers, Sir Henry 
Sidney, vol. i. pp. 76-79. He had a son, 

VIII. Donnell Ballagh, he is mentioned on 
Patent Roll, 3rd of Edward IV., and he was 
one of the contracting parties to the celebrated 
treaty of Ardtornish, printed in full in Rymer’s 
Federa. After an unsuccessful insurrection 
in Scotland, he fled to the Glinns in Antrim, 
where he was killed, and his head was sent to 
the King of Scotland. He married Johanna, 
daughter of O’Donnell, by whom he had 

IX. John of Islay, who is mentioned on Patent 
Roll of 5 Edw. [1V. He married Sabina, daugh- 
ter of Felimy, son of O’Neill. His death is 
recorded, together with that of his son, and 


others his relatives, in the following words, in 
the Annals of Ulster, at the year 1499: 

‘Eoin Mor Mac Donnell, King of the Isles, and 
John Cahanagh, his son, and Randal Roe, and 
Donnell Ballagh [Oge], were hanged together.” 

This fact is mentioned in a Gaelic manuscript, 
the date of which is late in the seventeenth cen- 
tury, quoted by Sir Walter Scott, in his notes 
to the ‘* Lord of the Isles,” as follows : 

‘There happened great feuds between these 
families” [the Mac Ceans and Mac Donalds], 
“while Donald Du” [obiit at Drogheda, 1545, 
see State Papers| ‘“‘was in prison ; insomuch 
that Mac Cean of Ardnamurchan [recté Mac 
Eoin of Apo na Munchon] destroyed the 
greatest part of the posterity of John Mor of 
the Isles and Cantyre. For John Cathanach, 
son of John, son of Donald Ballach, son of John 
Mor, son of John, son of Angus Oge” [the chief 
of the descendants of John Mor], “and John 
Mor, son of John Cathanach, and young John, 
son of John Cathanach, and young Donald Bal- 
lagh, son of John Cathanach, were treacherously 
taken by Mac Cean, in the Island of Finlagan, 
in Isla, and carried to Edinburgh, where he got 
them hanged at the Burrow Muir, and their 
bodies were buried in the church of St. Anthony, 
called the New Church. ‘There were none left 
alive at that time, of the children of John Ca- 
thanach, except Alexander, son of John Catha- 
nach and Agnes Flach” [Tlech], ‘* who concealed 
themselves in the Glens of Ireland. Mac Cean, 
hearing of their hiding places, went to cut down 
the woods of those glens in order to destroy 
Alexander, and extirpate the whole race. At 
length Mac Cean and Alexander met, were re- 
conciled, and a marriage alliance took place ; 
Alexander married Mac Cean’s daughter, and 


1590.) 
Owen Mac-an-Deaganaigh* died. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1895 


Hugh Roe O’Donnell had [now] been in captivity in Dublin for the space 


of three years and three months. 


she brought him good children.” 

X. John Cahanagh, son of John of Islay. Ac- 
cording to the Annals of Ulster, he slew, in 
1494, Alexander Mac Gilespick Mac Donnell, 
the head of the Mac Donnells. He married Celia, 
daughter of Savadge, Lord of the Ardes, and 
had by her a son, 

XI. Alexander Carragh. It appears from 
various documents among the printed State 
Papers, temp. Hen. VIII., that from about the 
year 1520, the Mac Donnells of the Isles began 
to form permanent settlements in the north- 
east of the present county of Antrim. In the 
list of the chieftains of Ulster in 1515, in the 
third part of the State Papers, p. 7, there is no 
mention of any Mac Donnell; but Fytz John 
Byssede, of the Glynnes, is mentioned as one 
of the ‘‘ greate Englyshe rebelles of Wolster.” 
In 1533, however, they were numerous in the 
Glinns, as appears from a report of the Irish 
Council to Cromwell, in which the following 
statement occurs : 

“The Scotts also inhabith now buyselly a 
great part of Ulster, which is the Kinge’s inhe- 


ritaunce ; and it is greatly to be fearid, oonles 


that in short tyme they be dryven from the 
same, that they bringing yn more nombre daily, 
woll, by lyttle and lyttle, soo far encroche in 
acquyring and wynnyng the possessions there, 
with thaidis of the Kingis disobeysant Irishe 
rebelles, whoo doo nowe aide theym therein after: 
suche maner that at leyngth they will put and 
expell the King from his hole seignory theire.” 
—State Papers, Ireland, vol. ii. p. 172. 

And in a report of Alan to Cromwell in 1539, 
same vol. p. 136, he says : 

‘““T moch suspect the King of Scottes, that 
so moch tendereth the amitie of theis men, 


It was [a cause of] great distress of mind to 


\ 


which no King of Scottes hath been seen to doo 
befor. He hath also this yere twice sent for 
Alexander Carragh, Capteyne of the Scottes of 
this lande, who hath goon thider, and by his 
retorne it is perceyvid what busynes he had 
ther; but oonlie it appereth he was well enter- 
teyned in the Courte of Scotland, though of 
trowthe ther was no amitie but mortalitie be- 
twixt them; the Kinge of Scottes and anteces- 
sours having killed and put to death the said 
Alexander’s fader, grandfader, and gretegrand- 
fader, and exiled him owte of the Isles, whereby 
he was compelled to inhabite here. But I sus- 
pecte playnelie that if any busyness shalbe the 
said King hath interteyned this man havinge 
both knowlege and power with him in this 
land to be a chieftayne for this purpoos.” 

He married Catherina, daughter of Mac Eoin, 
Chief of Ardnamurchon, in Scotland, and had 
issue: 1, James; 2, Alexander Oge, who slew 
Shane an Diomais O’Neill; 3, Gillaspick; 4, 
Donnell Ballagh; 5, Angus Uaibhreach, i.e. the 
haughty; 6, Colla Duv-na-gCapull, i.e. Black 
Colla of the Horses; 7, Sorley Boy; and, ac- 
cording to Duald Mac Firbis, 8, Donnell Gorm. 
James, who was his eldest son, as appears from 
the State Papers most clearly, was elected Lord 
of the Isles on the death, at Drogheda, in 1545, of 
Donnell Duy, the last descendant of the last Lord 
of the Isles recognised by the King of Scotland. 
This James married the Lady Agnes Campbell, 
daughter of the fourth Earl of Argyle. He died 
of his wounds received in the battle of Glen- 
shesk, from Shane O’Neill, in 1566 ; leaving 
issue: 1, Angus, who succeeded his father in 
Scotland, and is called in some Irish MSS. Mac 
Oomnaill na h-Cban, ie. Mac Donnell of Scot- 
land, He was of Duneveg, and forfeited by insur- 


1896 ANNaGZG RIOSHaChTA ElRECGNN. (1590. 


noaop bpoicc, 7 nin b6 po a dag budéin acc ap Dag na oaoipcimbeacta | 
mbéccan a cip,7 a talom, a caipoe, 7 a Compialup mn Zach maigm peacnon 
Eneann. Ro baci occa pecpyoad ma mfnmain vo Fpep carve an ceappuy 
eludd p6 sébad. Nip bd pooams d6pom an ni pin, Gp oor puccta 1 cubacail 
pommaca ip in carplén Zac noice via 1oMCcoIMEd conouPp Ficcfo Tent an a 
banaé. b& imne baci an caiplén mpm 7 Ucanclarp lanoomain lonn- 
wpcece ma wptimeedtll, 7 clapoporcfe comodluca puippe PO (pcomain dopaiy 
an vine, 7 Fappad spuamameac na ngall amug 7 hptis imo6n oopup oa 
Dancoiméce co né& diccpead aon Tarpyrb munn nac amac Fan atcomanc. An a 
aoi ni bf pnlocaipe an nac ppascap pall pa ded. Gui Cod co nopuing oa 


rection the lands of Kintire, which were granted 
to the Earl of Argyle, when a commission issued 
to*the Earl of Huntly to extirpate ‘‘ the barba- 
rous people of the Isles within a year.” This 
Angus was father of Sir James Mac Donnell of 
Knockinsay, whose estates descended to two 
daughters, co-heiresses. 2, Donnell Gorm, who, 
on Sept. 18, 1584, by articles, between Sir John 
Perrott andthe rest of the Council there, and this 
Donnell Gorm called of the Glynnes in Ulster, 
“was to hold so much of the Glynnes as were 
the lands of Mysset, alias Bysset, he undertaking 
not to serve any foreign prince or potentate, 
nor *“ kepe any Scottes but such as be natives 
of Irelande without lycense.” Always to serve 
‘“‘avainst Severlie Bwoy” [Sorley Boy, his own 
This 
Donnell Gorm was slain by Sir Richard Bing- 
ham, at Ardnarea, in Connaught, A. D. 1586. 
James had also Donnell and Alexander, who 


uncle], ‘and any other forraine Scot.” 


were slain at Ardnarea, and two other sons who 
were slain by Captain Merriman in 1585. This 
James was also father of Ineenduv, the wife of 
Sir Hugh O'Donnell, and mother of the great 
Hugh Roe O'Donnell, of Rory, the first Earl of 
Tirconnell, and of Caffar O’Donnell. 

XII. Sorley Boy, whom all accounts mention 
as the youngest son of Alexander Carragh, ob- 
tained a patent of denization of Ireland on the 
14th of April, 1573, when he acknowledged the 


Queen’s right to Ulster and the Crown of Ire- 
land, professed obedience and swore to be a 
true subject, in consideration of which he was 
thenceforward to be considered a free denizen, 
‘not as mere Irish, Scottish-Irish, or a stran- 
ger.”—Roll. There are various original letters 
and papers relating to his affairs, and those of 
his brothers, preserved in the Cotton Library, 
Vespasian, F. 12, and Titus, B. 13, which de- 
serve examination. The last of these is his In- 
denture of Submission, dated 18th June, 1586. 
He married Mary, the daughter of Con O’ Neill, 
first Earl of Tyrone, and had by her, according 
to Duald Mac Firbis, four sons, viz., 1, Sir 
James; 2, Sir Randal, created Viscount Dun- 
luce and first of the Earls of Antrim (whose 
genealogy may be seen in Lodge’s Peerage), by 
James I.; 3, Donnell; 4, Aengus. Lodge adds, 
and correctly, another son, Alexander, who was 
slain by Captain Merriman in 1585. 

XIII. Sir James was Lord of the Route and 
Glynnes. He had several children by Mary, 
daughter of Hugh mac Felim O’Neill of Clan- 
enaboy. But whether he was lawfully married 
to her was a matter of dispute after his death. 
His son, Alexander, who was afterwards created 
a baronet, rose in arms about 1614, alleging as 
the cause of his insurrection that he was the 
right heir to the lands of the Route, and not 
Sir Randal, his uncle—MS. Trin. Coll. Dub- 


1590.} ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1897 


him to be thus imprisoned ; yet it was not for his own sake [that he grieved |, 
but for the sake of his country, his land, his friends, and kinsmen, who were in 
bondage throughout Ireland. He was constantly revolving in his mind the 
manner in which he might make his escape. 
-him, for he was confined in a closely-secured apartment every night in the castle 
This castle was surrounded by a wide and very 


This was not an easy matter for 


until sunrise’ the next day. 
deep ditch, full of water, across which was a wooden bridge, directly opposite 
the door of the fortress ; and within and without the door were ‘stationed a 
stern party of Englishmen, closely guarding it, so that none might pass in or out 


without examination. 


lin. It is most likely that Sir James, hav- 
ing died during the minority of his children, 
_their inheritance was usurped, under the colour 
of Tanistry, by their uncle, Sir Randal, who ob- 
tained a grant of it from King James IL. in 1603 ; 
and that this insurrection took place when Sir 
James’s heir was of age to assert his claims. 
The grant to his uncle from the Crown, of 
course, would sufficiently account for his failure. 
Much curious evidence could be adduced in sup- 
port of this conjecture; but it would extend this 
note beyond all reasonable limits to adduce it. 

XIV. This Sir Alexander, who was of Moyane, 
in the county of Antrim, in 1634 had married 
Evelin, daughter of Sir Arthur Magennis, first 
Viscount Iveagh, and had, 

XV. Sir James of Ballybanagh, in the county 
of Antrim, second Baronet, who married Mary, 
daughter of Donough O’Brien, of the county of 
Clare. He was attainted in 1691. He had: 
1, Colonel Sir Alexander Mac Donnell, who is 
mistaken by Lodge for Colla Kittagh, who was 
also a Sir Alexander Mac Donnell, having been 
knighted by Montrose on the field, and who was 
slain in the battle of Knocknanos, Cnoc na n-or, 
i. e., Hill of the Fawns, in the county of Cork, 
by Inchiquin, in 1647. Colonel Alexander, the 
son of Sir James, married Lady Elizabeth How- 
ard, daughter of Henry Earl ofSurrey, Arundel, 
and Norfolk, and had issue, by her Randal, who 


There is, however, no guard* whose vigilance may not 


died without issue, and who, as well as his father 
(who was killed in a duel, A. D. 1677), died, in 
the life-time of Sir James, the second baronet. 

XVI. The second son of Sir James was 
Captain Randal, who became third baronet. He 
commanded a ship of war in the service of 
Charles II., accompanied James II. to Ireland, 
and followed his fortunes abroad. He died about 
the year 1720, leaving, besides his eldest son 
James (who would have been fourth baronet but 
for the attainder, and who died unmarried, and 
was buried in the churchyard of St. James, 
Dublin, 24th May, 1728), a second son, Ran- 
dall, who was commonly called Sir Randall, of 
Cross, county of Antrim, who commanded a regi- 
ment of the Irish Brigade in France, and died 
there in 1740 without issue, leaving his third 
brother, 

XVII. John-Richard, who then succeeded to 
the family property. 

4 Mac an Deaganaigh, i. e. son of the Dean. 
This name is still common in Tyrone, and angli- 
cised Mac Digany by some, and Deane by others. 

' Until sunrise, conoup piccfo tent .1. FO 
ozigzead an malo, no eimigio Fpeine. The 
word cenz is explained ‘“‘tertia hora” in Cor- 
mac’s Glossary, and ‘ sunrise” by O’Reilly, in 
his Irish Dictionary. 

’ No guard, literally, ‘* however, there is no 
guarding of which an advantage is not got at 


Ris 


1898 QNNdza RIOShachta ElIREGNN. (1590. 


aop cumta ma pappad 1 ndeimud Feimpmid vo ponnnad 1 nuptopac o1oce pé 
pla do paca ip na cubaclab pormacai mbicip Zac nowdce. Oo beptpat cév 
pépead po pooa led sup an prenercep baoi pon a monchaib, 7 oup pelsfo 
riop pmp na pucanfmnenb Zo canblainsyfc popnyan upopocat baoi alla mms 
vo DopuP an otmald. Oui 1d mplmap iapnarge ap an ccomlad pm a Tappains 
cucca amac vo neoc an tan bad adlaic. Oo pacyom bale lan slaice vo 
Cponn comdamp(n ther an 10 ap na Tiopoa Dia TCOFpaim co cinn{pnac ap an 
oinad. Ro baoi occlac do pammumncip an aoda i ppoicill a néluda, 7 00 
pala poe 0616 ian TTODeacc amac 7 0a Lanncloidfm lancovat lap po a 
com, 7 vo bfpz lam an aoda. Oo pace clodfn oibpioe ia porle Laoc 
ampa oo lagmb, Ane caomanac aca comnaic, ba heaps onsale 7 ba 
caoipedc 1ompZona eEiproe. 

* Cid 1aT na popcomedaise tna ni po pacarspc meallma an célud,7 cid 
an Tan TuUcpas dia Nutd E, 00 c(nZat po CEDOIN dO Pals1d Donaip an canyceorl 
amail ap oéme conpangaccan uaip po bad 0615 led co cccuppiccip iace 1 
ccpaice. lan poccain 0616 Sup an donup ponfémid ponpa a enplogad conoup 
capopacc pM a ccosainm cuca an lucc vo pala ip na 7wg1b bacap pop 


ronchaib an vonayp ven caob anall oon cpparcc. On can cangaccap poe 


length.” The word pmocaipe is explained wi- [puaineam] with them, and they let themselves 
down by the rope through the privy-house.”— 
O? Reilly’s Copy, p. 5, but it is used in the Battle 
of Magh Rath, in this sense of loop.—See p. 284, 
line 25. 

¥ Closed it, literally, for one to pull it [ie. 
This 
idiom translates very clumsily into English. 


gilia in Cormac’s Glossary, and ‘‘ Faipe no 
poncoiméo,” by O’Clery. 

© Before™they were put.—This Irish idiom, 
which the Irish peasantry have introduced into 
It could 
be easily corrected thus : peru panic an uain 
a pazcaoi 1a0 1p na cubaclaib pomaca 1 mbizip 


their English, is not strictly correct. 


the door] out to him when he desired it. 


mac noice, i. e. “before the hour arrived at 
which they used to be put into the close cells 
in which they used to be every night.” 

x Of the rope—This word is not in the pub- 
lished dictionaries ; but in the Life of Hugh 
Roe O’Donnell, by Cucogry O’Clery, it is used 
to denote a rope. Thus, in describing the es- 
cape of which we are now treating, it is used 
thus: “Az pagaz 1anezam sup an ppiailefch 4 
puaineam piocfooa leo, 7 00 pelccfe piop Laip 
an puaineam cpep an preleig,”’ ‘ They after- 


wards went to the privy, having a long rope 


It should be: ‘there was a strong iron chain 
attached to this door, by which the door was 
fastened on the outside when occasion required.” 

* Awaiting their escape.—F ynes Moryson and 
Sir Richard Cox seem to believe that a certain 
great man [the Lord Deputy William Fitz- 
William, who endeavoured to make profit of his 
office] was privy to the escape of these pri- 
soners; and Leland, a far more honest histo- 
Le- 
land says that they first attempted to bribe 


rian than either, is of the same opinion. 


their keeper, who disclosed their offer to the 


1590. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1899 


some time or other be baffled. At the very end of winter, as Hugh and a party 
of his companions were together, in the beginning of the night, before they 
were put’ into the close cells in which they used to be every night, they took 
with them a very long rope to a window which was near them, and by means of 
the rope* they let themselves down, and alighted upon the bridge that was 
outside the door of the fortress. There was a thick iron chain fastened to this 
door, by which one closed it’ when required; through this chain they drove a 
strong handful of a piece of timber, [and thus fastened the door on the outside], 
so that they could not be immediately pursued from the fortress. There was 
_a youth of Hugh’s faithful people [outside] awaiting their escape’, and he met 
them on coming out, with two well-tempered swords concealed under his gar- 
ments; these he gave into the hand of Hugh, who presented one of them to a 
certain renowned warrior of Leinster, Art Kavanagh by name*, who was a 
champion in battle, and a commander in conflict. 

As for the guards, they did not perceive the escape for some time; but when 
they took notice of it they advanced immediately to the door of the castle, for 
they thought that they should instantly? catch them. Upon coming to the gate, 
they could not open it; whereupon they called over to them those who hap- 
pened to be in the houses on the other side of the street, opposite the door [of 
the castle]. When these came at the call, and took the piece of timber out of 
the chain, and threw open the door for the people in the castle, who [then] set 
out, with a great number of the citizens, in pursuit of the youths who had 


Lord Deputy; that this keeper was instantly 
displaced by the Lord Deputy, who substituted 
one of his own servants in his room; ‘a cir- 
cumstance which gave rise to a suspicion that 
Fitz-William himself was not unacquainted with 
their design, nor averse to favouring it.” It is, 
however, quite evident from this, and the ac- 
count of the escape of Hugh O’Donnell, written 
by Cucogry O’Clery, that the Irish did not be- 
lieve that the Lord Deputy was privy to the 
escape. It was evidently concerted between 
Fitz-William and Hugh, Earl of Tyrone, who 
buried the secret in “ altitudine profunda 
animi.”’ 

* Art Kavanagh by name, “at comnaic, «1, 


ata’ comainm.”—H. 3, 18, p. 529, T. C. D.— 
This personage is unsatisfactorily intreduced 
here. In the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, by 
Cucogry O’Clery, in the Library of the Royal 
Irish Academy, it is stated that this Art Kava- 
nagh remained behind the fugitives, in the 
streets of the city, to cover the retreat: “Oo 
pac 1anam peat pon lopg 00 na hégab cpé 
ppcuceib 7 pugzib an baile.”—p. 4. 

> Instantly, 1 ctpaize. “ Tpard «1. luaz, no 
obamn.”—O’ Clery. ‘‘ Tpoi «a. obano no lu- 
at i, unde dicitur, ticfa a Tpaive «1. co Luaz.” 
—Cormae’s Glossary. See the Editor’s Irish 
Grammar, part ii. & vi. p. 265, Formation of 
Adverbs. 


Lier 2 


1990 QNNaza RICSshachta elREAHNN. (1590. 


pon TOFaIpM po Favpac an cpano baof tper an 10 eipte, 7 Do lecle an com- 
lad puap vo luct an caipceorll, vo DEocatTap co nopuMs Moin do lucc na 
catpaé Wifamain na néce ac pulaccap uaohonb. Ni bao ba v0 podam uaip 
bacon pom alla mms vo munaib an beole, [ma] pid po patargice ap pobtcan 
Ciploicte 6béla doippr na piogsceatpac an ionbad pm pop a ccionn, 7 Ran- 
Zaccap pon péd ancplébe baoi pfmpa.1. an phab Rua 7 ni po lérce an oman 
voib poe apcnam ipin conarp coiccinn icip. Ni po anpac via pemim Zo 
pangaccap ian peip apraip 7 imtecca capp an pucdpliab péempaice. O pob- 
pap paths cupyplg ciagaice supan ccoilead chotapolwit poncaomnaccain pop 
a ccind, 7 apit mnte co mavain. Oo beantpacc 1appurde Lam pon modecc 
an nip bo hinmll led anmain ipin pploobad an oman a cronaseacca, an a 
aof rip b6 cualcing aod an apccnam la a ofp cumta, vain po tpésoad a 
tpoiste co.nnseala canaige la harcc(n an tyleibe an po heiccendeligicc 
a nappa pia ran pecaoilead 1 nuamann lap an ppleachad na pua.ppead 56 pin. 
ba paét mon la a cop cumta na po pevpac leo é ni bad pipu, 7 ciomnaic 
celeabpad 06,7 pagbartc binvactomn occa. Ro paoid pum a phi mumtipe Zo | 
-apoile ouine uapal vo jaopclanoaib coiccid lag{n vo pala hn ccanptiall ma 
compocpaib cup an fpoisbead a 1ompnadad no a imdiofn occa. Pelim 
6 ctuatail a plonoad, 7] ba cana vo aevh ma yonn (an vaploaap) uenp v0 Cow 
© Had been wide open, i.e. happened to be  Gilla-Comhghaill, who was son of Duncuan, son 


open, i.e. the hour for closing them had not of Gilla-Kevin, son of Gilla~Comhghaill, son‘ of 
e 


arrived. 

1 Sliabh Ruadh,—See note ™, under the year 
1535, p. 1420; and note ', under the year 1557, 
p: 1548, supra. 

© To know.—* Our .1. 0a Flop.” —O? Clery. 

f Felim O’ Toole-—He was O’Toole of Feara 
Cualann, and lived at Powerscourt. He was the 
son of Turlough, who was son of Art, who flou- 
rished chief in 1497, son of Edmond, slain 1488, 
son of Theobald, son of Dermot, slain 1445, xtat. 
80, son of Hugh, Lord of Imaile, slain 1376, son 
of David, hanged at Dublin, 1328, son of Faclan, 
or Felim, Lord of Hy-Murray, d. 1260, son of 
Gilla-Kevin, son of Walter, son of Gilla-Kevin, 
(whose brother, Muircheartach, chief of Hy- 
Muireadhaigh, was father of St. Lorean, or Lau- 
rence O’Toole, who died in 1180, q. v.), son of 


Duncuan, son of Dunlang, who died in 1013, 
(whose brother Ugaire, king of Leinster, was 
slain at Bithlann, now Belin, near Athy, in Kil- 
dare, in the battle fought against the Danes, A. D. 
976), son of Tuathal, king of Leinster, who died 
in 956, and from whom the surname of O’'Tua- 
thail, or O’' Toole, has been derived, who was the 
son of Ugaire, king of Leinster, who was slain by 
the Danes, under the command of Sitric Mace 
Ivor, at the battle of Cinn fuaidh, A.D. 915, who 
was the son of Oilloll, son of Dunlang, son of 
Muireadhach, son of Bran, king of Leinster, who 
died in 790, who was the son of Murchadh, son of 
Muireadhach, from whom the tribe name of 
O’Muireadhaigh was derived, who was the son of 
Murchadh Mor, who died in 721, son of Bran 
Mut, king of Leinster, died 687, son of Conall, son 


1590.] 


escaped from them ; but this was fruitless, for they [the fugitives] had passed 
beyond the walls of the city before they were missed, for the gates of the regal 
city had been wide open‘ at the time ; and they pursued their way across the 
face of the mountain which lay before them, namely, Shabh Ruadh*, being afraid 
to venture at all upon the public road, and never halted in their course until 
after a fatiguing journey and travelling, until they had crossed the Red moun- 
When, weary and fatigued, they entered a thick wood which 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1901 


tain aforesaid. 
lay in their way, where they remained until morning. They then attempted 
to depart, for they did not deem it safe to remain in the wood, from fear of being 
pursued ; but Hugh was not able to keep pace with his companions, for his 
white-skinned [and] thin feet had been pierced by the furze of the mountain, 
for his shoes had fallen off, their seams having been loosened by the wet, which 
they did not till then receive. It was great grief to his companions that they 
could not bring him any further; and so they bade him farewell, and left him 
their blessing. 

He sent his servant to a certain gentleman of the noble tribes of the province 
of Leinster, who lived in a castle in the neighbourhood, to know* whether he 
could afford them shelter or protection. His name was Felim O’Toole*, and he 
was previously a friend to Hugh, as he thought, for he had gone to visit him 


of Faelan, died 665, son of Colman, son of Carbry, 
‘son of Cormac, king of Leinster, died 536, son 
‘of Oilioll, king of Leinster, who was baptized 
by St. Patrick at Naas (whose elder brother 
Illann, was king of Leinster, and died in 506,» 
and had also been baptized by St. Patrick), who 
was the son of Dunlang (See Tripartite Life of 
St. Patrick, apud Colgan, in 7rias T'haum., lib. 
ill. c. xvi., pp. 151, 152), who was son of Enna 
Nia, son of Breasal Belach, the common ancestor 
of the O’Tooles, O’ Byrnes, and Mac Murroughs. 
It appears from Patent Roll, 1 Jac. L, that 
this Felim and Brian O’Toole forfeited the 
whole territory of ‘“ Fercuolen,” five miles in 
length and four in breadth, which was granted 
on the 27th of October, 1603, to Richard Wing- 
field Knight, Marshal of the King’s forces.— 
See Erck’s Repertory of the Chancery Enrolments, 
Dublin, 1846. According to a pedigree of the 


O’Tooles, in a manuscript in the Royal Irish 
Academy, this Felim had a son, Garrett, who 
had a son, Turlough. The Editor has not been 
able to trace the descendants of this Felim, toa 
later period. Another distinguished branch of 
the family resided at Castlekevin, in the dis- 
trict of Fir-Tire, the head of which, Art Oge 
O’Toole, the son of Art, son of Edmond, slain 
1488, &c. received a grant of the manor of Cas- 
tlekevin, and the territory of the Fertyr, from 
Henry VIII. He had a son, Luke, who died 
seised of the manor of Castlekevin in 1565, leav- 
ing a son, Barnaby, or Bernard, of Castlekevin, 
who rebelled with his brother-in-law, Feagh 
mac Hugh O’Byrne, in 1596. He died on the 
17th of January, 1596, leaving a son and heir, 
Luke, alias Pheagh, aged eight[een] years. 
King James granted his estate to John Wake- 
man, Esq., who, with others, by deed dated 5th 


1902 


GQNNAG~A RIOShAChTA EIREGNN. 


[1590. 


old Ploppugad pom pect narle 1pin ccurmpeac 1 mbaof in at cliat co po nadm- 


plc a ceapactcpad oiblimb pn a porte. 
pelim, 7 atpet 06 an coipee ima TocinICc. 


cmo an teacca co haipm 1 mbaos 
ba paoilis plum mam, 4 po 


tingeall Fo noempsenad Zac mart via ccaompad vo aod. Ap a aof cpa nf po 


foocamplo a cainve nac a compurlige 00 a diclht ap uaman pmacc cana 


December, 1609, enfeoffed Luke, alias Feagh 
O’Toole, of all the said territory of Fertry, as 
fully as he possessed same ; and said Luke was 
in possession thereof for eleven years previous 
to 21st April, 1636.—See Inquisition taken at 
Wicklow at that date. This Feagh, or Luke 
O’ Toole, was J. P. in the county of Wicklow in 
1630, and a Colonel of the Confederate Catho- 
lics in 1641. In May, 1650, -he received the 
following commission from the Catholic Bishops, 
of which there is a copy authenticated by his 
own oath and signature in the manuscript De- 
positions, preserved in the Library of Trinity 
College, Dublin, 3555, Wicklow, vol. F. 2. 14: 

“To Colonel Luke, alias Pheagh O’Tohill, 
greeting, in our Lord God everlasting. 

‘** Sir,—The pressing calamitie of this king- 
dom, wherewith the holy Catholique, Aposto- 
lique, and Roman religion, his sacred Majesties 
Right, and the just liberties of us his loyall 
subjects, are like to be trode under foote by a 
company of prophane and mechanical Rebells 
(made instruments of God’s wrath to punish our 
sinnes), together with the confidence wee have 
in your zeal, worth, and wisdom, to redeem 
those soe deare pleadges, invites us to call to 
your assistance, Giving you hereby full power 
and authoritie to levie, leade, and command a 
Regiment of foot, and a troope of horse, praying 
you to containe the said Regiment and troope 
as much as may be from incurring God’s just 
anger, especially from oppressing the poore, 
swering, and stealing; Giving you to under- 
stand wee are hereunto authorized by his Ex- 
cellency the Lord Livetenant, 
Ormond, as appeareth by his letter, dated at 


Marquess of 


Loughriagh the first of last April. Wee also 
pray you, with the consent of the gentry there, 
to chose among yourselves in those partes, a 
commander in cheefe, and that each Colonel may 
choose his own Officers. We will not cease to 
pray his divine Majestie to encouradg you to 
fight in his quarrell, and bless your designs. 
Farewell. 


1650. 


“*H,. ARDMACH. 
Eve. KiLMorREN. 
Fr. THoomas DuB.in. 
Fr. Epmunpus Lacu- 
LINENSIS. 


Given at Cavan, the second of May, 


Fr. Antonius Ciun- 
MACNOSENSIS. 

WALTER B. CLONFERT. 

JAMES DempsiIE, VIC. 
‘Appo. oF KILDARE.”’- 


‘“‘ This is a true copie of the originall remayn- 


ing with me. 
“Luc. Tooue. 


“The 7th September, 1652.” 


This celebrated man was imprisoned in Dub- 
lin in 1652, in his seventy-fifth year, as ap- 


pears from the Depositions just referred to. He 


left at least four sons, namely: 1, Barnaby, who 
was living at Harold’s Grange, near Rathfarn- 
ham, in 1641, and who is named in the list of 
Wicklow Rebels in the manuscript Depositions; 
2, Donough, a Lieutenant-Colonel of the Confe- 
derate Catholics; 3, Christopher, a Major in 
the same service; and, 4, Turlough. ¢ 

The Editor has not been able to trace his 
descendants to a later period. Two families of 
the O’Tooles settled in the county of Wexford, 
where they still inherit property. The head of 
the more distinguished of these families, in the 
last century, was Laurence O’Toole, Esq., of 
Buckstown and Fairfield, in the county of 


1590.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1903 


on one occasion in his prison in Dublin, when they formed a mutual friendship 
with each other. The messenger proceeded to the place where Felim was, and 


stated to him the embassy on which he came. 


Felim was glad at his arrival, 


and promised that he would do all the good he could for Hugh; but his friends 
and kindred did not allow him to conceal him, from fear of the English govern- 


Wexford. 
1722, served in the Irish Brigade in France, 
and died in 1794, and was buried at Killilly, 
near Castle-Talbot, county of Wexford. He 
married, 1, a Margaret Masterson, of Castletown 
and Monaseed, in the county of Wexford, and 
had by her Colonel Count John O’ Toole, of the 
French service, who was considered the hand- 
somest man in Paris before the first revolution. 
He diedat Ballinafad, near Gorey, about twenty- 
This Count John O’Toole mar- 
ried Lady Catherine Annesley, daughter of the 
last Earl of Anglesea, and had by her Laurenzo 
O’ Toole, Esq., who marrieda Miss Hall, of Holly- 
bush, Derbyshire, an heiress of very large for- 
tune, by whom he had a son, Lorenzo O’Toole, 
who succeeded to his mother’s property, which 
is worth about £20,000 per annum, and changed 
his name to Hall. 


This Laurence, who was born in 


five years ago. 


By his first marrage he had, 2, Luke, who 
was in the French service, and was guillotined 
at the Revolution, leaving one daughter, whose 
fate is unknown to the family; 3, Laurence, who 
settled in the Isle de Bourbon, where he mar- 
ried the daughter of the Governor, and died 
there, leaving a son now (1847) living in the 
island of Maida; 4, Edward, who served with 
Lord Rodney, but no account of him has reached 
his family for the last sixty years. He had also 
three daughters, who married, and have left 
issue, the third, of whom, Mary, married Wil- 
liam Talbot, Esq., of Castle Talbot, who died in 
1796, by whom she had issue five sons, Matthew, 
William, Roger, and Laurence, and three daugh- 
ters; 1, Maria Theresa, who married John, now 
Earl of Shrewsbury; 2, Juliana, who married 


Major Bishopp; and 3, Margaret, who married 
Colonel Bryan, of Jenkinstown. 

Laurence O’Toole, Esq., the father of Count 
John, married, secondly, Eliza, second daughter 
of William Talbot, Esq., of Ballynamona, in 
the county of Wexford, and had by her; 1, 
William, who was in the Irish Brigade in 
France, and died, unmarried, in 1798; 2, Mat- 
thew, who was in the French service, which he 
left at the Revolution, and afterwards, in 1798, 
in Baron Hompesch’s [Hessian] Hussars, and 
died about 1806; leaving by his wife, Frances 
Tighe of Warfield; 1, Matthew, Captain of 82nd 
regiment, now (1847) aged about forty-five; 2, 
Edward, now in India; and three daughters. 

The third son of Laurence O’ Toole, by his se- 
cond marriage, was Brian O’Toole, who was a 
Lieutenant-Colonel in the British service, Com- 
mander of the Bath, Grand Cross of the Tower 
and Sword (Portugal), Cross of Merit (England), 
Cross of St. Louis and St. Lazare (France), Colo- 
nel of Portuguese Cacadores in the Peninsular 
war. He died at Fairfield, in the county of Wex- 
ford, sine prole, in February, 1825, and was inter- 
red at Piercestown, inthe barony of Forth, where 
a monument was erected to his memory by his 
relative, John Hyacinth Talbot, Esq. of Talbot 
Hall, late M. P. for New Ross. 4, Andrew 
O’Toole, who served in: the Armée des Princes, 
and died of fatigue, sine prole. Lawrence had 
also several daughters, two of whom, unmarried, 
are still living at Fairfield, near Wexford. 

The late William Toole, Esq. of Edermine, 
near Enniscorthy, was the head of the second 
branch of the Wexford O’Tooles. 
ried a Miss Hatchell, and had issue: 1, Laurence 


He mar- 


GQNNaza RIOShachta ElREGNHN. ; 


nangall. Ro plpianom popna a bAtpium ipin coillead ameul acpubpaman, 7 
po cuap leo pon a iaponp 1. lap an Luce accualarg a bt ipin pprovbad, 7 vo 
léiccitc co na luinec pon a porlleacc. O Rob epoalca la peilim a pasbaul, ap 
i comaiple vo vo pome pum 7 a bnaatm 140 badém via (ngabenl 4 a bphic vo 
cum an tpfnad sup an ccatpas pop cctlab vopioip. Oo snit pamlaid. O 
pamice pide co hat chat, Robcap pubenge an comaiple o1a poccam cuca, 70 
ponpac neppni 7 bpfg mbice oon ule Fall aiccim ole po elawdplcs uadaib. 
Ro cumpead 1pm ccapcarp céona vo pops € 7 vo bplca zlimel slaamapaimnn 


1904 (1591. 


poa peib ap cumpe conpangaccap, 7 po bot occa pmitaine 7 occa popcoiméd 
amenl ap deac po Pévpac. Ro clor 50 cortciomn fo cpie neneann a elaprom 
pamlaid, 7 a (pgabenl vomdiyy, 7 po la pocc msn pon Zaowealab ve proe. 


QO18 CRIOST, 1591. 


Cloip Cmort, mile, curce cév, nocacz, a haon. 


O Ruane ban (1. bman na manta) mac bniam mic eoccain vo 1onnap- 
bad (amail vo pemobad cuap)1 cop conull sup na cuactaib, 7 baof cmtlead 
ap bliadam 1 ppocaap Mhec purbne edgan 6ce. Oo od 1ap yin co halbam 
an vas caomna no compuntacca opasbail 6 pig alban. Rugpac onong vo 
muincip na beanogna paup, 7 vo beanat leo E50 Saxain 4 co lonncam, 7 bai 


lé hachand wlaim ann pin 50 cépma na pamna ap ccionn. Ro cuipead 


Toole, Esq. of Edermine, who sold Edermine to 
Sir John Power, Bart. of Roebuck, and died 
sine prole ; 2, William Toole, Captain of the 40th 
Regiment, J. P., county of Wexford, now living. 
He possesses a small estate in the barony of Shel- 
maliere. 

8 The English Government, literally, ‘ the 
control of the law of the English.” 
O’Conor, in his suppressed work, Memoirs of 
Charles O Conor of Belanagare, p. 107, says that 
O’Toole assured him of his protection, recom- 


Doctor 


mending to him, however, to lie quiet in the 
wood, as hisgiving him public protection, so near 
Dublin, would give umbrage to Government. 

" Great gloom, poet mén.—Dr. O’Conor ex- 


presses it thus: 


“O’Donnell was again shut up in the Castle 
of Dublin, where he was loaded with irons; and 
his escape and the manner of his recommittal 
convulsed the minds of his exasperated coun- 
trymen with the alternate agitations of grief, 
indignation, and despair.” — Memoirs, §c., p. 107. 

It may be here observed that it was the after 


celebrity of Hugh Roe that caused this over- 


drawn account of the sympathy of the Irish 
people with him to be written ; because the 
senior sept of Con O’Donnell, and their adhe- 
rents, would have rejoiced at seeing him cut 
off. } 

' Brian na Murtha, son of Brian.—Charles 
O’Conor of Belanagare adds, inter lineas, that 
Brian na Murtha was the son of Brian Ballagh; 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1905 


ment®. These learned that he was in the wood, as we have said, and they 
(i. e. the people who had heard that he was im the wood) went in search of 
him, and dispersed with their troops to track him. When it was clear to Felim 
that he [Hugh] would be discovered, he and his kinsmen resolved to seize upon 
him themselves, and bring him back to the Council in the city. This was 
accordingly done. When he [Hugh] arrived in Dublin, the Council were ’ 
rejoiced at his return to them ; for they made nothing or light of all the other 
prisoners and hostages that had escaped from them. - He was again put into 
the same prison, and iron fetters were put upon him as tightly as possible ; and 
they watched and guarded him as well as they could. His escape, thus attempted, 
and his recapture, became known throughout the land of Ireland, at. which 
[tidings] a great gloom" came over the Irish people. 


1591.] 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1591. 
The yi ge of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-one. 


O’Rourke, i.e. Brian-na-Murtha, the son of Brian', son of Owen, was ba- 
nished, as stated before, into the Tuatha in Tirconnell, where he remained 
upwards of a year with Mac Sweeny (Owen Oge). After that he passed into 
Scotland, in hopes of obtaining protection or assistance from the King of Scot- 
land. A party of the Queen’s people, [however], took him prisoner, and carried 
him into England and into London, where he remained for some time* in prison, 


fi. e.] until the ensuing November Term. The law was urged against him', and 


and that Owen, the father of Brian Ballagh, was 
the son of Tiernan, son of Teige, son of Tiernan 
More. : 

k For some time, \é hachaio.—This phrase 
is redundant, and should be left out, i.e. it is 
an error of construction, not an idiomatic re- 
dundance of the language. 

‘The law was urged against him.—An English 
writer would say, he was tried according to the 
English law. The following account of his trial 
and death is given in a manuscript History of 
Ireland, preserved in the Library of the Royal 
Trish Academy, p. 452: 


“ Bryan O'Rourke, the Irish potentate, being 
thus, by the King of Scotts, sent into England, 
was arraigned in Westminsterhall: his indict- 
ments were, that he had stirred Alexander Mac 
Connell, and others; had scornfully dragged 
the Queen’s picture att a horse-taile and dis- 
gracefully cut the same in pieces; giving the 
Spaniards entertainment, against a proclama- 
tion; fier’d many houses, &c. This being told 
him by an interpreter (for he understood noe 
English), he said he would not submit himself 
to a tryall of twelve men, nor make answer, 
except the Queen satt in person to judge him. 


Pek: 


1906 ANNazta RIOshachta eiRECNN. [1591]. 


vliccead pain 50 po daopnad v6 cum bap. Ro cpochad po dic{noad 7 vo 
ponad cltpamna de 1apam. Ro bad vo moinpsélanb Zaoidel odead an bmiam 
hipm, ucip ni tamice via bunad ppemm 6 cin main neac no veanpccaspl ve 
ve ap veanlaccad an ofigemeac an ouaparb ouanmolca ap conctfm an conga 
ap aobdact ap poipcme ap cotuccad catlaitpige ag mdichh a atanoa an 
ainppine eactpand co a o1ohead don cup pin. 

Mupchad mac concobain mic toinpoealbais, mic taldcc, mic Toippdeatl- 
bag, mic bmain cata an aonaig ui bmaim décc 1 ccatain mioncain 25 Pe- 
bnuapn, 7 a adnacal hn cell plonnabnac. 

Maimpspes msean vomnarll mic concobaip, mic toinpoealbarg, mic carocc, 
mic toimpoealbaig mic bniain cata an aonais ui bmam, 6fn compdealbang 
mic bmain mic vonnchaid mec matsamna vo éce bi call mec oubam, 7 a 
haonacal 1 mmp cathag 7 a ofipbpiup ele a. cane b(n coinpdealbars puad 
mic Taldee mic munchaid mic Taldcc puaid mec MactsZamna do écc. 

— Oonnchad mac munchaid pucnd, mc bmam, mic tardcc, mic tToippdeal- 


bang, mic bmam cata an aonang do écc .8. Pebpuann. 


The lord chief Justice made answer againe, by 
an interpreter, that whether he would submitt 
himself or not to a tryall by a jury of twelve, 
he should be judged by law, according to the 
particulars alledjed against, him. Whereto he 
replied nothing, but ‘if it must be soe, let it be 
soe.’ Being condemned to die, he was shortly 
after carried unto Tyburne, to be executed as a 
traitor, whereat he seemed to be nothing moved, 
scorning the archbishop of Caishill (Miler Ma- 
grath), who was there to counsill him for his 
soule’s health, because he had broken his vow, 
from a Franciscan turning Protestant.” 

Lord Bacon says in his Essays, that O’ Rourke 
‘gravely petitioned the Queen, that he might 
be hanged with a gad, or withe, after his own 
country fashion, which doubtless was readily 
And P. O’Sullevan Beare, Hist. 

Jathol. Iber., fol. 122, says that, being asked, 
why he did not bow his knee to the Queen ? 
he answered, that he was not used to bow. 
‘““How! not to images,” says an English Lord. 


granted him.” 


“« Aye,” says O’Rourke; “ but there is a great 
difference between your Queen and the images 
of the saints.”? Walker, in his Irish Bards, gives 
an account of an extraordinary interview be- 
tween O’Rourke and Queen Elizabeth, the truth 
of which Mr. Hardiman attempts to corroborate 
in his Jrish Minstrelsy, vol. i. p. 427; but it 
seems totally groundless, or, at least, to rest on 
no solid evidence. Dr. O’Conor, who was the 
ninth in descent from this Brian O’Rourke, has 
the following note on his execution in the Me- 
motrs of the Life and Writings of Charles O’ Conor 
of Belanagare, p. 112: 

“The only crime which O’Rourke could be 
accused of was, his having received under his 
roof some shipwrecked Spaniards; men whom 
the most hardened barbarity would scarcely 
consider as enemies. <A little before his execu- 
tion Miler Magrath, appointed Archbishop of 
Cashel, was sent to him, to prevail on him to 
conform. ‘No,’ said O’Rorke, ‘but do you re- 
member the dignity from which you have fallen: 


1591.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1907 


he was condemned to death. He was afterwards hanged, beheaded, and quar- 
tered. The death of this Brian was one of the mournful stories of the Irish, 
for there had not been for a long time any one of his tribe who excelled him 
in bounty, in hospitality, in giving rewards for panegyrical poems, in sumptu- 
ousness, in [numerous] troops, in comeliness™, in firmness, in maintaining the 
field of battle to defend his patrimony against foreign adventurers, [for all which 
he was celebrated], until his death on this occasian. 

Murrough, the son of Conor, son of Turlough, son of Teige, son of Turlough, 
son of Brian Chatha-an-Aenaigh O’Brien, died at Cathair-Mionain", on the 25th 
of February, and was interred at Kilfenora. 

Margaret, the daughter of Donnell, son ‘of Conor, son of Turlough, son of 
Teige, son of Turlough, son of Brian Chatha-an-Aenaigh O’Brien, and wife of 
Turlough, the son’ of Brian, son of Donough Mac Mahon, died at Cill-Mic- 
Dubhain’, and was interred in Inis-Catha; and her sister, Aine, the wife of 
Turlough Roe, son of Teige, son of Murrough, son of Teige Roe Mac Mahon, 
died. 

_ Donough, the son of Murrough Roe, son of Brian, son of Teige, son of Tur- 


lough, son of Brian Chatha-an-Aenaigh, died on the 8th of February. 


return into the bosom of the ancient Church, 
and learn from my fortitude that lesson, which 
you ought to have been the last on earth to 
disavow.’ ”? See also Lombard, de Hib. Comment., 
p- 344; and the Abbe Mageoghegan’s Histoire 
d’ Irelande, tom. ii. p. 480. 

The family of O'Rourke seems to have been 
the proudest and most inflexible of all the Irish 
race. On the 15th of June, 1576, Sir Brian 
O’Rourke, chief of the Western Breifny, and 
other Irish chiefs, waited, at Dublin, upon the 
Lord Deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, who says of 
O’Rourke: ‘And first of Owrycke, I found 
hym the proudest man that ever I dealt with 
in Ireland.”—See Letters of Sir Henry Sidney, 
vol.i. p. 114. It is curious to see how this 
fallen Irish family has found its proud level in 
the present Prince O’Rourke of Russia. 

m™ (omeliness—Walker, in his Irish Bards, 


and Hardiman, in his Jrish Minstrelsy, vol. ii. 
p- 427, assert that Queen Elizabeth was struck 
with the noble deportment and manly beauty of 
O’Rourke, had apartments assigned to him in 
her palace, and intimated to her Council, that 
she wished herself, privately, to examine him 
as to the affairs of Ireland; but the Editor has 
not béen able to findany authority for this asser- 
tion. 

2 Cathair-Mionain, now Caherminane, a town- 
land in the parish of Killelagh, barony of Cor- 
comroe, and county of Clare. In the Descrip- 
tion of the County of Clare, preserved in the 
Library of Trinity College, Dublin, E. 2. 14, 
‘‘ Cahirmenayn Castle” is mentioned as the pos- 
session of Teige Mac Murrough [ O’Brien ], and 
placed in the ‘‘ Baronie of Tuogh-Morey-Conor, 
or Corkemroe.” 

° Cill-Mic-Dubhain, i. e. the church of Mac 


ik: 2 


1908 ANNaza RICshachta ElREGNN. (1592. 


Uilliam bane mac Sain, mic éiluenaip, mic Slain vo mapbad le oume 
uapal oa luct Lnamna pin a. lé halapcpann mac aoda bude mec vomnanll. 

Mac mec wlham bine 1. uacép na mbuill( mac Riocaipo mic Sfain an 
cipmamn, mic maoilin vo mapbad ap ionnpargio o1dce La Opus dia com- 
mbnaitmb Zaoil 7 sfnealons plin, 7 la cmd vo clomn noomnanll. 

O baoisill commpdealbac puad mac nerll, me coinpdelbars, aén ba veany- 
cemmste tamic oa bunad Fnfim 6 clin main port congmala vam 7 oe6nad 
pip méocgte nfimls eccailp: 7 ealadan, Guaipe a ceneoil an pele 7 emeac, 
Togbalaig tng 7 annprann vo écc ina longponc plin po Pell bpisve, 7 a 
adhnacal co nonoip 1 noun na ngall 1 notaimlighe a pmnpion. 


COIS CRIOST, 1592. 
Cloip Cpropt, mile, cuice céd, nocat, a 00. 


O concobain puad tadcc occ mac caldcce bulde, mic catanl puad ovo 
cnochad an Seppion Ropa comain 1 mi 1anuapn cma cioncaib a clomne 
baccan pon pogail 7 pop oibfince 1 nacchad conona paran,7 ap amlaid baoi- 
plom an tan pin anpaid anppand, oipadaipe se do puaip a orvhead amlawd 
pin. 

Mac vianpmava marge luince ban mac Ruaiom mic taioce me oiap- 
maoa vécc 1 mi nouemben, 7 po ba moive oadban éccaome écc an Fip pm 
san a copmail(p 00 bht vo clomn Maolpuanad oo Fébad chhoup dia e1p. 

Mac conmana mabac ciszeanna an caoibe torn vo clomn cuilém.1.0omnall 
The name is now an- 


Dubhain, now Maguane. in the barony of Carra, and county of Mayo.— 


elicised Kilmacaduane, which is that ofachurch See Genealogies, Tribes, §c.. of Hy-Fiachrach, 


and parish in the barony of Moyarta, and county 
of Clare. This church is mentioned in the Life 
of St.Senan (published by Colgan, at 1st March, 
c. 44), as subject to the monastery of Inis Ca- 
thaigh, now Scattery Island, in the Shannon, 
near the town of Kilrush. Of the old church 
called Cill Mic Dubhain, the east gable and 
twenty-five feet of the length of the side walls 
still remain. 

® Of the Termon, i.e. of the Termon of Balla, 


pp- 157, 197. 

9 Guaire—Guaire Aidhne was King of Con- 
naught for thirteen years, and died in the year 
662. 
sity among the Irish poets.—See (Genealogies, 
Tribes, jc. of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 391. 

' His own fortress.—Besides the seats which 
O’Boyle had in his own territory of Boylagh, 
he had a castle called Baile Ui Bhaoighill, now 
Ballyweel, on the north side of the River Esk, 


He became the personification of genero- 


1592. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1909 


William Burke, the son of John, son of Oliver, son of John, was slain by a 
gentleman of his own followers, namely, by Alexander, the son of Hugh Boy 
Mac Donnell. 

The son of Mac William Burke, namely, Walter of the Blows, the son of 
Rickard, son of John of the Termon?, son of Myler, was slain, in an assault at 
night, by a party of his own tribe and kinsmen, and some of the Clann-Don- 
nell. | 

O’Boyle (Turlough Roe, the son of Niall, son of Turlough), the most dis- 
tinguished man that had come of his tribe for a long time, a sustaining pillar 
of the learned and the destitute, an exalter of sanctuaries, churches, and science, 
the Guaire’ of his tribe in generosity and hospitality, [and] the supporter of 
the poor and the feeble, died at his own fortress", about the festival of St. Bridget, 
and was interred with honour at Donegal, in the burial-place of his ancestors. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1592. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-two. 


O’Conor Roe (Teige Oge, son of Teige Boy, son of Cathal Roe) was hanged 
at the session of Roscommon, in the month of January, for the crimes of his 
sons, who were [engaged] in plunder and insufrection against the crown of 
England ; and he was at this time aged, feeble, and blind, though he suffered 
death® in this manner. 

Mac Dermot of Moylurg (Brian, the son of Rory, son of Teige, son of Der- 
mot) died in the month of November; and the death of this man was the more 
to be lamented, because there was no other like him of the Clann-Mulrony‘ to 
succeed him in the chieftainship. 

Mac Namara Reagh, Lord of the western part of Clann-Cuilein, i. e. Donnell 


near its mouth, opposite the monastery of Done- death in that manner.” 

gal, On a map of the coasts of Mayo, Sligo, and * The Clann-Mulrony.—Vhis was the tribe- 

Donegal, preserved in the State Papers’ Office, name of the Mac Dermotts of Moylurg, in the 

London, this castle is shewn in the above situa- county of Roscommon. The Mulrony from whom 

tion under the name of *‘ Ba. O Boile,” which is they descend was an O’Connor, and as the Mac 

intended for Bally O’Boil, or O’Boyle’s town. Dermots asserted, the senior of all the Clann- 
> Suffered death, literally, “found or got his Conor. 


1910 


AQNNQZa RIOSshachta EIREGNN. 


[1592. 


piabac mac conmfoa, mic vonnchand, mic Ruaidm, mic meccon cfnmoin vécc 
11 Pebpuapn pean caitmeac congaipeac, veaplaictec, oaonnactac eE1ploe. 
Oune uapal vo pol aoda vEécc 1pm mi céona 1. Sfan na ngfimleac mac 


conmana mic matsamna, mic aooa. 


Mop ngsfh oonnchard, mic Slain, mc maolpuanaid na pépoicce mic Tarocc 
ui cfpbaill, bth mic uf bmam apa vo écc, bth po cat a harmpip co mant, 7 
vo paccaib an paogal san ataup Zan 1modeanccad. 

Cancilin ingf vomncall, mic ping, mic DIapMava an DonaId MEF cantars 
btn tardce mic conbmaie éicc, mic copbmaic, mc tTaldce MES cantars, bin 


ceillis, cnoarbveac vencac, vergeims vo Ecc 1an mbuaid 6 Oman, 6 Soman, 7 


6 oaomnib. 


Mac uf meacain Sfan an 5l{noa mac tomaip vécc. 


bupcas Rainn mec uilliam uile co na lucc LMhamna do dol ap a ccomméece 
J lan ppiop pecél von sobepnoip Sin Ripoeno bingam vo cod 1 cconntaé 


mouse €6 50 mbaccan bailce an cine 


\ 


“ Maccon Ceannmhor, i. e. Maccon of the Big 
Head. 

* Warlike.—The adjective congaineac denotes 
‘‘having troops or companies.” See the year 
1598, where congaip, the substantive from 
which this adjective is formed, is used in the 
sense of “‘ troop or company of men.’ 

¥ Son of Hugh.—In a manuscript, transcribed 
by Maurice Newby in 1715, now in the posses- 
sion of Myles John O’Reilly, Esq., the pedigree 
of this Hugh is given as follows: 

* Hugh, son of Philip, son of Cumara, son of 
Loughlin, son of Maccon, son of Loughlin, son 
of Cumeadha Mor, the stirpes of all the Sil- 
Aedha, son of John, son of Maccon, son of 
Loughlin, son of Cumeadha, son of Niall, son of 
Cumara, son of Donnell, son of Cumara, the 
progenitor from whom the Mac Namaras haye 
The John na nGeimh- 
leach in the text was the ancestor of the Mac 


derived their surname. 


Namaras of Moyreask, in the county of Clare. 
He had a son, John Reagh, who had a son 
Donough, who died at Achadh-na-Croise, or 


plan 7 bmypce an a cumap .. oan na 


Crossfield, in the county of Leitrim, on the 4th 


of February, 1696, in the eightieth year of his 


age. 
married to Teige O’Rody, of Fenagh, in the 
county of Leitrim, and Mary, who married 


He had two daughters, Finola, who was 


Murtough, son of Donnell, son of Turlough 
O’Brien; and three sons: 1, John, his heir, who 
died in the county of Clare, on the 23rd of 
September, 1694. 2, Donough, a most accom- 
plished linguist, musician, and poet, who died at 
Moyreask, in the county of Clare, on the 16th 
of July, 1692, in the thirty-fifth year of his age. 
3, Mahon, who had a daughter, Mary, who lived 
with her aunt, Finola, the wife of Teige O’Rody 
of Crossfield, from the year 1692, when she was 
eight years old, til) 1701, when she was married, 
in her seventeenth year, to Calvagh, the son of 
Turlough, son of Niall Oge, son of Niall O’Mel- 
aghlin. There is a curious poem, in English, on 
the death of Donough, the second son of Do- 
nough above mentioned, by-Teige O’Rody, in 
which he gives the date of his death in the fol- 
lowing quatrain : 


1592. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1911 


Reagh, the son of Cumeadha, son of Donough, son of Rory, son of Maccon 
Ceannmhor’, died on the 11th of February. He was a sumptuous, warlike’, 
bountiful, and humane man. ; 

In the same month a gentleman of the Sil-Aedha died, i. e. John-na-nGeimh- 
leach, son of Cumara, son of Mahon, son of Hugh’ [Mac Namara]. 

More, the daughter of Donough, son of John, son of Mulrony-na-Feasoige, 
son of Teige O’Carroll, and wife of Mac-I-Brien Ara, died. She had spent a 
good life, and departed this world without disgrace or reproach. 

Catherine, the daughter of Donnell, son of Fineen, son of Dermot-an-Duna 
Mac Carthy, and wife of Teige, the son of Cormac Oge, son of Cormac, son of 
Teige Mac Carthy, a sensible, pious, charitable, and truly hospitable woman, 
died, after having gained the victory over the world, the Devil, and the people. 

The son of O’Meagher (John of the Glen, the son of Thomas) died. 

All the Burkes, of Mac William’s country, with their followers, went on 
their defence ; and when the Governor, Sir Richard Bingham, had received 
intelligence of this, he proceeded into the county of Mayo, and all the castles of 
the country, both perfect and broken, were in his power, namely, Dun-na-mona’, 


“Thy living Vatican, poor Ireland! now is dead, 
Thy records sleep in their eternal bed ; 
One thousand years, six hundred, ninety-two, 
June the sixteenth most fatall was to you.” 


He also composed the following epitaph for 
him, which was probably inscribed on his tomb; 
but it is not now in the abbey of Quin: 


‘** Donatus junior, Donati Mara Joannis, 

Conditur hoc busto, pro dolor! exiguo. 

Hic tenuit quicquid claris ab origine Mundi, 

Mandarat fastis tristis Ierna suis. 

Hispanus, Gallus, Grecus, preclarus Hi- 
bernus, 

'Anglus et Hebreus conditur hoe tumulo, 

Musicus atque sophus logus hac Theo con- 
ditur urna, 

Scrutator Thome, Scoti, et Aristotellis.”’ 


To this Maurice Newby, who seems to have 
been acquainted with Donatus junior, appends 
the following memorandum : ° 


‘This said gentleman died at Mureske, in 
the county of Clare, on Thursday, June 16°, 
1692; was buried in Quinn Abbey ; was bred with 
Mr. Thady Roddy from a Virgilian ; acquired 
all the above languages by his indefatigable 
studies and profound witt; spoke French and 
Spanish; read Greek and Hebrew; was most per- 
fect in Latin, and compleat master of the Irish.” 

The last of this branch of the Mac Namaras 
was John Mac Namara, of Moyreask, Esq., who 
died about twenty years since. He had mar- 
ried a Miss De Burgh, by whom he had an only 
daughter, who married Daniel O’Brien, of Crat- 
loe, Esq. His brother, Francis Mac Namara, © 
died, s. p. in 1813. 

2 Dun-na-mona, now Dunamona, a townland 
containing the ruins of a castle, situated near 
the boundary of the parishes of Rosslee and 
Drum, in the barony of Carra. This castle 
belonged to a branch of the O’Kellys, who 
removed from Hy-Many and settled here un- 


GQNNAGta RIOShachTa EIREGNHN. 


1912 P1592. 


mona, cinl na ccaupiol, an saoipicceac, 7 an clucimin. CTuccpac bipcais 
lomnpaasio ap an ngobennéin co cil na ccanpol, 7 po bad mosbalons) 140 
pin as pillead omib ina an gobepnoip. Ro cuip an sobepnoip ian pin plonaca 
cTpoma vo buanadaib Zalloa 47 saodealca oiannaid na mbincac pin baccan 
pop oibfince 7 pon posal po cMvaib cnoc cfhoganb, 7 colleib nvopac nolinc- 
camped. Nip bo cian po bactap pop an 1appaid pm an tan po puropioc Sup 
an ngobepndip 50 lion cpeac 7 gabal, go mbpaigoib ban 4 plp, co mbucab, 4 
co ccaiplib iomoanb. =CTangacan bapcas ian pm po bnht an gobennona acc 
mac ofmam an Coppa 2. Ripvepo mac Riocao. Ro pealbang an Zobennoip 
bailce an cipe do pin a husoanpar an ppiomnpa, 7 po paccanb Seon bingsam, 
7 bemvada uada pin aga nomcometc. : 

Clod puad mac aoda, mic magnupa ut domnaill bai rie 1 ccapcain, 7 
1 ccwumpeac m at chat iapp an ccéona hélud go semplo na bliadna po. 
CQ mbaccap anni nuptopac o1dce (e1pplum 4 a aey cumta .1. clann ui neill 
1. Sfan enn] apc) puanaccap ell popp na coméoagib ayia vo paca tpn 
bppomnzis 50 po binpace a ngfimle fob. Oo coccap iapom sup an ppiaol- 
Teac, 7 céd pépld piotpova leo co-po leiceit piop lap na puain(mnanb cmap 
on ppiaaleig co paccaccan an cclapaig comoomain bat 1 ccimcell on canp- 


der the Lower Mac William. According to 
Duald Mac Firbis’s genealogical work (Lord 
Roden’s copy), p. 324, this castle was built by 
Henry Reagh O’ Kelly, (the son of Edmond, son 
of David, son of John, Airchinneach, or Erenagh 
of Tuam, son of Melaghlin, son of William, son 
of Hugh, son of Donnell, son of Loughlin, son 
of Donnell More, son of Teige Tailltenn), head 
of that sept of the O’Kelly’s called Clann-an- 
Airchinnigh, who settled in Carra in the time of 
Edmond-na-Feasoige Mac William Burke ; and 
‘it remained in the possession of the family for 
four generations, that is, from the time of 
Henry Reagh, the first erector, down to Walter 
(son of David, son of Myler, son of HenryReagh), 
who was the last inheritor. Henry Reagh, the 
builder of the castle of Dun-na-mona, had a 
nephew, William (son of David, son of Edmond), 
who also lived under the Lower Mac William 


Burke, in Carra, and who made the road called 
Bothar-na-faine. 
the country, the O’Kellys of Dun-na-mona re- 


According to the tradition in 


moved to 'Tiranare, in the barony of Burrishoole, 
where they still remain. The following inscrip- 
tion is to be seen on the tombstone of this fa- 
mily, in the abbey of Burrishoole : 

‘‘ORATE PRO ANIMA Davipis OcE KELLY, 
QUI ME FIERI FECIT SIBI ET HEREDIBUS SUIS, ET 
uxorIs MaBLA Barret. A. D. 1623.” 

From Walter, the last inheritor of Dun-na- 
mona, the late Rev. Walter Kelly, O.S. A., of the 
convent of Ballyhaunis, in the county of Mayo, 
was the fifth in descent. David Oge, mentioned 
in the above inscription, was the son of David, 
and brother of Walter. He had a son, Walter 
Grana, who had a son, Patrick, who had a son, 
Walter, a priest ; a daughter, Sarah, the grand- 
mother of the Rev. Walter Kelly, who was pater- 


1592.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1913 


Cuil-na-gCaisiol, Gaoisideach*, and Cluainin®. The Burkes made an attack 
upon the Governor at Cuil-na-gCaisiol*; but they were more harmed on their 
return than the Governor. After this the Governor dispatched heavy troops 
of English and Irish soldiers to search for the Burkes, who were in rebellion 
and [engaged in] plundering, on the rugged mountain-tops, and in the bushy 

dense and intricate woods. They [the soldiers] had not been long in this search, 
when they returned to the Governor with many preys and spoils, with prisoners, 

After this, [all] the 
Burkes, except the son of Deamhan-an- -Chorrain, namely, Richard, the son of 
Rickard*, came and submitted to the award of the Governor ; 
Governor, by authority of the Sovereign, took the castles of the country into 
his own possession, and left John Bingham and companies of his own [soldiers] 


[both] women and men, and with many cows and horses. 


upon which the 


to guard them. 

Hugh Roe, the son of Hugh, son of Manus O’Donnell, remained in Dublin, 
in prison and in chains, after his first escape, to the winter of this year. One 
evening he and his companions, Henry and Art, the sons of O’Neill (John), 
before they had been brought* into the refection house, took an advantage of 
the keepers, and knocked off their fetters. They afterwards 
house, having with them a very long rope, by the loops of which they let them- 
selves down through the privy-house, until they reached the deep trench that 


went to the privy- 


nally descended from Walter, the last inheritor 
of the castle of Dun-na-mona. Thus: Walter, 
son of John, son of Patrick, son of Walter, son 
of David, son of Walter, the last proprietor of 
Dun-na-mona, son of David, son of Myler, son 
of Henry Reagh, the founder of this castle. 

* Gaoisideach, now Gweeshadan, a castle in 
ruins in the parish of Drum, in the barony of 
Carra.—Hy-Fiachrach, p. 491. 

> Cluainin, i. e. the little lawn or meadow, 
now Clooneen, a townland containing the ruins 
of a castle in the parish of Kilmore, in the said 
barony of Carra. 

© Cuil-na-gCaisiol—This name is translated 
angulum murorum by P. O’Sullevan Beare. It 
is now. corruptly written Cloonagashel, and 
sometimes Cloona Castle, which is applied to a 


townland in the parish of Ballinrobe, barony of 
Kilmaine, and county of Mayo. According to 
the tradition in the country, Sir Richard Bing- 
ham murdered sixteen women of the Burke 
family in this castle. 

4 Richard.—Sir Henry Doewra calls him, 
“ Riccard Bourke, alias the Divell’s Hook’s 
sonne.” Dockwra says, that ‘‘ these men uppon 
their submission were so pyned awaye ffor wante 
of ffoode, and soe ghasted with feare, within 
seven or eight weeks, by reason they were so 
roundlye ffollowed without any interim of rest, 
that they looked rayther like to ghosts then 
men.”’—Relation of Services, Fe. by Sir Bingham, 
Mus. Brit. Harl., No. 357, fol. 235. 

© Before they had been brought, recté, ‘before the 
hour for going to dinner or supper had arrived.” 


11. 


1914 


ceoll. 


ANNAta RIOSshachta elREGHN. 


(1592. 


Ro opmsytc iapam pip an mbnuac allcapac 50 mbaccap pop up na 


clapac. baoi solla camp) ag catarside Cuca uadaib,7 po Liccpot a pun 
py, 7 00 pala cuca an can pin € co mbaof ag oénam eolaip vo1b. = Coccan 


* Until_—This construction is redundant. The 
probability is that they were hauled up, by 
raeans of the rope, from the trench by the trusty 
servant sent to conduct them. Cox had no 
knowledge of the recommittal of the son of 
O’Donnell. He writes that in December, 1590, 
‘four considerable prisoners escaped out of the 
castle of Dublin, not without the privity of a 
great man, well bribed, as was supposed, viz. : 
the two sons of Shane O’Neal, O’Donell’s son, 
and Philip O’Reilly; but the weather being 
very bad, and the journey tedious, Art O'Neal, 
one of the prisoners, dyed by the way, but the 
rest escaped to Ulster, where the two sons of 
Shane O’Neal fell into the power and possession 
of the Earl of Tyrone, anno 1594, who kept 
them prisoners, and would by no means enlarge 
them, or deliver them to the Deputy.”—Hib. 
Angl., vol. i, p- 400. 

8 Visiting them, literally, ‘was frequenting 
to them and from them,” i. e. he was used to 
bring messages to them, and to bear messages 
from them to their friends. According to the 
Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, by Cucogry 
O’Clery, this youth was named Turlough Roe 
O’ Hogan, i.e. O? Hagan. He was Tyrone’s ser- 
vant of trust, employed on this occasion to bribe 
the Lord Deputy, Fitz-William, for allowing 


the prisoners to escape. Tyrone’s object in 


procuring the liberation of these prisoners was . 


twofold ; first, to obtain the assistance of his 
promising brother-in-law, Hugh Roe O’ Donnell, 
and to get Shane O’Neill’s legitimate sons into 
his own hands, that it might not be in the 
power of the Government to set them up as his 
rivals in his premeditated rebellion. Doctor 
O’Conor, in his suppressed work, Memoirs of the 
Life and Writings of Charles O' Conor of Belana- 


gare, says that one of their keepers assisted them 
in this escape; but his account of the manner of 
their escape is drawn almost wholly from his own 
imagination. The following account of it is 
given by P. O’Sullevan Beare, who also appears 
to have invented a few incidents, to give interest 
to the narrative; but it is quite evident that 
neither the O’Clerys, nor O’Sullevan, nor Hugh 
Roe himself, knew the secret practices of Hugh, 
Earl of Tyrone, who bribed the corrupt Lord 
Deputy Fitz-William, to get these prisoners into 
his own hands: 

‘‘ Paucis post diebus ex Vltoniorum obsidibus 
Hugo Odonellus Ruber, Daniel Macsuinnius 
Ceruleus, & Huon Ogallachur, de quibus supe- 
rius locuti sumus, ex arce Dubhlinnensi fugiunt. 
Cxterum Ruber in Felmium Otuehilem equi- 
tem Ibernum, & Regine ministros incidit. Fel- 
mius statuit eum inuitis regijs ministris dimit- 
tere, haud dubius se fortunarum iacturam fac- 
turum, & in discrimen venturum. Quod malum 
timens Rosa Nituehil Felmij soror, & Fiachi Ob- 
ruinis vxor, fratri persuasit, vt sue, atque Rubri 
simul saluti consuleret : idque illum facturum, 
si eanocte Rubrum apud se retineret in Kehino 
Castello (caislean Kehin, recte Caaplean Caoim- 
31n) donec a marito suo Fiacho cum armatis 
veniente, quasi inuito Felmio in libertatem as- 
seratur, nam magis fratri cauendum censuit, 
quam marito qui iam solitus erat rebellare, vi- 
tamque contra Protestantes, & pro eorum hos- 
tibus vouere. Quo consilio probato, Fiachus 
cum armata manu Rubro opitulatum contendit, 
Prorex quoque Dubhlinne certior factus cohor- 
tem mittit, que Rubrum vinctum trahat. Ea 
nocte tam copiosé pluit, vt aqua ripas inteiecti 
fluminis egrediente, cireumiectosque campos 
inundante nullo modo potuerit Fiachus vada 


1592.] 


was around the castle. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1915 


They climbed the outer side, until they were’ on the 


margin of the trench. A certain faithful youth, who was in the habit of visiting 
them’, and to whom they had communicated their secret, came to them at this 


traijcere. Interim Angli, qui flumine non pro- 
hibebantur, Rubrum Dubhlinnam deferunt. 
Vbi in eadem arce diligentiori custodiza manda- 
tur, in vincula quoque coniectus. Iterum die- 
bus [vrecte, mensibus] aliquot transactis cum 
Henrico, & Arto Onellis Iohannis principis filijs, 
qui eodem carcere tenebantur agit, quemadmo- 
dum sese in libertatem vindicent. Quod etiam 
consilium cum Eduardo Eustatio puero amico 
suo, & cum acerrimo Protestantium hoste Fiacho 
Eduardus puer se illi ad fugam 
Fiachus 


communicat. 
daturum quatuor equos pollicetur. 
itineris ducem, qui illum domum suam ad Mu- 
luriam syluam ducat, & inde in Vitoniam a se 
incolumem mittendum promittit. Ad constitu- 
tam noctem Ruber limam comparauit, qua vin- 
culorum clauos sibi, Henrico & Arto scidit, & 
sericam telam longissimam, qua se dimitterent 
ex arcis celse fastigio. Intempesta nocte supe- 
riore tele extremitate ad latrinam ligata, Hen- 


ricus primus capta tela manibus, & inter crura 


per latrinam descendit, nec socios spectans in 


Vitoniam itinere arrepto incolumis euasit. Se- 
quitur Ruber, qui Artum spectauit. Artus, 
dum preceps per telam fertur, lapide ex cloaca 
forte cadente, malé vexatur, vixque se susti- 
nendo est aptus. Eduardus puer, qui equos 
promiserat, quatuor velocissimos ephippijs in- 
structos per tres proximos anté dies in stabulo 
habebat, sed illo die eo inscio peregré ablati 
sunt ab amico. Itineris dux a Fiacho missus 
prope arcem prestolabatur, quiea nocte, dieque 
sequente Rubrum, & Artum per avia, vastaque 
loca duxit, né interciperentur. Tempus erat 
hybernum paucis diebus ante Dominici natalis 
Ob id Ruber, 
qui longo itinere, velocique cursu calceos con- 
sumpsit pedibus iam nudis niuis rigorem, loco- 


festum, & loca alta niue obruta. 


Liom2 


rumque asperitatem superans, vngues vtriusque 
pollicis pedum amisit niue combustos, & auulsos. 
Artus, etsi calceos firmiores habebat, lapidis 
tamen casu grauiter afflictus longum, & asperum 
iter egré metiens Rubrum tardabat. Satis fessi 
ad noctem perueniunt in subterraneum specum 


“non multis milibus passuum ab xdibus Fiachi. 


Ibique relictis, vt constitutum erat, dux rem 
nunciatum ad Fiachum tetendit. Duo iuuenes, 
qui toto die currentes nihil cibi ceperant, fame 
cruciabantur, tamen itinere lassi alto somno 
sopiti noctem transegerunt. Iamque die secundo 
sol precipitabat, & nullus a Fiacho remissus est. 
Tertio die inedia premente, Arte, inquit Ruber, 
en animantia bruta herba, & fronde pascuntur. 
Igitur nos etiam, qui quaniuis rationis participes 
simus, tamen animalia quoque sumus, eadem 
breuem inediam toleremus, donec a fido Fiacho 
cibus suppeditetur. Itaque proxime arboris 
frondes mandit,:& deuorat, sed oblatas renuit 
Artus. Interim Fiachus nullum lapidem non 
mouebat, vt illis cibum subministraret, diu pro- 
hibitus ab illis, qui eius suspecti hominis vel 
leuissimos gestus, & motus notabant. Denique 
ad tertiam noctem, per milites quatuor cibum 
misit. Artus lapidis casu, longaque inedia con- 
fectus nec in os imponere cibum, nec impositum 
a Rubro, & militibus mandere poterat, Ruber, 
qui validior erat, et frondibus linquentes vires 
non nihil retinuit, socio eflante animam coram 
pre meerore comedere recusabat: tamen Arto 
€ conspectu remoto se cibo reficere a militibus 
cogitur. Postquam perturbatio, & tumultus 
eorum, qui Rubrum inquirebant, sedatum est, 
Arto inhumato Ruber pedibus eger in Fiachi 
domum delatus clam curatur, curatumque Fia- 
chus per Vaterum Giraldinum Fuscum in VIto- 
niam ad Comitem Tironum, Tironus ad Macgui- 


\ 


1916 ANNaza RIOshachTa ElREGNN. (1592. 


lapam tpé pparoib na catpac 1 ccpécumare carc,7 ni tapo neach ora uid 1a 
act amanl sac naon ale ucip ni po anpat lucc an barle do tatag1o an tan 
rm, 7 poptan obéla oplaicte voip na cactpac. Rongactan iapam tné Zac 
mombopald 7 TNE FAC naimpéid Fo puactaccan pop phd an puad plerbe 
cmap a noeachard aod 1pm céo eld. Ro foanpecap voncata na hoidce 4 
cinofnup an ceichd (ap uaman a ccogpama) an ci ba pine ofob ppd 1. En - 
Cod ba poam ofob an aof naoip: son Sup bo hé an aos noipb{ptarp. 
Nip bo paofhg 1aoporn cpé Coappecapad enpi ppt, ap a aor po sabpac ay 
apecnam plmpa, 7 a ppfp muinctine acc venam eolarp vob. bat an avhangs 
ay pmde pneacca gu nap bd povaing odoibypium a prubal uaip bavan san Eoac 


o néill. 


san popbpuca ian ppagbal a nuaccameappad ipm ppralers cpép a ccan- 
saccap. Oa moa po mfincmsead ant py an oranaptap ma aod, ucip ba 
clan fooa 6 po cummseadh eppide, 7 00 cod 1 tcpoma anboill che foo a 
comnaide ipm ccapcain 1 mbaos. Nip bo hamland pin oaod, nispammice tan 
aoip macvacta,7 nf po anapcaip opap no vionpopkanpe an ronbaid pin, 7 ba 
huccmall epccad a Cimm 7 aimteacc. O po amg prum Ane aga enip- 
ciucchad 7 cdlGpece 7 1onmoille a ceme po pupal pap a lamh vo cop pop 
a sualainn bavem,7 an lam cale pon Zualamn an gille. Tiagaro app amlaio 
pin 50 pangaccan cap an pliab puad. Roboap pefeis comps rapam, 7 ni po 
féeopac ant leo ni ba pra, © na po cumaingpioc a bnht leo vo ponpac 
camip(m 7 comnade 1 ppopcad allbpuaic iomano baot pop accion. Jan 
nanmain ooib annpaide po cuppiot an Zrolla uadab la ps5étaib- 50 5l{no | 
maofluspa cpm 1 porbe pracha mac aoda baot 1 néccpaccay pi sallanbh. 


Slo vaing{n oiotoslargi Erde, 7] no Fnatangoip opons mop vo Fralleab ata 
rem, & Macguier ad ipsius patrem Hugonem the hands of his enemy, Hugh, Earl of ‘Tyrone, 


Odonellum Tirconella principem mittit.”—-His- who would neither enlarge him, nor deliver 


jorie Catholice Ibernie Compendium, ‘Tom. 3, 
lib. 2, ¢. iv. fol. 125. 

This account of the escape of the Ulster hos- 
tages is curious, but it does not appear perfectly 
accurate. First, Felim O’ Toole was not of Castle- 
kevin, and Fiagh did not leave Hugh Roe O’ Don- 
nell and Art O’ Neill for three days without food. 
But it is perfectly true that Henry O’Neill, of 
whom the Four Masters lose sight altogether, 
made his escape into Ulster, where he fell into 


him up to the Lord Deputy. 

” They were grieved, literally, ‘not joyous 
were they at the separation of Henry from 
them.” P.O’Sullevan Beare states that Henry 
made his way into Ulster; and he might have 
added, that he was there thrown into a worse 
prison than that from which he had escaped, by 
the Earl of Tyrone, who feared that the English 
would set him up as a rival to him in his me- 


ditated rebellion. It appears from a letter writ- 


1592. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1917 


time, and guided them. They then proceeded through the streets of the city, 
mixing with the people ; and no one took more notice of them than of any one 
else, for they did not delay at that time to become acquainted with the people 
of the town; and the gates of the city were wide open. They afterwards pro- 
ceeded by every intricate and difficult place, until they arrived upon the surface 
of the Red Mountain over which Hugh had passed in his former escape. T he 
darkness of the night, and the hurry of their flight (from dread of pursuit), 
separated the eldest of them from the rest, namely, Henry O'Neill. 
the greenest of them with respect to years, but not with respect to prowess. 
‘They were grieved" at the separation of Henry from them ; but, however, they 
proceeded onwards, their servant guiding them along. That night was snowing, 
so that it was not easy for them to walk, for they were without [sufficient] 
clothes or coverings, having left their outer garments behind them in the privy- 
house, through which they had escaped. Art was more exhausted by this rapid 
journey than Hugh, tor he had been a long time in captivity, and had become 
It was not so with Hugh; 


Hugh was 


very corpulent from long confinement in the prison’, 
he had not yet passed the age of boyhood, and had not [yet] done growing and 
increasing at this period, and his pace and motion were quick and rapid. When 
he perceived Art had become feeble, and that his step was becoming inactive 
and slow, he requested him to place one arm upon his own shoulder, and the 
other upon that of the servant. In this manner they proceeded on their way, 
until they had crossed the Red Mountain, after which they were weary and 
fatigued, and unable to help Art on any further ; and as they were not able to 
take him with them, they stopped to rest under the shelter of a high rocky 
precipice which lay before them. On halting here, they sent the servant to 
bring the news to Glenmalur, where dwelt Fiagh, the son of Hugh [O'Byrne], 
who was then at war with the English. This is a secure and impregnable 


they were.’ To-morrow (by the grace of God), 


ten on the 19th August, 1602, by the Lord De-, 
Iam again going into the field, as near as I can, 


puty Mountjoy, to Cecil, that Henry O’Neal, 


the eldest son of Shane O’ Neal, had then broken 
out of prison, and that his brother had done the 
like long before. And his Lordship adds: ‘* But 
as things stand now, I do not see any great use 
to be made of them; and I fear I shall be more 
troubled with them than if they were still where 


utterly to waste the Country of Tyrone, &c.”— 
See iMoryson’s History of Ireland, edition ot 
1735, vol. ii. p. 190. 

i In the prison, literally, ‘in the prison in 
which he was,” which is redundant even ‘in 


Irish. P. O’Sullevan Beare states, that Art was 


1918 AQNNaZa RIOsHhachTa EIREGNN. (1592. 


chat an can v0 elaiccip app vol sup an ngl(no ipm ap ba hinmll leo bit 
amnpade cco ctiagoaip Dia ceip. O Rare an giolla sup an mougm 1 mbaos 
placa acpéo a pcéla 06,7 arnanl po paccaib na hocca po ela ap an ecatpang, 
Ro 
ponconsaip praca po Cédoip pop OpuINs dia aop Spada (ooneoc poboap camy" 
laip vib) vol ora pansid, 7 Pep po bad 7 pean ale po Lion 7 conmaim leo. 
Do ponad parpprum mop, 7 pangaccan bail mbaccapn na propa. 


7 naé béntaor 1 mb(chard poppa muna ciopta oia ccobaip accpaicce. 


Monuan 
nip b6 pommeac padal baccanpom pop a ccionn, uaip ap iad poboan cogZada 
nia ccoppaib ameaccain colbada crumaipszeala cloicpneacta acc pedd oa 
sac Lf mpa, 7 acc 1omucim a nionap nuipéccpom, 7 a ppeabannleimcib 
pnaccaol py a cenfpaib,7 a nappanimleaban, 7 a mallacpann pm a noincmb, 
7 cpoascib sup bo pamalca lap na prlona our pamnic nan bo oaoine icp 1aT 
ian na mompolac ip pneacta ueop ni pucipypioc blogad ma mballarb acc 
amoanl bacip mapb. Ro cogbad leo 1a0 ap a lige, 7 po fupalmot poppa ni 
von biad 5 von Lonn oo cocaitlm, 7 ni pt uadaib voip uoan Zac oveoc no 
eaboaip no celgoip san fuipeac, conad ann pm acbat apc po ded, 7 po 
hadnacc an ot pin. | Oala Clodar po congaib pide ian pm an copmaim, 7 po 
baccap a bpfosa pon popbernt iap na hol act a oF Comp nama, voip ap am- 
laid baccaippioe ma mballaib manba san moctuccad iap nat 7 1onbolgao 
mp an ploo 7 pp an pneacca. Ro cuippot na pip pop 1omcan eippium sur 
om nglionn aopubpamanp, 7 bat 1 cas oOfipme 1 noiamaip an olintploa aga 
leis(p 50 ccaMnice Teacta Fo dicelta via plop pcél 6 a Chamam an Tiapla 
6 NOU. Ro cmallpom imceact 1anpm ian mbpfic von ceacca pap. ba 
volig Dopom dol 1pm Tupayp pm uaip ni po péoad LOS(p via cTnoiscib Fup bo 


severely hurt by a stone, which had fallen acci- 
dentally upon him in his descent from the privy. 
i Instantly, \ tctpaicce.—See note * under the 


ceived him with shouts of exultation, mingled 
with expressions of the most implacable animo- 
sity to the English name: one kissed his feet, 


year 1590, p. 1899, supra. 

* In a sequestered house.—He was placed in 
Dr. O’Conor 
ornaments the simple style of the annalists, in 
his account of the second escape of Hugh Roe 
O’ Donnell, as follows, in his Memoirs, &c. p. 108: 

‘** O’Donnel was carried on men’s backs to the 
defile of Glyn Malura. Here the O’Beirnes” 
[O’Byrnes] ‘“‘came out to meet him, and re- 


this house from fear of pursuit. 


another clasped his hands, and the peasantry 
crowded into the castle to salute with their 
usual expressions of respect and veneration the 
young representative of the house of O’Donnel. 
Feasts were immediately prepared; the harpers 
swept the history of his illustrious family on 
the strings of their musical instruments, accom- 
panied with rhapsodies of their own invention. 
Messengers were dispatched to the old Earl of 


1592. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1919 


valley ; and many prisoners who escaped from Dublin were wont to resort to 
that valley, for they considered themselves secure there, until they could return 
to their own country. When the servant came into the presence of Fiagh, he 
delivered his message, and how he had left the youths who had escaped from 
the city, and [stated] that they would not be overtaken alive unless he sent 
them relief instantly’. Fiagh immediately ordered some of his servants of trust 
(those in whom he had most confidence) to go to them, taking with them a 
man to carry food, and another to carry ale and beer. This was accordingly 
done, and they arrived at the place where the men were. Alas! ,wnhappy and 
miserable was their condition on their arrival. Their bodies were covered over 
with white-bordered shrouds of hail-stones freezing around them on every 
side, and their light clothes and fine-threaded shirts too adhered to their skin ; 
and their large shoes and leather thongs to their shins and feet; so that, 
covered as they were with the snow, it did not appear to the men who had 
arrived that they were human beings at all, for they found no life in their 
members, but just as if they were dead. They were raised by them from their 
bed, and they requested of them to take some of the meat and drink; but this 
they were not able to avail themselves of, for every drink they took they rejected 
again on the instant ; so that Art at length died, and was buried in that place. 
As to Hugh, after some time, he retained the beer ; and, after drinking it, his 
energies were restored, except the use of his two feet, for they were dead mem- 
bers, without feeling, swollen and blistered by the frost and snow. The men 
carried him to the valley which we have mentioned, and he was placed in a 
sequestered house‘, in a solitary part of a dense wood, where he remained under 
cure until a messenger came privately from his brother-in-law, the Earl O'Neill, 
to inquire after him. When the messenger arrived, he [Hugh] prepared to 
depart. It was difficult for him to undertake that journey, for his feet could 


Tyrone, and soon after young O’Donnel set out not suspect that he would hazard so close an 
for his own country. approach. Here O’Donnel and he embraced 

‘‘Mean time the Lord Deputy posted guards each other with tears, and then, attended only 
on all the fords of the Liffey, to prevent his by eight horsemen, he took his way through 
escape ; but Fiagh, escorted by a party of horse, Meath, Stradbally, Shabh Fuad, Armagh, Dun- 
galloped forward with him towards Dublin, gannon, to the shore of Logh Earne, where, after 
foreseeing that the fords near the capital would escaping a variety of dangers, he was joyfully 
not be so well guarded, since government could _ received by the brave Hugh Maguire, and con- 


1920 ANNA7a RIOSHachTa EIREGNN. 1592. 


high 00 neoc ele a cupsbcnl pon a eoc, 7 a sabonl ecip a o1b Lamaib vo 
poipr an can no tanblamns(o. 
50 paime can abainn lipe o1a 1mof(Sail pon na celccarb bacan p6 a encomarp, 
ucaip vo cualaccap Zoll aca chat 50 paibe Clod 1 nglionn maoilusna, conad 


Ro cum pracha ofmm mapcac ipin adang Laip 


cope pm po cumpproc luce coméoa pon ataib évomne na habann co na 
pasad Cod, 7 na bnargoe po éla amantle pmp cond 1 ccdiccead ulad. ba 
hGcctn vo na hoccarb batap 1 ppanpad aoda Zabail a bpoccup 00 catpars 
oublinne cap at noopa@d momodomain bat pon abainn live co pangaoap san 
Ro bat 
an luce lap po tpéccead pom peace mam (iapy an ccéona hélud 1. Pelim 


poncloipteacc vo na Zallaib co mbatcap pon paitce an owume. 


6 cuatail co na bnatain) 1 copéecumaypce an oiopma aga tTpeopuccad sup an 
ov pin, 7 po c{ngailpiot a ccovac 7 a ccarpofp pe a pole. Tiomnarc celeab- 
pad do, 7 paccbaro bMoaécamn occa, 7 pRapars PMp-annpin. — 

Oala Coda ui oomnanll ni baf na pocain acc an taon d6cclaoc do deoch- 
aid pop a 1apcup mpm nglionn oipveanc do muincip Cloda ui neill, 7 no labnad 
cinga na couat nfecpann, 7 no biod vo spép 1 ppocamp an iapla (1. aod o neil) 
an tan no chsfo 1 m(pce Fall sup bo heslac,7 Fup bo oana mn sac conan baoi 
pop a cionn. Coctap 1apam pop a noth neacarb ana uomalla pon poovaib 
paoin noinse na mide co pangaccap pop bnt na bomne ia mavain Co Zoid 
6 opoicfe ata pian, 7 pobcan omnaig im sabeul sup an ccatnarg pm conad 
én vo ponpac Zabcal la hup na habann 50 ham 1 mbiod 1apecanpe oimnim 
veanoil, 7. antpac bfcce occa pé Momloctad. Oo cod Clod 1ym ccupac co po 
paccaib an tTlomancoptas € popp an mbpuac allcanac rap ccabaine a lan 
loge 06. Tice pip mumntipe aoda ma PNTINg,7 Fabaid Lap na heocha cpép 
an ccatpoas, 7 00 bent 50 haod 140 von caob anaill von abamn. Ciagaic 
pon a neacaib, 7 loccan co mbavap va mile 6n aban. Clo ciao voine oopac 
Mioxsainn pon a cciomn an conamp po Zabpac, 7 ounclad oimop ma timcell 


ameal bid lubsonc pormaca. Ro bat otmapup aipodine la hocclac namnlsoa 


ducted by water to his father’s castle of Bally- 
shannon. 

| They were afraid.—This artless style could 
be easily improved ; but the Editor will allow 
the Four Masters their own mode of telling 


stories. It should be stated thus: ‘* Tyrone’s 


servant of trust being afraid to bring Hugh © 
O’Donnell publicly through the streets of 
Drogheda, rode with him along the south bank 
of the Boyne, to where he knew there was a 
ferry, kept by a poor man, who earned his live- 
lihood partly by fishing and partly by ferrying 


1592.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1921 


not have been healed [within the time], so that another person had to raise him 
‘on his horse, and to lift him from his horse, whenever he wished to alight. 
Fiagh dispatched a troop of horse with him, [who accompanied him] until he 
crossed the River Liffey, to protect him against the snares which were laid for 
him ; for the English of Dublin had heard that Hugh was at Glenmalure, and 
had therefore posted guards on the shallow fords of the river, to prevent him 
and the prisoners who had escaped along with him from passing into Ulster. 
The youths who were along with Hugh were obliged to cross a difficult deep 
ford on the River Liffey, near the city of Dublin; and they proceeded on their 
way until they came to the green of the fortress, unperceived by the English. 
The people by whom he had been abandoned some time before, after his first 
escape, namely, Felim O'Toole and his brother, were amongst the troop who 
escorted him to this place; and they made friendship and amity with each 
other. They bade him farewell, and having given him their blessing, departed 
from him. | 
As for Hugh O'Donnell, he had [now] no one along with him but the one 
young man who had been sent for him to the famous Glen [Glenmalure]; he 
was of the people of Hugh O'Neill, and spoke the language of foreign countries, 
and had always accompanied the Earl (i.e. Hugh O’Neill) when he went among 
the English ; so that he was acquainted with and confident in every road by 
which they had to pass. They proceeded forwards on their noble, swift steeds, 
by the straight-lined roads of Meath, until they arrived before morning on the 
brink of the Boyne, a short distance to the west of Drogheda; and they were 
afraid’ of going to that town, so that what they did was this, to proceed along 
the brink of the river to a place where a poor little fisherman used to wait with 
a little boat, for ferrying [people across the river]. Hugh went into this little 
boat, and the ferryman conveyed him to the other bank, having received a full 
remuneration ; and his servant returned with the horses through the city [town], 
‘and brought them to Hugh on the other side of the river. They then mounted 
their steeds, and proceeded onwards until they were two miles from the river, 
when they observed a dense bushy grove, surrounded with a rampart, looking 
like an enclosed garden, at some distance on the way before them. On one side 


people across the river. Here he conveyed with the horses through the town of Drogheda, 
Hugh across the river, and then went round - where he was well known as Tyrone’s servant.” 


ll m 


1922 


aNNaZa RIOshachtd elREaNnN. (1592. 


vo na sallonb la caob an ovoipe, 7 ba Deapbeana oaod 6 néill erpioe. lan troce 
ooib sup an vinclad pewmpice a neice, ] Tlagaite 1pteac ipin vorpe baos 1pm 
otunclad ucap po bad pipéolac caofmtectaad aoda 1pm margin pn. lap pRas- 
bal aoda Mpuide Lud prum pin DGnad, 7 PO Fe1b a Piaduccad, pucip pum 
capfecal ofippit oaod 6 somnaill, 7 vo bent lap € so po pnlpclad 7 co po 
procaileao amaul ba lamn Lop. Ro anpac npuide co an a banac vavaigsh 
Ro sabad a neice om1b 1 nuptopac o1dce, 7 Locan cap pliab bnlS,7 tne macaipe 
conaill co pangaccap co ctpagbanle mic bucan ma mavam. O Roboan epp- 
laicte voinp! an baale 1pm mavam muic apflo po cinnple gabenl cpemic Fo 
pangacap ma piimim pon a neaconb 50 praccacap von caob anal. Robcap 
pubis ponppaoilg an aba a ecépnuio can sac mbaogal oa mbaot pfmpa 
sopm. UApplo vo coccap iapam sup an ppiod cpm 1 mbaof compdealbac, 
mac en, mic pelim puad i néill, vo lérccfh a pecip. Ga hnmll.ooib ann 
paide uaip ba capa ba coiccéle o6pom an ci coippdealbac, 7 ba Monann 
Mataip Dd6plde, 7 don 1apla 6 nell. Cimppic anoparde co ap a banac. Oo 
deacactan 1apam cpé pliab puaicc co pangaccan 50 hapomaca, anarc ann 
co dicealcta in aohag pin. Tiagait an a banac co otn nZMainn capm 1 mbaoi 
an tianla aod 6 néill. 6a paoihs eipprum dia tTTolEACT, 7] puccad iad 1 
naineccal ucagneac Zan Prop oa Fac aon acc mad uacthad oia aoy Tay 


m A fine mansion-house.—According to the 
Lite of Hugh Roe O’Donnell this mansion was 
at Maimipcip mop, or abbey of Mellifont. 

2 Conveyed him.—The reader must bear in 
mind that Hugh O’Donnell could not walk at 
this time, as his toes had been bitten by the 
frost, near Glenmalure. 

° Shiabh Breagh, now anglice Slieve Brey, a 
chain of hills, extending from Clogher head, in 
the east of the county of Louth, to Rathkenny, 
in the county of Meath. The part of this chain 
of hills lying in the county of Meath is often 
called Sliabh na gCearc. This mountain is called 
Mons Bregarum, in the Lives of St. Fanchea and 
St. Columbkille, and it was so called as being 
the only mountain in the territory of Breagh. 

P Tragh-Bhaile-mhic-Buain.—This was origi- 
nally the name of the strand at Dundalk, but 


it was afterwards applied to the town.—See it 
already mentioned at the years 1392, 1399, 1428, 
1430, 1434, 1483, 1492, 1557. 

9 The Fiodh, i.e. the wood. ‘This is still the 
Irish name of the Fews, in the south of the 
county of Armagh. 

‘Turlough, the son of Henry.—The name of 
this Turlough mac Henry O’Neill is marked on 
an old map in the State Papers’ Office, London, 
as chieftain of the Fews, in the south of the 
county of Armagh. According to a pedigree of 
O’ Donnell, in the possession of Count O’ Donnell, 
of Austria, this Turlough had a daughter, 
Margaret, who married Hugh, son of Calvagh 
Roe, son of Manus, son of Con [the brother of 
Sir Niall Garv] O’Donnell; and she had for him 
a son, Carolus, or Calvagh Duv, the ancestor of 
the O’Donnells of Castlebar, and of the Counts 


1592.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1923 


of this grove stood a fine mansion-house™, belonging to a distinguished English 
youth, who was a particular friend of Hugh O'Neill. On reaching the enclo- 
sure, they unharnessed their steeds, and entered the grove which was inside 
the rampart, for Hugh’s companion was well acquainted with the place. Having 
left Hugh there [in the grove], he went into the fortress, where he was kindly 
received. He procured a private apartment for Hugh O’Donnell, and conveyed 
him" thither, where he was attended and entertained to his satisfaction. Here 
they remained until the evening of the followmg day ; their horses were got 
ready for them in the beginning of the night, and they proceeded across Shabh 
Breagh’, and through the territory of Machaire-Chonaill ; and before morning 
they had arrived at Tragh-Bhaile-mhic-Buain’. As the gates of the town ‘were 
opened in the morning early, they resolved to pass through it on their horses. 
{This they did, and advanced] until they were at the other side; and they were 
cheerful and rejoiced for having escaped every danger -which lay before them 
They then proceeded to the Fodh*, where dwelt Turlough, the son 
They were here 


thus far. 
of Henry‘, son of Felim Roe O’Neill, to recruit themselves. 
secure, for Turlough was his friend and companion, and he and the Earl O'Neill 
had [been born of] the one mother. They remained here until the next day, 
and then proceeded across Shabh Fuaid’, and arrived at Armagh, where they 
remained in disguise for that night. On the following day they proceeded to 
Dungannon, where the Earl, Hugh O’Neill, was. He was rejoiced at their arri- 
val, and they were conducted [recte, Hugh was conducted] into a private apart- 


ment, without the knowledge of any, except a few of his faithful people who 


O'Donnell of Spain and Austria. This Turlough 
mac Henry O’Neill, usually called Sir Tirlagh, 
was transplanted from the Fews to Oldcastle, in 
the county of Mayo, where he got a grant ofa 
considerable estate, which was forfeited in 1641. 

S Shabh Fuaid, i. e. the mountain of Fuad, son 
of Breogan, one of the chieftains who came over 
with the sons of Milesius, so early as A. M. 2934, 
according to O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, part iii. c. 16. 
See also Keating’s History of Ireland, Haliday’s 
edition, pp. 300, 382. This mountain is shewn on 
an old map of Ulster in the State Papers’ Office, 
London, under the name of Slew Bodeh, and 


placed between Lough Muckno [at Castle-Blay- 
ney ]}and Armagh. This name is still preserved 
and applied to the highest of the Fews mountains. 
It should be here remarked that Fews, the name 
of the territory, was formed, not from Sliab 
Fuaio, the name of this mountain, but from 
F100, or peas, i.e. wood, which was applied to the 
territory before the two baronies were formed. 
t They.—This is faulty. It should be: “Hugh 
was shewn to a private apartment,” because 
there existed no necessity for concealing the 
Earl’s servant, who had accompanied Hugh 
O’Donnell from Glenmalure to Dungannon. 


LE? 


1924 ANNaZa RIOshacNTA ElREGNN. (1592. 


bacan ocd ppmtcilem, 7 baoi aod an va pin né cetedpa noice ag cup peiyp 
a cipccip 7 aimmg ve. Oo bfpc 1anom lam pon imteacc,7 ceileabnarp oon 
rapla lap ccon oipime mancac lap so pamice co haipfp loca hépne. 

ba capa od6pom tTmat an cine, 7 ba bnateap anpamn a macan 1. Coo 
Maguidip ucop ba hi nuala mpm Magnupa uf vomnall a matcp. Ro ba 
paoihs Masgudip pemeprum. CTuccad ianam (cap oia posi 7 cho im. 
Impapple ap iappodamn co pangacan sup an ccaol ccumang baot pop an 
loc co po sabpac popt an v4 pin. Oo coccap ‘Dpons dia Pain muincip ma 
comoail annpm, 7 00 bfptpac leo € co caplén ata pinay apm 1 mbaccan 
bapoa uf oomncall a ataprom. Oat anopaide co crangaccan a mbaot ma 
ccompocnab 1pm tip Dia pargid dia Pladucchad. Robcapn paothg a pam 
muincip pp oamna na plata our pamicc, 7 5é po olusy’e pape 06 ap aof a 
cenedil Ro baoi oamna nan bo lucca acca o1a pponbailce pnip, uenn ap amlond 
baof an cip ma chive cneac ecin sallanb, 7 saoidelanb 50 pin. Ro baccan 
Tha oad Caiptin capofipce 1. captm uulip 7 captin conaill 50 noib céoab Laoc 
amcille pia (cangaccap achaid pap an tan pa a coiccead comnact) acc 
jonnpad 7 acc opccain an Tipe co coizceann co mbaoi 6 pliab anoip) crip conmlL 
ap a ccumap cenmoca captiall ata pfnaig, 7 capoiall 0am na ngall apm 1 
mbaof 6 vomnaall 50 nuachad oaoine Ina pocarp. Ap a aot ni po péopac ni 
06, 7 mi baoi cumang occa Zabenl pnt im aromillead na cpice. 
sabpacc na soll ifm ionacacc 7 aictpeb 1 moamptip na mbpatan 1 noun na 
nsall ian nool via hupd 7 via macenb eccailp: po d1ampanb, 7 po opoibelanb 
an tipe an a momsabeal pum ouaman a mudcagte 7 a mimbinca. 


6a hann po 


lan 
mbht achad 1pm mampcp 0616 sup an uachad plums acpubnamanp, oo 
4 They rowed him, i. e. the men sent by Ma- 


lower] Lough Erne, where the River Erne 


guire to convey him to Ballyshannon. Maguire 
himself did not accompany him, as we learn from 
the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell: ‘¢4 00 taoo 
inj pacbard biinaccam az Mazguidip: He 
went into the boat and left his blessing with 
Maguire.” 

“ The narrow neck.—This is that narrow part 
of the Lower Lough Erne, near Belleek, called 
Caol na h-Eirne. It is stated in the Life of 
Hugh Roe O’Donnell, by Peregrine O’Clery, 
that Cael na h-Gipne is that part of [the 


escapes from it: 30 pangazan sup an ccael 
ecuapcumang baoi pop an loc pemepentmap, 
bait hi coet ap an ob aovbclopaé iaic-1omoa 
ppp! paizen Gipne. 

* Ballyshannon.—It is stated in the Life of 
Hugh Roe O’Donnell that this castle was built 
by Niall, the son of Turlough-an-Fhiona 0’ Don- 
nell, in the year 1423. 

Y Willis.—Captain Willis was made sheriff of 
Fermanagh, despite of Maguire, who had given 
the Lord Deputy three hundred cows to free 


1592. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1925 


attended him ; and here Hugh remained for the space of four nights, to shake 
off the fatigue of his journey and anxiety. He then prepared to depart, and 
took his leave of the Earl, who sent a troop of horse with him till he arrived 
at Lough Erne. 

The lord of this country, namely, Hugh Maguire, was his friend and kins- 
man, by the mother’s side; for Nuala, daughter of Manus O’Donnell, was 
Maguire’s mother. Maguire was rejoiced at his arrival. A boat was afterwards 
provided for him [Hugh], into which he entered; and they rowed him* thence 
until they arrived at the narrow neck” of the lake, where they landed. Here 
a party of his faithful friends came to meet him, and they conveyed him to the 
castle of Ballyshannon*, where the warders of O’Donnell, his father, were [sta- 
tioned]. He remained here until all those in the neighbourhood came to him, 
to welcome him; and his faithful people were rejoiced at the return of the heir 
to the chieftainship ; and though they owed him real affection on account of 
his family, they had an additional cause of joy at this period ; [for, until his 
return] the country had been one scene of devastation between the English and 
the Irish. There were two famous captains, namely, Captain Willis’ and Cap- 
tain Conwell, with two hundred soldiers (who had some time before come 
thither from the province of Connaught), who were plundering and ravaging 
the country in general, so that they had*[reduced] in subjection to them the 
entire of Tirconnell from the mountain westwards, excepting the castle of 
Ballyshannon, and the castle of Donegal, in which O'Donnell was [stationed | 
with a few men. The English, however, were not able’ to do him any injury ; 
nor was he [on the other hand] able to prevent them from plundering the 
country. The place where the English had taken up their abode and quarters 
was the monastery of Donegal, the friars and ecclesiastics having fled into the 
wilds and recesses of the territory to avoid them, from fear of being destroyed 


or persecuted. After having resided in the monastery for some time, with the 


his country from a sheriff. Fynes Moryson 
states that Captain Willis had for his guard 
one hundred men, and “lead about some one 
hundred women and boys, all which lived on 
the spoil of the country.” Hence that Maguire, 
‘taking his advantage, set upon them and drove 
them into a church, where he would have put 


them all to the sword, if the Earl of T'yrone had 
not interposed his authority.”—Vol. i. p. 28. 
See also P. O’Sullevan Beare’s Hist. Cathol. Iber. 
Compendium, tol. 126. 
2 Were not able, literally, ‘‘ Non potuerunt 
isti nocere illi” [O’Donnello] ‘‘nec erat potestas 
illi prohibere istos a diripiendo territorium.” 


1926 ANNGZGA RIOSHACHTA EIRECNN. (1592. 


Heacactap opions oiob co heoconn tmlib an cuam of mle cfimenn 6 otm na 
ngall pian 50 bale uf baorgill dip ba_hinmll led bhe 1pmde 6 po baccap 
bnaigoe na cmice pon a ccumay. No chigoip na noe’ y ina ccmapaib co 
mbfipvip cnod 7 cftpa,1onnmapa 7 evala m po ba compocpaib omb von tip 
dia pars von bale fp. Gaccap vo Spép ace cécmpH pulld plos 7 
-pochade Cuca vo dol cap bfinap mop oingsperm 7 vanccam na cipe von caob 
Zoip vo pliab amanl vo ponpac capm mmbaccan. 

Imtupa Cloda uf vomnantl ian ccogaipm a tipe cucca, ni po an ppii 50 
lerce (6 po cuala an mopbpoiw 1 mbaccan cenél cconaill, mllead 7 midiac 
na mainipenec) acc appld do pdine Todect Fo Ot na ngall emeac 1 moncanb 
pp na sallonb. Ni canopac an cip exppiom 1 ppanll san coct p6 a Toscapm 
ma neipib 7 ma mbuiomb amonl ap ofine conpangaccapn oonfoc po canpac hé 
lapodam po lapom a teacta an amup na ngall via pada pit Zan 1ompumeac 
no eapnadhad ipm (Slap. o1a haromillead ni ba pipe, 7 nac ccommmlpccpad 
impa tect an conain bad lainn leo, acc nama co po Paccbaroip via nop ma 
mbaot vo bord, 7 00 Cnod na cpice led. Ro baoi ouaman 4 oimeaccla ponna 
yom co nveapnpact morn amail po Poncongnaio popna, 7 poboan bwio1s vo 
poccam a nanmann leo, loccan pon a cctlarb vomdipl 1 ccoiccead Connacc. 
Cangaccapn na bnaitp 1apam oon mampop. 

Oo cucd aod 6 vomnanll 50 hat pfhas 1 ppmeipyy, 7 vo blpc Usa vo 
iCslp a cop, 7 ni po péopac LASfp 06 co po deilispiot a Oi ondain FIP, 7 Nip 
bo hogplan so o1md mbliadna. Oaoi pum amland pm m otcuplge a cop 
o pél bmsoe 50 mi appl. O ovo veachond aduaipe na harmypipe (ppchaide 
von cctila ba pooa lap po bof ma otaiplige 7 po cup capcclamad 7 ciondl 
pop a mbaot umal oa acorn alla comp von ctpliab omveane .1. bfmap mop cine 
haoda, 7] po Tiondoil cuicce a mbaoi alla cian von cpliab céona 1. 6 baorg ll, 7 


* Baile- Ui-Bhaoighill, i. e, the town or resi- 
dence of O’Boyle, now Ballyweel.—See note ™, 
under the year 1440, p. 920, supra. On an old 
map of parts of the coasts of Mayo, Sligo, 
Leitrim, and Donegal, preserved in the State 
Papers’ Office, London, “‘ Ba. O’Boile” is shewn 
as a castle on the north side of the ‘‘ Baie of 
Donegale,”” opposite the ““Monasterie of Done- 
zalle” which is shewn on the south side of the 


tiver Eske, near its mouth. 

> Two and three, literally, “in twos and threes.” 

° Such of them as loved him.—The reader must 
bear in mind that the sons of Calvagh O’ Donnell, 
and their followers, the O’Gallaghers, O’Do- 
hertys, and some of the Mac Sweenys, were op- 
posed to the election of Hugh Roe as chief of 
Tirconnell. 

4 Bands. 





“éip «1. burdean.” — 0’ Clery. 


1592] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 19927 


small number of forces which we have mentioned, a party of them went to 
Baile-Ui-Bhaoighill’, [a castle] on the borders of the harbour, about two thou- 
sand paces west of Donegal, for they considered themselves secure there, as 
they had the hostages of the country in their power. These were wont to go 
forth, in companies of two and three”, and carry off the flocks and herds, goods 
and treasures, of the neighbourhood with them into this castle. They were 
constantly inviting additional hosts and forces to proceed across Barnesmore, to 
persecute and plunder the country on the east side of the mountain, as they had 
already treated the western portion. 

As for Hugh O'Donnell, after having summoned the country to him, he did 
not long wait for them (when he heard of the great oppression in which the 
Kinel-Connell were, and of the spoiling and profanation of the monastery), but 
proceeded to Donegal to meet the English face to face. The [people of the] - 
country, such of them as loved him‘, did not negleet to come at his summons ; 
they followed him in bands* and in companies as expeditiously as they were 
able ; he, thereupon, sent his messengers to the English, to tell them not to 
remain or abide any longer in the monastery destroying it ; and, [adding] that 
he would not prevent them to depart in any direction they pleased, provided 
only they would leave behind all the prisoners and cattle of the territory. they 
had with them®. They were so terrified and dismayed that they did as they 
were ordered ; and, being thankful that they escaped with their lives, they went 
back again into the province of Connaught. The friars then returned to the 
monastery. : 

Hugh O’Donnell returned to Ballyshannon, and sent for physicians to cure 
his feet ; but they were not able to effect a cure until they had cut off both his 
great toes’; and he was not perfectly well till the end of a year [afterwards]. 
He remained thus confined under cure of his feet from the festival of St. Bridget 
to April. When the cold of the spring season was over, he thought it too long 
he had been confined as an invalid; and he sent [persons] to assemble and 
muster all those who were obedient to his father to the east side of the cele- 
brated mountain, i.e. Barnesmore, in Tirhugh ; and he collected [also] all those 


© With them, i.e. in their hands, or in their a ¢oipe. In Irish the same word is used to ex- 
possession. press finger and toe; they are distinguished by 
* Both his great toes : a di opocin 2. 04 épodiz adding Léame and corre. 


1928 ANNdZa RIOshachta ElRECGNN. (1592. 


Mac puibne tipe bosaie. 
1. aod mac Magnupa, mic aoda owib co na commarm amaille pip 1. nstn 
ba pé ionad enoalca im po dalpac 


Tanaic beop via commopad 6 vomnaill a atain 


cpemaly mec vomnaill a mactaippiom. 
na moute pin pe a porte hin ccill mic néncan, 7 ba hand no hoiponste ua vom- 
nall vo spép 1 cciszeapnap pop cenel cconcall. Reamce pum sup an lion 
ecéona an oa pin. Tanaic mo apf aoda ut vomnaill sup an maigm pin, 
Mac puibne panat oomnall mac comnpvdealbargs, mic Ruadm, 7 Mac pmbne 
na TTUAT EoFZaN Occ Mac Eosan dice mic eogain. Cacrap oponga veanmana 
oo cenel cconaill na tanance 1pm ccomodail pin. Roba oibpde aod mac aova 
ouib mic aoda pucid f domnanll,7 pliocc an calbaasy mic Magsnupa mic aoda 
oumb, ua vocantarg Sfan occ mac Slain, mic peilim mic concobain cappas 
cToipeac Tmocait céct mnypr heoccam, 7 opongs vo clomn ctpuibne vo deach- 
cd ap a TTIp, Cond and po attpeabrac fon up loca peabail,7 ap iad pobtapn 
cToIPyZ lompona von calbac ua vomnaill,7 via pol ma ofohans. baccan beop 
opons mon von mumcip sZallcubain Fan cleo ann pm cma mopeaiy 7 ta 
mionan ameul an lucc nonle.. 

Oo cod 1apam va Domnall Cod mac magnupa 7 na maite pin tangacayi 
Dia Parsld vo cpud a ccomaiple, 7 ba plo po cin la hua noomnaill (6 po 
cams(ptaipn a empte 7 moble a aoipe) a HSfpnap vo ctabaipe dia mac, 7 
6 vomnaill vo Zainm ve. Ro molpac cac 1 ccoitcimne an comaiple pin, 7 
po smte pamlad, uaip do pavad 6 Fipgsil an Taincmdeac oIa parsid, 7 po 
oonfpcaippioe Cloo puad 1 ccfhoup na cpice la poncongna, 7 la bfnoact a 
atap, 7 00 pore Opodo an anma feib po ba cécta,7 po sain ua vomnanll ve an 
3. la do man. 

Ni po léice 6 Domnall aod puad pecaoilead von uachad pocparve pin vo 
pala ma panpad co painice etip Tpoistec 7 mapcac ipin ccoicemc 1 ccenél 
eosam mic nell. Nf oeachmd cna pabte, na pAmpioy o1a paisid, an nf po 
paoilpioc a einse prum meallma ap m lige ma mbaoi, 7 ni moa vo pavpat 


* Kilmacrenan.—It is stated in the Life of 
Hugh Roe O’Donnell that Cill mic Nénam, the 
church in which St. Columbkille was educated, 
and where the O’Donnells were inaugurated, 
was situated on the north side of the river Le- 
anainn, in the very centre of the Triacha ched, 
or cantreds of Cinel-Luighdheoch. This had been 


the only district over which the O’Donnells had 
sway until they dispossessed the O’Muldorys 
and O’Canannans. 
" Tricha-ched, i.e. hundred, or barony, con- 
taining one hundred and twenty quartersof land. 
' Like the others, recte, “‘ great numbers of the 
O’Gallaghers also abstained from coming to this 


Fy 
1592. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1929 


to the west of the same mountain, namely, O’Boyle, and Mac Sweeny of Tir- 
Boghaine. There came also to join him, his father, O’Donnell, i. e. Hugh, the 
son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv, with his wife, the daughter of James Mac 
Donnell, his [Hugh Roe’s] mother. The place of meeting appointed by these 
chieftains was Kilmacrenan®, where the O’Donnell was usually inaugurated Lord 
of the Kinel-Connell. He arrived with the same number at that place. To 
Hugh O’Donnell’s levy on this occasion came also Mac Sweeny Fanad (Donnell, 
the son of Turlough, son of Rory), and Mac Sweeny-na-dTuath (Owen, Oge, 
the son of Owen Oge, son of Owen). There were many parties of the Kinel- 
Connell who did not come to this assembly. Of these was Hugh, the son of 
Hugh Duy, son of Hugh Roe O'Donnell ; and the descendants of Calvagh, the 
son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv ; O'Doherty ; John Oge, the son of John, son 
of Felim, son of Conor Carragh, Chieftain of the Tricha-ched” of Inishowen ; 
and a party of the Clann-Sweeny, who had gone away from their [own] terri- 
tory, and were dwelling at that time on the margin of Lough Foyle, and who 
had been leaders in battle to Calvagh O'Donnell, and his descendants after him. 
There was also a great number of the O’Gallaghers who did not come hither, 
through spite and malice, like the others’. 

O'Donnell (Hugh, the son of Manus) and these chiefs who came to meet 
him, then held a consultation ; and the resolution which O’Donnell came to (as 
‘he felt his own feebleness and great age) was, to resign his lordship to his son, 
and to style him O’Donnell. This resolution was universally applauded by all, 
and accordingly adopted, for O’Firghil the Erenagh was sent for; and he inau- 
gurated Hugh Roe chief of the country, by order and with the blessing of his 
father ; and the ceremony of conferring the name was legally performed, and 
he styled him O’Donnell on the third day of May. 

O'Donnell (Hugh Roe) did not permit those few troops he had then with _ 
him to disperse, but marched them, both horse and foot, into the neighbouring 
parts of [the territory of] the race of Eoghan, the son of Niall. No notice or 
forewarning [of this movement] had reached the others, for they did not think 
that he had perfectly recovered from his confinement ; yet they did not intend 


meeting, being, like the others, actuated by the cited her Scottish attendants to murder Hugh, 
malice and animosity which they bore to Hugh _ son of the Dean O’Gallagher, as has been already 
Roe, and his mother, Ineenduy, who had in- at full length set forth.” 


11 N 


1930 aNNaza RIOshachta elREaNnN. (1592. 


ola nufo chefm pia ccenel cconaill 6 clin main. Ro cneac loipccead in po 
ba commnfpa ooib vo cenel eogain Lap an uachad plorg pin Zoncan capligcean 
Zac aon pobinécca ana puccpac. Captacan an pluas evala 1omda ectin 
clépab 7 moilib, 7 poouc pon cctlaib o1a ccpie budém. 

ba hance baof otnapup ui nell coippoelbans luims an an pnat mban mn 
1onbad pm, 7 nion b6 Znat aipipiom uf néll pram ipuide Fup an ccoinpoeatl- 
bac fpin. 6a mé6p a mofolca pom pm cenel cconanll,7 pm chamain uf oom- 
nal a. an cianla 6 nell. Ro tanpoing ua neill opong vo salloanb omblinne 
via nN(ptad 1 naccard cenel cconaill 7 an iapla ui nell a. captm uulap, 7 
captin pulant 50 noib cévaib laoc amalle piu. 6a sZalan mfnman la 
hua noomnanll occ Zoill omblimme do Toct 1 nop a Cpice do cTaipcélad a 
atapnda, 7 an cuiccid an cfna conad ape vo ndine Sloiccead Laip a cciomn 
cpeaccmuine 1 ccip eosain. Ro teicpoc luce an cine an oala peact pram 
50 pangaccan ciannacca slinne smn. Cc cuap o6pom co mbui 6 neill 7 na 
soilt pempaice co lion a pocpave ina compocpanb, pon ponconganc 6 vomnanll 
pon a pocnaive a monnparcchid aipm1 mbaccap. Oo ponad pouppum movin. 
Oo bint puabainct biodbad 7 amup amnap poppa hn momfoon laoi. Ov 
conncazanparde cenel cconall cuca ni po anpac ppd act ciagaic pon a 
momsZabanl co conplén bai pon bnt na habann o1amd canm Roa. 6a ovainzean 
vitoglaisze an caapciall ipin, 7 ba ofn apap ova catcon eipide. Ro sab 
ua ovomnaill ace 1ompulde imon mbanle. Ro paoid ua catéin a teacta vo 
paso uf oomnaall, 7 peemblno lap cuicce, ba hf bao 1pm licip sup bo 
valca v6pom 6 vomnaull, 7 co no epnaidm a Capaopad nip 6 céin, 7 po ba céccva 
dO FO D&F an capacctpad ipin an ccneie ccamcc pop a ionchaib 7 pon a 


k Second occasion —Cn oala peacc- mam «1. 
an vapa@ peace poime. They did not fly before 
him on his first irruption. 

' Cianachta-Glinne-Geimhin, now the barony 
of Keenaght, in the county of Londonderry.— 
See note °, under the year 1197, p. 107, supra. 
The River Roa, or, as it is now anglicised, Roe, 
flows through this barony, dividing it into two 
almost equal parts. The vale of this river was 
called Gleann-Geimhin by the Irish; and the 
name is still partly preserved in that of Dun 
Geimhin, anglice Dungiven, a church standing 


in ruins over a deep glen, through which the 
Roe flows. 

m He was informed.—‘ Cuap, no ao cuap «1. 
vo himpeaoh,””—O’ Clery. 

" On the margin of the River Roa.—This was 
probably the castle of Limavaddy, which was 
situated on the margin of the River Roe, in the 
barony of Keenaght.—See note ‘, under the 
year 1542, p. 1472, supra. O’Kane had ano- 
ther castle at Dungiven, on the same river. _ 

° What was stated—The style is here very 
clumsy and totally devoid of art. The language 


1592. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1931 


to fly before the Kinel-Connell [neither, indeed, had it been their Wont to do so] 
from a remote period. By this small army of the Kinel-Connell the neigh- 
bouring parts of Kinel-Owen were plundered and burned; every one fit to bear 
arms whom they caught was put to the sword and slaughtered. The army also 
seized upon many spoils, both herds ‘and flocks, and [then] returned back to 
their own territory. 

At this time the residence of O’Neill (Turlough Luineach) was at Strabane, 
where, before the time of this Turlough, the O’Neill had not usually held his 
residence. Great was his animosity to the Kinel-Connell, and to O’Donnell’s 
brother-in-law, namely, the Earl O'Neill. O’Neill drew a party of the English 
of Dublin to strengthen him against the Kinel-Connell and the Earl O'Neill, 
namely, Captain Willis and Captain Fullart; and they had two hundred soldiers 
along with them. It was anguish of mind to the young O’Donnell that the 
English of Dublin should have come to the confines of his territory to spy his 
patrimony, and the province in general ; wherefore, in a week’s time he made 
a hosting into Tyrone. The people of the country fled on this second occasion* 
before him, until they reached Cianachta-Glinne-Geimhin'. He [O’Donnell] 
was informed™ that O’Neill and the English before mentioned were [assembled] 
with all their forces in the neighbourhood ; and he ordered his troops to ad- 
vance to the place where they were. This was accordingly done. He marched 
resolutely and fiercely against them in mid-day. When they perceived the Kinel- 
Connell approaching them, they did not wait for them, but fled, to avoid them, 
to a castle which was [situated] on the margin of a river called Roa’. This was 
a strong, impregnable castle, and the mansion-seat of O'Kane. O’Donnell pro- 
ceeded to lay siege to the castle. O’Kane sent a messenger with a letter to him. 
What was stated° in this letter was, that O’Donnell was his foster-son; that he 
[O’Kane] had ratified a friendship with him long since ; that by reason of this 
friendship, it was now lawful for him [O'Donnell] to leave to him the property 


should be constructed thus: ‘ O’Kane sent a 
messenger with a letter to O’Donnell, remind- 
ing him that he was his fosterfather, and that he 
had been at all times on terms of friendship with 
his father, O'Donnell, and him ; that, in conse- 
quence of this friendship, O’ Donnell should now 
spare those O’Neills who had fled to his castle with 


their cattle, and placed themselves under his asy- 
lum ; that he had solemnly promised to protect 
them before he knew that it was from his own 
fosterson, O'Donnell, they were flying ; that if 
O’Donnell would spare these on this occasion, he 
would never again admit under the shelter of his 
fortilace any enemies to his fosterson, O’Donnell. 


Pi Ne? 


1932 aNNaza RIOshachta eIReaNn. (1592. 


comaince dotleccad 06 an Tan pm, nac Léiccpead Cuicce dopldiy) DIA Mbhi<- 
plum ma did. +=Oo0 pad 6 vomnarll an aipecid pm 06,7 poaip ma PMeing, 7 
po aipip co c{nd tedpa noice co na lab ip m cepie ap a noeacaccap na 
cpeaca via tTapo comaince aga lot 7 acca Lainmillead. 
dia tip peiym,7 ni po ampip co pamice otn na ngall,7 bat annparvde pm pé oa 


Soaip tan a ap 


miop aca Lisl. 

Ro ba pava lappum baor 6 nell 7 a Zoill gan pobaint pp an pé ym, 
7 po cup tionol pon a plogab lotan app iapom cap bipnap mo6n, cap pm 
cap modaipn vo dol Zup an ppat mban aipm 1 mbaos 6 neil co na Fallenb, 7 
mf po anpac 50 pangaccan eneac mionchaib ppia. O neill tna ni po paccaib 
poe nad a sorll oansfh an otnand o1a Ppobaint pom, o na puapaccap pom 
a pppeaccpa m cartionszail, bapplo vo ponpac cfinnce 7 choala oadannad 
1 cefteépa anoa an baile, 7 ni po pcanpac py co por loipcpioc 1 mbaoi vo 
cisib pp muna’ peaccarp, 7 6 na puanactan na goill amac vo tappaccamn 
na hoipecne do Coctap dia TTIZ1b 1a ccopecan. 

Imtupa an iapla f nell 6 po prop poe amemide a ceneorl badém oua 
domnaill (aod puad) appfo vo pome vol do pargio an iuptip a. william pic3- 
uilliam, 7 ppotexion opagbail oua oomnanll la cocc do latain, 7 oa accal- 
Fucappium 1oip moyin 7 00 cord an cfnod tf vom- 
Oo cotzan viblimb vo 
pasio an iuypcip, 7 ba paoths prum ppt, 7 po mont an celad cua oomnanll, 7 
po naompiot a pt 7] a ccapaccpad pm pole amanl ip veac po péopat, 7 
ceilebnait na mate pin ppip an aye Tip, 7 paccbarc bMhvaccan occa, 7 pout 
lz an Lf ora coigib. 

Ov cualatcap an opong vo cenel conarll bacan 1 ppmtb(pc pm hua noom- 
naill ploduccad 00 FIP an iupsip TangZgatcap pioe wile po Copa po pt DIA 


lam co tpaisbarle mic buan. 
naill 50 vin na nsall,7 puc lair € co tnags barle. 


Parpio. 


* To avenge.—‘* Tannacecain «1. o1ogail.”— 
O Clery. 

4 To obtain a protection—This was a wise 
stroke of policy in the Earl O’Neill, in order to 
intimidate the race of Calvagh O'Donnell and 
their adherents, who were opposed to his'brother- 
in-law, Hugh Roe O’Donnell. The facility with 
which the Chief Governor complied with this 


Robcan 1a0 ba hanp(soa cance annpn Clod mac aoda omb mic 


request founds a strong argument in favour of 
the suspicion of Fynes Moryson, who says that 
Fitz-William was privy to the escape of Hugh 
Roe O’Donnell. 

¥ Peace.—Cona a, piothchain.—O’ Clery. 

° Hugh, the son of Hugh Duv.—lIt is stated in 
the Life of Hugh Roe O’ Donnell, that this Hugh 
Duy was the senior of all the race of Dalach, the 


1592.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1933 


which had come under his asylum and protection ; and that heswould never 
again admit such, should he [O’Donnell] be in pursuit of it. O’Donnell granted 
him this request, but, returning back, remained three days and nights in the 
territory whence the spoils to which he had given protection had been removed, 
plundering and totally devastating it. He then went back to his own country, 
and never halted until he had reached Donegal, where he remained two months 
under cure. * 

By this time he thought it too long that O’Neill and his English were left 
unattacked ; wherefore, having assembled his forces, they proceeded through 
[the gap of] Barnesmore, and across the [Rivers] Finn and Mourne, on his way 
to Strabane, where O'Neill and his English were [stationed]; and they never 
halted until they came before them face to face. But O’Neill and his English 
did not come outside the donjon of the fortress to engage them ; and when 
they were not responded to in battle, they set fires and flames to the four oppo- 
site quarters of the town, and did not depart until they had burned all the 
houses outside the walls; and when they could not excite the English to come 
forth to avenge? the destruction, they returned home in triumph. 

As for the Earl O’Neill, when he perceived the enmity that his own tribe 
bore to O'Donnell (Hugh Roe), what he did was, to proceed to the Lord Jus- 
tice, William Fitzwilliam, to obtain a protection’ for O’Donnell to come before 
him, and confer with him, at Tragh-Bhaile-mic-Buain [Dundalk]. This he ob- 
tained at once, and went to Donegal to O’Donnell, and took him to Tragh- Bhaile- 
mhic-Buain, where both appeared before the Lord Justice, who was gracious 
to them, and he forgave O’Donnell the escape. They confirmed friendship and 
amity with each other as strongly as possible, and, having bid the Lord Justice 
farewell, and left him their blessing, they all returned to their respective homes. 

When that party of the Kinel-Connell who were in opposition to O'Donnell 
heard that he had made peace with the Lord Justice, they all came to him 
in peace’ and amity. The most distinguished of these who came there were 
Hugh, the son of Hugh Duv’, son of Hugh Roe ; Niall Garv‘, the son of Con, 


son of Muircheartach, next after Hugh, theson youth Hugh Roe, who was a man of greater elo- 
of Manus, whom he expected to succeed in the quence, wiser counsel, loftier mind, and of greater 
government of Tirconnell. Heisdescribed asthe force of character to command and enforce obe- 
Achilles of the Irish race, but it is added, that it dience. 

was no disgrace to him to have submitted to the * Nial Garv.—This is the Nial Gary who 


1934 QNNQaZa RIOShachta erReaNn. | (1593. 


aoda puaid. Niall sanb mac cumn, mic an calbang, mic Magnupa mic acda 
ouib co na bnaitpib, 7 6 vocantarg Sfan 6cc mac Slam, mic peilim mic con- 
coboap Cappongy ian na sabeal Laippium. 


QO1S CRIOST, 1593. 


_Aoip Cort, mile, cuice ced, nocat, a tpi. 


O vomnall Qod puad vo bht 1 mi ianuapn na bliadna po ma ioptad 
caipeacaip badéin 1LGcbtp pop 1oncaib a namac 1. coimpdealbac luineae mac 
neill conallang. Ro sab ag imipt a eccpaicti 7 a aincmbde fain dia 1onnanbad 
ap a tiseannap, 7 ola enipciucchad apn og aoda ut néill OdIponead ina 1onad. 
ba plipde Ddpam an permodeiccyi do pome vain painice tTicc{pnay do paced 
aopa uf nell, 7 00 pace coippdelbac luineac aonca 7 umla 06 1m6n cinm do 
saipm ve. Ro Zaipecdgapam o neil oaod o nell (1. an ctianla), 7 Lleiceip 
coippoealbac lumeac na soll po baccap Lap uada ian ploduccad 06 pm hua 

nell 7 pm hua noomnaill. 1 mi Man vo ponnad vo ponad mopin. Ro baos 
ona céiccead concobaun mic nfpa FO pmacccam pioda don dIap fpm, 7 po 
Bavap 1 ngeill, 7 a ncipe pon ccumup Zombcap pomamaigte oor. 

Cn clann wllam pin a oubhpamap do toct 1pteac 1 cc{no an sobepnona 
po pal micil na buaona plain po boccadpioc na soill acc, co nan pagaib- 
plot a bls Dia Maoin no 1a Mon macy aca pia mbelcame na bliaona po 7 
an mfd na po ofolntpicchead via noaoimb, 7 na po bapaicchead po sabpac 
pon pecaotlead 7 pon eipploed pecnom epeann oiappaio a mbfchao. 

Eappaénca coccad ap nfinse ecip Sip Seoipps bmgam 6 baile an moca 4 
bmian na pamtac (1. bman 6cc) mac bmain mic bniann, mic eosann uf puainc 
pa belcame na bliaona po. ba hé adban an implpna cmd vo crop na bain- 
josna nac pt on mbpfipne ap m breil pm. Oman 6 Ruane via pada sac 
clop oa mbaof san otol sup ab an an pefpann bai ma papac po baof, 7 nap 
afterwards betrayed the cause of Hugh Roe to the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell that O’ Doherty 
the English. It is stated in the Life of Hugh and he came to meet each other with a party of 

toe O’ Donnell, that this Niall Garv, who was a twelve horse on either side; that Hugh Roe, 
fierce and valiantchampion, wasthefoster-brother indignant at the idea that O’Doherty alone should 
and brother-in-law of Hugh Roe, but still that he | oppose him, took him prisoner, and kept him in 


submitted to him, not through love but fear. irons until he rendered hostages for his future 
4" After having taken with him.—It is stated in obedience. 


1593. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1935 


son of Calvagh, son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv, with his kinsmen ; and O’Do- 
herty, namely, John Oge, the son of John, son of Felim, son of Conor Carragh, 
after having been taken prisoner by him" [Hugh Roe]. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1593. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand Jive hundred ninety-three. 


O'Donnell (Hugh Roe) was during the month of January of this year at 
Lifford, his own lordly residence, confronting his enemy, Turlough Luineach, 
the son of Niall Conallagh. He proceeded to wreak his enmity and vengeance 
upon him, to expel him from his lordship, and weaken his power, in order that 
Hugh O’Neill might be inaugurated in his stead. He was the better of this 
precaution which he took, for the lordship came to Hugh O'Neill, and Turlough 
Luineach gave consent, and made his submission to him, in order that the dig- 
nity might be conferred on him. Hugh O’Neill, namely, the Earl, was then 
styled the O’Neill; and Turlough Luineach, after having made peace with 
O'Neill and O’Donnell, sent away the English whom he had with him. This 
was done in the month of May. The province of Conor Mac Nessa* was then 
under the peaceable government of these two ; and they had the hostages and 
pledges of the inhabitants in their power, so that they were subject to them. 

The Clann- William, whom we mentioned as having submitted to the Gover- 
nor at the Michaelmas of the preceding year, were so impoverished by the 
English, that before the May of this year they left them not the smallest portion 
of their former wealth or great riches; and such of their people as had not 
been executed or (otherwise) destroyed were scattered and dispersed through- 
out Ireland, to seek for a livelihood. 

A warlike dissension arose in the month of May in this year between Sir 
George Bingham of Ballymote and Brian-na-Samhthach, i. e. Brian Oge, the son 
of Brian, son of Brian, son of Owen O’Rourke. The cause of this dissension 
was, that a part of the Queen’s rent had not been received out of Breifny on 
that festival, Brian O’Rourke asserting that all the rents not paid were those 
demanded for lands that were waste, and that he [Bingham] ought not to 


* The province of Conor Mac Nessa, i. e. the Nessa, who was its king in the early part of the 
province of Ulster, so called from Conor Mac first century. 


1936 ANNAZa RIOshachcta EIREGNR. [1593. 


dls plum ciop olanpard a papac 50 mbht a puroiucchad. Sin Seoinyp vo cup 
pasoiuipide 1p m mbpnerpne vo venam cpeice 1 ngloll an ciopa, 7 ar € Feall 
capla cuca bleaccac bmiam us pucapc bavém. Oo cHd bman oiappad a 
naipice, 7 noca npuaip iin. Caime pum ianom dia tip, po cuip Tionol pon 
ampoib 7 pop aop tuapapcanl 1 ccip eogain, 1 ccenel cconaill,7 1 pefpab ma- 
nac. lap poctam véib via pausid nf Deanna camipim vo Lo no Do1dCeE co pamicc 
co baale an motans. Cn can baoi 1 ccompoccur an baile po léice pecaoflead 
va pecemelcoib pa oa toca clomne vonnchaid .1. an conann, 7 Tip oilella. 
Nip bo mon don tip pin na po ance von aon puatap pm. Ro loipecead lap 
beop an la yin tpi baile décc ap Zac cTaoib oo baile an mocais, 7 po leip- 
cpeachad baile an mécang plin laip peac sac mbanle. Nip 66 hionaipim a 
nécta cenmota mac cobtarg puaid mécc pampadain po manbad 6 bman, 4 
ailub(ic spanne ouine uapal oo muncip Sin ploinp1 vo mapbad on Liz nonle. 
Cice mac uf puaine tap a ap co nainectib, 7 co nevalaib 1omoda larp o1a Tip. 
Cin céd mi 00 pampad do ponad mnyin. 

Sluaiccead La masuidin aod mac conconnaée diomtnue mp om plows pin 
bmain ut Ruane. Apo po sab cecup tne vepcenc na bnepne lam clé lé 
loc aallinne, ouaccap ua noilealla, 7 von cCopann do dpoicls maimpopeac na 
buille 50 macaine connacc. Ro léicc pecaoilead va pocermelcoib in uptopac 
laoi pon tip na ctimcell. 15 ano canla oon Zobepnoipn «1. Sin Ripoeno bingant 
bOt an cnoc 1 noopup cuillpeci 1 mbaéntncace Roppa commam m o1mce pin 
ay coméipteact pp an tip ma cimceall,7 vo pala opong vo mancylors an 
sobepnona ag cuantuccad na ccnoc an Zac caoib von culars 1 mbaof pum, 
J ni po patagpioc ni la oallciac na marone muice 50 ccapla iad phi, 7 
maguioin co na mancpluas agzhaid m aghad. Oo padvpac mancpluag an 
sobennona cal ooib, 7 po lad 1a0 san corsill la maguidip co na muimceip, 7 
po bap aga ppaosllo, 7 asa pionbualad co poctain o61b sup an ccorccad 4 
sup anccomnanc capm1 mbaoi an gobepnoip. Ro pillead vom ap Magurioip 
1 ppPTNS na conaine céona, 7 po bay aga lfnmain 50 vol 061 nhioipmloon a 
compels. Oc connaine an gobepndin co na baos commlion ovaoine pa po pill 

. 


* More than, literally, ‘and Ballymote itself evident from the context. See the Editor’s Irish 
was totally plundered by him beyond every Grammar, part ii. chap. vii. p. 318. 
bally.” The Irish preposition reac means ertra, * Gilbert Grayne—Sir Henry Docwra calls 
i, €. beyond, or more than, in this clause, as is him ‘‘ Captain Grenn Omoley,” in his Account 


1593. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1937 


demand rent for waste lands until they should be inhabited. Sir George sent 
soldiers into Breifny to take a prey in lieu of the rent ; and the soldiers seized 
on O’Rourkes own milch cows. Brian went to demand a restoration of them, 
but this he did not at all receive. He then returned home, and sent for merce- 
naries and hireling troops to Tyrone, Tirconnell, and Fermanagh ; and after 
they had come to him, [he set out, and] he made no delay by day or by night 
until he arrived at Ballymote. On his arrival in the neighbourhood of the town, 
he dispersed marauding parties through the two cantreds of the Mac ‘Donoughs, 
namely, Corann and Tirerrill ; and there was not much of that country which 
he did not plunder on the excursion. He also burned on that day thirteen 
villages on every side of Ballymote; and he ravaged Ballymote itself more than’ 
- [he did] any other town. Their losses were of little account, except the son 
of Coffey Roe Magauran, on the side of Brian ; Gilbert Grayne’, a gentleman 
of Sir George’s people, who was slain on the other side. The son of O’Rourke 
then returned back to his own territory loaded with great preys and spoils. 
This was done in the first month of summer. 

A hosting was made by Maguire (Hugh, the son of Cuconnaught), to.emu- 
late that excursion of Brian O’Rourke. He proceeded first through the eastern 
part of Breifny, keeping Lough Allen to the left ; then through the upper part 
of Tirerrill, through Corran, and across the bridge at the monastery of Boyle, 
into Machaire Connacht. Early in the day he dispatched marauding parties 
through the country around. This night the Governor, Sir Richard Bingham, 
happened to be on a hill near the gate of Tulsk, in the barony of Roscommon, 
watching the surrounding country; and a party of his cavalry went forth to 
scour the hills around the hill on which he was [stationed]; but they noticed 
nothing, in consequence of a thick fog of the early morning, until they and 
Maguire’s cavalry met face to face. The Governor's cavalry turned their backs 
to them, and they were hotly pursued by Maguire and his people, who continued 
to lash and strike them until they arrived at the camp* and fortification where 
the Governor was. They again turned upon Maguire, and pursued him back 
by the same road, until he had reached the middle of his forces. When the 
Governor saw that he had not an equal number of men with them, he returned 


of Services done by Sir Richard Bingham, * Camp.—Corptad «. car aptad.— Old Glos., 
already referred. to. i.e. a temporary dwelling, a camp. 


ll o 


1938 aNNaGza RIOShachta €lREGNN. [1593. 


cap a ap, 7 cépna pln co na mbaot ina pappad on ppoipéice(n pm Fenmoca 
wlham chpanc (oume vapal veanpccaZte ) Fo ccurccean nb phpean mapcac 
amaille php vo manbad von cup pin. Ro manbad von caob ole Emann 
may pampadain pplomad apoa maca (vo pala co clecmaipeac 1 ppocaipn 
mésuldin) 7 an cab maguidin 1. catal mac an abbad, 7 Mace cappnais 
pelim,7 Mac a ofpbpatap. An 3 la vo mi ul po manbaice 1aophin, an aof 
cpa ni po l(nad Magmdip 6 pm co horce, 7 puce cneaca, 7 tnomaincte an 
Tine, ] 00 CHD 6n poplonsponc Zo a cele 50 cobpaid chm pigin co peanarb 
manac. 

baoi Maguidip, 7 an bman o Ruaipe pémpaice py pé an ctpamnaid 1 
ecaomaonta cocemd 7 admillce pon sallaib. 6aoi bese bman mac aoda 
6icc mic aoda, mic Sfcan buioe MEF mactsamna 6 oaytpaise ompsiall, 7 clann 
emp mic conulad 6 Ffpnmais 7 Ripofpo mac willice a bane 1. mac ofmam 
an Coppa map an ccéona pon posal 7 pon oibfince m acchand sZall. Tuce- 


> Accidentally.— Camden thought that the 
titular Primate, Mac Gauran, accompanied Ma- 
guire on this excursion designedly, to encourage 
him to fight against the heretics. His words 
are as follows : 

“Tile [Mac Guyrus vir ingenii et pugnacis- 
simi] predabundus in vicinos agros irruit, 
Conacthiam ingreditur concomitante Gaurano 
sacrifico, quia Papa Primas Hibernie designa- 
tus, jussit ut Deo fretus fortunam experiretur, 
certam victoriam pollicitus. Secus tamen acci- 
dit, Mace Guiro fortitudine Rich. Binghami fu- 
gato, & Primate cum pluribus occiso. Mox Mac 
Guyrus in apertam rebellionem prorumpit, 
quem Tir-Oenius Officii prosequutus, vulnus 
cum magna fortitudinis & fidei accipit.”—An- 
nales Reg. Elis., A. D. 1593. 

The account of this irruption of Maguire into 
Connatght, and of Archbishop Magauran’s death, 
is given as follows by Philip O’Sullevan Beare, 
Hist. Cathol. Tber., tom. iii. 1. ii, ¢. 6: 

‘Sub hoc tempus Edmundus Macgabhranus 
Ibernie Primas, Archiepiscopus Ardmache ex 
Hispania 4 Iaimo Flamingo Pontanensi merca- 


tore vehitur, habens ad Ibernos Regis Hispaniz 
mandata, vt Protestantibus pro Fide Catholica 
bellum indicant, & ab ipso quam celerrimé aux- 
ilium mittendum esse, intelligant: & ad Mac- 
guierem, qui iam bellum gerebat, profectus, 
cupidum bellandi virum Catholici Regis verbis 
& auxilij spe in incepto facile confirmauit. Cum 
Primate Macguier Brethnia Orruarki Principatu 
transmissa rursus Connachtam exiguis viribus 
ingreditur. Ea de re certior factus Richardus 
Binghamus Anglus eques auratus Connachte 
prefectus in illum mittit Gulielmum Guelfer- 
tum Anglum cum paruis copijs. Ad locum cui 
scuto miraculorum [Skieth na bhfeart] antiqui- 
tas nomen indidit, occurritur. Vtriusque partis 
equitatus peditum agmina preibat, tacitis cor- 
nibus procedens. 

perquam obscura. 


Dies erat densissima nebula 
Quare prius feré ytrique 
alteros offenderunt, quam viderunt. Signo tuba 
subito dato vtrinque in pugnam proruitur. 
Macguier, quo erat presentissimo semper animo, 
Guelfertum hasta transfodit, & interimit, eiusque 
equitatum fundit, & fugat. Maceuierem non 
procul anté pedestre agmen sequebatur Primas— 


1593. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1939 


back, he himself and all his people having escaped scathless from that conflict, 
except only William Clifford, a distinguished gentleman, and five or six horse- 
men, who were slain on that occasion. On the other side were slain, Edmond 
Magauran, Primate of Armagh, who happened accidentally” to be along with 
Maguire on this occasion ; the Abbot Maguire, (Cathal, son of the Abbot); 
Mac Caffry (Felim), and his brother's son. These were slain on the third day 
of July. Maguire was not pursued any more on that day‘; and, having carried 
away the preys and great spoils of that country, he proceeded steadily and 
slowly, from one encampment to another, to Fermanagh. 

The Maguire and the Brian O’Rourke before mentioned confederated during 
the summer to war against and plunder the English. Brian, the son of Hugh 
Oge*, son of Hugh, son of John Boy Mac Mahon, from Dartry-Oriel; the sons 
of Ever Mac Cooley‘, from Farney ; and Richard, son of Ulick Burke, i. e. the 


son of Deamhon-an-Charrain, were also in insurrection and rebellion against 


Equo vectus et duobus tantum equitibus Felmio 
Maccaphrio, & Cathalo Macguiere comitatus: 
in quem, dum Macguier dum Guelferto dimicat, 
altera regij equitatus turma incidit. Primas 
fugiens equo corruit, & stratus humi interimitur 
vna cum Felmio pugnante. Ex agmine Catho- 
lico pedites, qui Primatis vocem cognouerunt, & 
si illum non videbant, nebula oculorum vsum 
intercipiente, accurrunt, & Cathalum stricto 
ferro pro Primate preliantem existimantes esse 
ex Protestantibus multis vulneribus conficiunt, 
& Protestantes equorum pernicitate illesos di- 
mittunt. Interfecto Primate Macguier magis 
mezstus, quam obtenta victoria, & preda letus 
domum redit. Rursus Orruarkus, & Macguier 
statuentes non modo Protestantibus Anglis, sed 
etiam ijs Catholicis Ibernis, qui illis auxiliaban- 
tur, esse officiendum in Midhia Inaliam Ophe- 
-ralis ditionem depredantur.. Cum quibus de 
preda cepit equestri prelio experiri Guliemus 
Opheral, sed in ipso equitum primo congressu 
Macguier pugne finem fecit, qua erat felicitate, 
& virtute, Gulielmum hasta traijciendo. Quo 
occiso cteri nihil amplius institerunt, & Or- 


ruarkus, & Macguier preda potiuntur.”—Fol. 
127, 128. 

The reader will also find a somewhat similar 
account of these events in Lombard, De Hib. 
Com., p. 345 ; and Stuart’s Historical Memoirs 
of the City of Armagh, pp. 269, 270. 

© On that day, literally, ‘“‘ Maguire was not 
followed from that till night,” which is not cor- 
rect, because he was not followed then either. 

4 Brian, the son of Hugh Oge.—See his pedi- 
gree given in the Account of the Territory or 
Dominion of Farney, by E. P. Shirley, Esq., 
p- 150. 

© Ever Mac Cooley.—He is called Farmer of 
the Fernie by Fynes Moryson. His pedigree is 
given by Mr. Shirley, wbé supra, and long ex- 
tracts from his petitions to the Queen, and to 
the Lord Treasurer, are given in pp. 97-100. 
In:a letter of recommendation of this Ever Mac 
Cooley, by the Lord Deputy and Council, 5th 
January, 1592-3, he is styled ‘‘a principall gen- 
tleman of the county of Monochan, attending 
the Court in England, his children civilly 
brought up, and have the English language.” 


* LivoeZ 


1940 GQNNaza RIOshachtTa EIREGNN. 


[1593. 


pac na hamsialla pr amup pon banna parson baoi 1 mumeacan Fo po 
manbad led a nupmon conad ve pm tcainice ppoclamation vo con m sac baile 
mon oa mbaof in Eninn dia Poccna na oponsa pm a oubnamanp (co na ccom- 
aoncaib) 00 bert ma topecuinib. 

Ro poccaip an iuptip 1appm pm prposmMan ap ccinn vo monpluaisead na 
mide Laigtn 7 Lite mosa ool 1 nullcoib. Ro poccain man an ccéona Zobep- 
nop Coiccid cConnact ploiccead 6 Plonaimn so opobaoip oo dol ina ccomne Fo 
hepne. Oala an iuptip do pavpaide a ionad pfin an an ploiccead pin oo 
mapapecal an iubeap 7 oiapla cipe heogam .1. aod mac Prpdopca, mic culnn 
bacans. Roimespioc na plog Wonmana lanmona pin oon caob top do Loc 
eyme o capn mon plebe blta 50 hfp pumo. Nin 66 land la hapla cine 
heosain tcoct pop an cyploiccead pin, ana aof po baof ouaman na ngall pain 
sup bo hiccth 06 a man vo sniom. | 

Oo cuala Cod magwioin coc(pcal an cyplog laonmoip pin ora porgsio pio 
cup a cnod 7 a cltpa etin 647 inmmli 1 ccenel cconaill pon a momsabant. 
bao plin 5up an uachad ploy cappupcaip ina pappad ora tip pon 7 campab 
a cinib ele von taoib Hap vo loc acc mp cetlionn pop cionn na ngall co na 
léiccead tTaimp iatc an ov pin, po sabpac iapam lam ch ppp an lec 
(amoul pemebentman) so pangaccap at omodfinc pil pop an einne a. at 
caluam. Qn ccfin batcappom ace coct an of pm po buf Magurdip co na 
pocpaitce ag commteact ppt von caofb Tian vo Loc 50 pammice Zuy an at 
céona von caoib anaill. Ro ionnpaispioc 1anam an plos gall an cach, 7 po 
baot Magwoip aga copnam pia perb a cumains. On a aoi tna po piopad 
an plnpocal 1. luigi rolap an uatad uain plob ficctn an cat vo Uficefn vo na 
sallaib, 7 po ppaoinead pon magumdip, 7 po mapbad pochorde ora muincip. 
Ro gonad 1apla cipe heosain von cup pin. 


* Carn-mor, now Carnmore, a townland in that 
part of the parish of Clones, which extends into 
the county of Fermanagh.—See Ordnance map, 
sheet 35. 
Beagh, or Slieve Baha, and contains a large carn 
from which it has derived its name, and which 
is a very conspicuous object, of which a good 
view can be obtained from the top of the moat 
at Clones. For the situation of Sliabh Beatha, 


It is a part of the range of Slieve 


anglice Slieve Beagh, see note ", under the year — 
1501, p. 1260, supra. 

8 To avoid them, i.e. away from them. 

» Ath-Culuain.—P. O’Sullevan Beare calls 
this ‘‘ Beal au Cluoen, os vadi prati ;” and it is 
“ Bel atha cul uain,”’ in these Annals, at the year 
1597. It is still the name of a ford on the River 
Erne, about half a mile to the west of Belleek.— 
See note ", under the year 1247, p. 341, supra. 


s 


1593.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1941 


the English. These people of Oriel made an attack upon a company of soldiers 
who were [stationed] at Monaghan, and slew the greater part of them; where- 
fore a proclamation was issued to every town in Ireland, declaring the aforesaid 
persons and their confederates to be traitors. : 

In the autumn following, the Lord Chief Justice commanded a great hosting 
of [the men of] Meath, Leinster, and Leath-Mogha, to proceed into Ulster ; and 
the Governor of the province of Connaught ordered a hosting [of all those dwell- 
ing in the region extending] from the Shannon to the Drowes, to meet them 
at Lough Erne. As for the Lord Justice, he gave his own place on this hosting 
to the Marshal of Newry and the Earl of Tyrone (Hugh, the son of Feardorcha). 
These numerous and very great forces marched from Carn-mor‘ of Sliabh- 
Beatha to Easroe, [keeping] on the east side of Lough Erne. It was not pleasing 
to the Earl of Tyrone to go on this expedition ; however, he had so much dread 
of the English that he was obliged to obey them. 

When Hugh Maguire heard that this great hosting was approaching him, 
he sent all his property, both cows and flocks, into Tirconnell, to avoid them®, 
while he himself remained at the west side of the lake, at Enniskillen, with a 
small army of the inhabitants of his own territory, and hired soldiers from other 
territories, to oppose the English, and to prevent them passing that place. The 
others marched with their left to the lake, as we have before stated, until they 
arrived at a celebrated ford on the Erne, namely, Ath-Culuain®. While they 
were advancing to that place, Maguire and his forces kept pace with them at 
the other side of the lake, so that he arrived at the same ford on the opposite 
side. The English army then proceeded to cross the ford; and Maguire at- 
tempted to defend it as well as he was able. But the proverb, “the many shall 
overcome the few,” was verified in this instance, for Maguire was obliged to let 
the English pass the ford, and was defeated, with the loss of a considerable 
‘number of his people. The Earl of Tyrone’ was wounded on this occasion. 


i The Earl of Tyrone.—This is the last action 
in which Tyrone fought on the side of the Eng- 
lish. The Marshal Bagnal, whose sister had 
been carried off by Tyrone, who married her, 
impeached him of divers treasons, to which he 
replied, offering even to appear in England and 
there to defend his cause, or to maintain his 


innocence in single combat with his adversary.— 
See Captain Lee’s Letter to Queen Elizabeth, 
in the Desiderata Curiosa Hibernica, vol. ii. p. 91, 
et sequent.; and Leland’s History of Ireland, 
book iv. ¢. 4. 
attack upon Maguire, and the cause of Tyrone’s 
disaffection, is given in P. O’Sullevan Beare’s 


The following account of this 


1942 


GQNNAGZG RIOshachcta EIREGNN. 


(1593. 


Tanaice Zobepnoip coicer connacc, 7} 1apla cTuadmuman doonnchaod mac 
concobain mic oonnchaid i bain ma ccomne don caoib ele don efpine, 7 ni 


Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. iii. lib. i. 
CEg ger Os 

“‘ Hee dum agebantur, exercitus duo, quos in 
Macguierem conscribi Regina iusserat, compa- 
ratisunt. Alteri preerat Henricus Bagnal eques 
Auratus Ibernie Castrametator, et Vitoniz pre- 
fectus, qui minimé spernendas copias ex Ibernis, 
& Anglis presidiarijs, Ibernisque nuper delectis 
ducebat. Equites habebat septingentos quorum 
partem maiorem, et peditum non paruam per- 
duxit Comes Tironus, qui iussus Regine im- 
perio non gerere morem, minime sibi integrum 
putabat. Macguier impendente periculo per- 
culsus Odonellum, vt sibi presidium ferat, 
rogat. Ex quo acceptis paucis Ibernis bipen- 
niferis, & Scotis sagittarijs, & aliquot oberatis 
suis armatis longé exiguiores copias, quam 
hostis, habebat, quorum erant equites fere cen- 
tum. Bagnal cis Ernium flumen cum copijs 
omnibus constitit, inde traiecturus fluminis va- 
dum, quod Prati nuncupatur, Macguierisque 
Ab 
Vitro, ci- 
troque missilibus prelium inchoatur, Regij nu- 


oberatos, qui ed fugerant, predaturus. 
altera parte Macguier consederat. 


mero militum, armorum genere, natura loci 
prestabant. Nam, & peditatus multitudine su- 
periores erant, equites septingentos contra cen- 
tum habebant, & bombardarios contra sagitta- 
rios: neque enim sagittam tam longé iaculatur 
arcus,,quam bombarda plumbeam pilam. Pre- 
terea bombardarij ex sylua, que ad fluminis 
ripam pertinebat, Catholicos in planicie stantes, 
impune feriebant: et sagittarij in regios arbo- 
rum densitate protectos minime poterant sagittas 
collineare. Ita cum pugnaretur magno Catho- 
licorum detrimento, Comes Tironus, qui regic 
equitatui preerat, calcaribus additis cum omni 
equitatu vadum penetrat, & in Catholicos: im- 
pressionem faciens omnes fundit, fusosqué in- 
sequitur non tamen Jonge, nam ab Iberno pedite 


per femur telo transfixus est, & Macguier cum 
equitatu suo peditibus fert subsidium. Ea 
pugna desiderati sunt Catholici minus ducenti, 
ex regijs per quam pauci. Inter Tironum, qui 
qui fuit graui vulnere affectus, & Bagnalem ex 
hac quoque victoria vetus inimicitia augetur, 
dum vterque sibi gloriam arrogat : Bagnal, 
quod ipse esset exercitus imperator, & Vitonize 
prefectus cxteros imperio regens; ‘Tironus, 
quod ipse magna equitatus partem ductitauerit, 
vadum cum equitibus transmiserit, Macguieri- 
anos in fugam verterit, periculum adierit, & 
vulnus acceperit. Ob id 4 Bagnale rogatus, vt 
litteris Reginam, & Proregem de ipsius virtute 
faceret certiorem, se illis coram verum dicturum 
respondit. Odonellus, qui cum vberiore equi- 
tatu, bombardarijs, & hastatis Macguieri sup- 
petias ibat, ad noctem post pugnam factam per- 
uenit, hostemque inuaderet, nisi per internun- 
cios a Tirono clam rogaretur, vt ipsius salutis 
rationem haberet, Protestantes non circumue- 
niens, dum in eorum castris ipse esset, que citd 
foret deserturus, vt deseruit : nam timens, ne a 
Bagnale vinculis mandaretur, & ad Proregem 
vinctus traheretur (vt 1ussum fuisse credebatur) 
ea nocte e castris saucius fugit in Dunganinnam 
municipium suum, vbi medicamentis adhibitis 
breui curatur. Eodem tempore Richardus Bing- 
hamus Connachte prefectus Iniskellinnam magis 
intestina proditione, quam vi capit. Ea insula 
est non magna Ernio lacu cincta, in qua Mac- 
guier arcem duplici vallo cincta tenebat. In 
hanc Binghamus copijs in Connachta conscriptis 
ex Anglis aliquot, sed Ibernis pluribus Catho- 
licis signa militaria pedestria quindecim, & 
equestria quatuor per Brethniam Orruarki di- 
tionem tune temporis vastam, atque direptam 
perduxit, vectusque pontonibus, & phasellis 
arcem diebus aliquot frustra oppugnat, militibus 
octoginta magna virtute propugnantibus : haud 


1593.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1943 


The Governor of the province of Connaught and the Earl of Thomond 
(Donough, the son of Conor, son of Donough O’Brien) came to meet them at 


dubius in cassum se vires diffundere, dato signo, 
propugnatores ad colloquium prouocat. Ad eum 
in castra prodit vnus non satis genere notus, 
sed cui propugnatores maximeé suam salutem, & 
arcem credebant, quod apud Maceuierem fami- 
liaritate plurimum valebat, ab eoque donis orna- 
batur. Filius porce, vel scrophe cognomina- 
batur, nec incongrué: nam preterquam, quod 
statura erat inelegante, & facie difformi, illi 
etiam duo Columellares dentes ore prominebant 
similes suis, vel apri fulminibus. A Binghamo 
promissionibus, atque donis corruptus, & victus, 
postquam cum eo statuit, quemadmodum sit ar- 
cem proditurus, ad suos, tamquam arcem ad in- 
ternecionem defensurus, rediuit. Binghamus 
induciarum spacio transacto more solito arcem 
oppugnat. Propugnatores suam quisque par- 
tem tutantur. Filius scrophex, quasi sortiter, & 
animosé dimicaturus sese in exteriore vallo hos- 
tibus ostentat. Hi illum magno agmine ageredi- 
untur. Ile ex composito fugiens locum defen- 
sore nudum deserit, & tamquam sese recipiens, in 
secundum vallum celeriter confert: quo etiam 
sequentibus hostibus aditum permittit, arcis 
portam subiens, quam ingresso, miles qui ad 
portam in stationibus erat, venientibus hostibus 
portam claudere, & obserare festinat : sed illum 
Filius Scrophe stricto ferro percutiendo humi 
sternens patefactis foribus hostes inducit, qui 
propugnatores omnes preter proditorem intere- 
merunt: et senes pueros, atque feeminas, qui in 
arcem confugerant ex sublicio ponte, quo insula 
cum continente coniungebatur, precipites dede- 
runt. Locato in arce presidio Binghamus, & 
Bagnal celeriter reuertuntur cum Tirono iam 
diffidentes, tum Odonellum, & Maceuierem ma- 
joribus copijs refectum timentes.”—Cap. vii. 

“ Hee dum aguntur, & Odonellus Iniskellinnee 
obsidionem producit, Tironus Comes magis in- 
dies Protestantibus infensus, & suspectus red- 


ditur. 
Prati de Macguiere obtentam gratie a Regina 


Principio ob victoriam apud vadum 


Bagnali relate sunt, Tirono vero ne acte qui- 
dem, aut habite, quo nihil hic impatientius 
ferebat: neque tam cruciabatur, se digno preemio 
fuisse fraudatum, quam eo Bagnalem ornatum, 
loetantem, atque triumphantem: quippeé vterque 
alterum inexpiabili odio persequebatur multis 
de causis. Bagnal Vltonie prefectus Tirono vi- 
debatur in prouincialium bona facere impetum, 
& prohibebatur. Tironus Bagnalis sororem fx- 
minam forma conspicuam speciei pulchritudine 
captus rapuerat, matrimonio sibi coniunxerat, & 
ex Protestante conuerti ad fidem Catholicam 
fecerat : pactam sibi dotem a Bagnale retineri 
querebatur. Bagnal sepe dixerat non tam cla- 
ritate mariti sororem suam, & familiam esse 
decoratam, quam Papiste rebellione, & perfidia 
esse breui feedandam, & illi esse priuignos, qui- 
bus, et non sororis. sue liberis, si quos progig- 
neret, esset hereditas amplissima deferenda. Ob 
has, & alias causas vterque alterum in singulare 
certamen Dubhlinne prouocauerat, congressu- 
rique videbantur, nisi ab amicis anteuerteren- 
tur. Hine Bagnal nullam incommodandi Tirono, 
& in eum accendendi Regine inuidiam occasio- 
nem pretermittebat. Insuper Tirono occurrebat 
Macmagaunus crudeli supplicio nuper affectus, 
& eius nomen Parlamenti decreto extinctum ; 
alijque principes Iberni deleti in mentem venie- 
bant. Sed Catholico viro Catholice Religionis 
libertas precipué ante oculos obuersabatur. 
Quibus. & aliw suspiciones noueé accesserunt. 
Iohannes Onellus Tirone princeps cum fuisset 
4 Scotis militibus suis per perfidiam extinctus 
(vt superius tradidimus) eius quoque posses- 
siones Anglie Regine fuerunt addicte, & si 
frustra, nam sunt retente 4 Terentio Onello. 
Inter has Farnia Iberi Macmaganni municipium, 
regine etiam fuit adiudicata eo nomine, quod ad 


1944 AQNNaza RIOSshachtTa eEiREGNN. (1593. 


depnsenypac nac m 19iIp acct an Zobennoip 59 nopse amac coicci connact vo 
poad 50 maimypoip na buille 7 a bt pé hachaid annpin ag cnpeachad muin- 
cine heslaip 7 1antain p(pmanac. Ro pcecaoilmoc pin connact via cos1b ap 
a hale. Oo deachad iapla cine heogam 7 an mapapceeal ora ceis1b ap 
millea® mona 1 pRfparb manac. Ro faccarbpioc banvange 1pm tip az cons- 
nam la concoban occ mac concobain pucd mesmodip baot m eccparcc(p pé 
maguiom. Ga nfmpommec (yaoncadac po bap 6 clocap mac noaimene 1 tTIp 
eoccain 50 palit cpuacaim 1 cconnaccaib 7 6 tTpais eotuile go bneipne uf pars- 


ils an tan pin. 


Mag captas mrabac 1. Cogan mac vomnall mic pingm cigeapna caip- 
ppeac vo éce, pf ceilig cnaiboec po ba mart enec, 7 oipbl(pz epde, 7 vomnall 


mac copbmaic na haoine vo Zsabail a 1onard. 


Meope mgean copbmaic oicc mic copbmaic, mic taroce mes cantais bin 


ui pullebam morn vo écc. 


Mupecpcac mac concobaip, me tommpoealbars ut bniaimn o opurm lash 


Iohannem pertinebat, & a Regina Comiti Essexize 
Anglo dono data. Sed tune temporis neque 
adiudicatio neque donatio executioni mandata 
est Ibero possessiones suas obtinente. Postea 
Comitis huius iam mortui filius Farniam cuidam 
Iohanni Talboto Angloiberno locauit, Talbot- 
usque in Farnie castellum, & possessionem a 
Regine iudicibus mittitur, frustra a Catholicis 
obiurgatus, quéd minime iustée Iberi Catholici 
viri possessiones ab Heeretico, qui in eas iniusta 
actione agebat, conduxerit. Iberi vero filij eam 
opportunam occasionem rati, qua gerebat Odo- 
nellus arma, amicorum manu coacta Farniam 
castellum noctu inuadunt. Foribus improuisod 
ignem admouent. Castelli inquilinus Talbotus 
suffocante fumo expergefactus subucula tantum 
indutus lecto exsilit, foresque patefacit ; poné 
ianuam absconditus, vbi Iberi liberi cum agmine 
suo irruperunt, nudus egressus pedibus salu- 
tem petit, quem sua familia sequitur eiecta, & 
direpta. Cuius rei culpam Angli in Tironum 
transferebant, asserentes hoc inuito, nihil illos 


ausuros. Sub idem tempus Angeli, qui Ard- 


macham Primatis Iberni sedem preesidio tene- 
bant, templum ingredi constituunt, resisten- 
temque exdituum, & alios sacerdotes in vin- 
cula conijcere. Ad rixam accurrens Bernardus 
Onellus, qui tunc forte in oppido erat, sacerdotes 
in libertatem asserit. Duodecim Anglos milites 
patibulo suspendi iubet. Reliqui preesidiarij 
fugiunt, cuius rei authorem fuisse Tironum 
Protestantes pro re certa, indubitataque confir- 
mabant.”—Cap. x. 

Captain Thomas Lee, who wrote his memorial 
addressed to Queen Elizabeth in 1594, and who 
had commanded some troops in various posts on 
the frontiers of Ulster, during Fitz-William’s 
administration, and who was well acquainted 
with the machinations of Bagnal, who had 
been planted at Newry, to effect the ruin of 
the O’Neills, thus writes of the trial by combat 
with which O’Neill offered to clear himself of 
Bagnal’s accusations of treason : 

‘And then, I am persuaded, he will simply 
acknowledge to your Majesty how far he hath 
offended you; and besides, notwithstanding his 


y 


1593. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1945 


the other side of the Erne. They effected nothing [worthy of note], except that 
the Governor returned with the rising-out of Connaught to the Abbey of Boyle, 
where he remained for some time, plundering Muintir-Eolais and the west of 
Fermanagh. The men of Connaught then dispersed for their homes. The Earl 
of Tyrone and the Marshal [also] returned to their houses, after destroying 
much in Fermanagh. They left companies of soldiers in the country to assist 
Conor Oge, the son of Conor Roe Maguire, who was at strife with the Maguire. 
Unhappy and disturbed was the state of [the entire extent of country] from 
Clogher Mac Daimhene in Tyrone to Rath-Croghan in Connaught, and from 


Traigh-Eothuile to Breifny O'Reilly, at this time. 

Mac Carthy Reagh (Owen‘, the son of Donnell, son of Fineen), Lord of Car- 
bery, died. He was a sensible, pious, truly hospitable, and noble-deeded man. 
Donnell, the son of Cormac-na-h-Aoine, took his place. 

Mary, the daughter of Cormac Oge, son of Cormac, son of Teige Mac Car- 


thy, and wife of O’Sullivan More, died. 


Murtough, son of Conor, son of Turlough O’Brien, of Druim-Laighean', died, 


protection, he will, if it so stand with your Ma- 
jesty’s pleasure, offer himself to the Marshal 
(who hath been the chiefest instrument against 
him), to prove with his sword that he hath most 
wrongfully accused him; and because it is no 
conquest for him to overthrow a man ever held 
in the world to be of most cowardly behaviour, 
he will in defence of his innocency allow his ad- 
versary to come armed against him naked, to 
encourage him the rather to accept of his chal- 
lenge. I am bold to say thus much for the 
Earl, because I know his valour, and am pér- 
suaded he will perform it.” 

k Owen.—He was Sir Owen Mac Carthy Reagh, 
Chief of Carbery, a district in the county of 
Cork, now divided into four baronies.—See 
Genealogies, Tribes, jc. of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 447, 
in which is. quoted a Chancery Record, from 
which it appears that Teige O’Donovan, in his 
replication to his brother, Donnell O’ Donovan, 
asserts that this Sir Owen Mac Carthy was an 
intruder, and that Donnell Mac Carthy was en- 


titled to be ‘“‘ Mac Cartie Reough, whereunto he 
had right by her Highnes’ Patents.”’ The Don- 
nell mentioned in this Chancery Record is the 
very person referred to in the text as the suc- 
cessor of Owen, the son of Donnell. Accord- 
ing to the manuscript, entitled Carbrie Notitia, 
already often quoted, this Donnell was usually , 
called Donnell-ni-pipy [oormnall na bpiopare | 
from some pipes of wine which were washed 
ashore during his time, which was considered 
an omen of good success. He married Margaret, 
the daughter of the Earl of Desmond, and had 
by her a son,’ Cormac, who married Eleanor, 
daughter of the White Knight, and had by her 
a son, Daniel, who married Helen, daughter of 
the Lord Roche, and had by her a son, Charles, 
who married Eleanor, daughter of Lord Mus- 
kerry, and had by her a son, Daniel Mac Carthy 
Reagh, who was living in the time of the writer 
of Carbrie Notitia [1686], and married to Mary, 
daughter of Col. Townshend. 

| Druim-Laighean, now Dromline, ina parish 


ll Pp 


1946 


ANNaza RIOshachtd EIREANN. 


(1594. 


vécc, a adhnacal ma baile pln 2.1 nopurm lagtn, 7 a mac concoban vo 


sabarl a 1oncnd. 


Muipéefpeaé mac vomnaall, mic concobaip ut bmam 6 tulca vécc. 

Tadcc mac ulliam mic caldce Oumb ui cealleng on calad 1 ccnic ua mame 
vécc, | po ba vo mommpecélarb 6 mame an ci cfpoa ann pin. 

O owbidin colle na manac 1. pip mac uaitne vécc, ] a mac DIapMaie 


vo sabail a ionand. 


Maipspéce inghh ui baorgill (coppoealbac) vécc. 


QO1S CRIOST, 1594. 
Coip Cpropt, mle, ctice céd, nocaz, acltanp. 


Mac matsamna .1. cZeapna cone baipeind aant{parsi vécc 1. Cadce mac 
mupchad, mic Taldce puand, mic Toippdealbaig, mic cTadec,4 a Mac «1. ToINp- 
delbac puad vo Zabenl a 1onaid. : 

O Sinllebam béippe Eocchan, mac v1apmaca, mic vomnaill vo écc. Ap 
a aot ni bo 6 Sullebain beinpe € an can pin 5€n 66 hl mam, 0615 plo bin 
mac a@ veanbnatan an bliadain pia na éce din baoi, 7 béippe de 1. Domnall 
mac oomnall mic olanpmaca ian mbpit comainle Saran 7 comaiple net 


heneann, 7 po gaipd 6 Sullebain béippe do Domnall phppin. 
O oubova tine pracnac 1. oachi, mac taoce prabars mic eogain vo map- 
bad la paigoiaip 00 muinzip na Dalnplop ne imbarle via baileib perp 1 sci 


placnac muaivde. 


O hfidin Cod bude mac eogain manncans, mic emainn, mic plomn do €cc. 


of the same name, in the barony of Bunratty, 
and county of Clare. 
County of Clare, in the Library of Trin. Col. 
Dublin, E. 2. 14, this castle is placed in ‘*‘ West 
Mac Namara’s country,” and the proprietor 
of it is set down as ‘‘ Muriertagh O’Brien,” 


In the Description of the 


who is the very person mentioned above in the 
text. 

m™ Tulach.—There were two castles of this 
name in the county of Clare, according to the 
description of that county just referred to, 


namely, Tullagh, which gave name to the ba- 
rony of Tulia, in the east of the county, and 
which belonged, in 1585, to ‘‘ Donell Reagh Mac 
Nemara ;” and Tullagh, in the barony of ‘* Cor- 
kemroe,” in the west of the same county, which 
then belonged to Sir Donell [son of Conor] 
O’Brien, who was the father of the Murtough 
above mentioned in the text. We may, there- 
fore, safely conclude that the Tulach of the text 
is the castle of Tullagh, in the barony of Cor- 
comroe. 


1954.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1947 


and was interred in his own town of Druim-Laighean ; and his son, Conor, took 


his place. 


‘Murtough, the son of Donnell, son of Conor O’Brien of Tulach”, died. 
Teige, the son of William, son of Teige Duv O'Kelly of Caladh", in Hy- 
Many, died ; and his death was among the mournful news of Hy-Many. 
~ O'Dwyer of Coill-na-manach’ (Philip, son of Anthony) died ; and his son, 


Dermott, took his place. 


Margaret, daughter of O’Boyle (Turlough), died. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1594. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-four. 


Mac Mahon, Lord of East Corca-Bhaiscinn’, died, namely, Teige, the son 


of Murrough, son of Teige Roe, son of Turlough, son of Teige ; 


Turlough Roe, took his place. 


and his son, 


O'Sullivan Beare (Owen, the son of Dermot, son of Donnell) died. He was 


not, however, the O’Sullivan Beare at that time, though he had once been; for 
in the year previous to his death, his brother’s son, Donnell, the son of Donnell, 
son of Dermot, had, by the decision of the Council of England and the Council 


of Ireland, deprived him of Dunbaoi.[the castle of Dunboy] and Beare ; and 
Donnell himself was nominated the O’Sullivan Beare. 

O’Dowda of Tireragh (Dathi, the son of Teige Reagh, son of Owen) was 
slain by one of the Queen’s soldiers, in one of his own castles in Tireragh on 


the Moy. 


O’Heyne’ (Hugh Boy, the son of Owen Mantagh, son of Edmond, son of 


Flan) died. 


" Caladh, now Callow, in the barony of Kil- 
connell, and county of Galway.—See note ‘+, 
under the year 1475, p. 1097, supra. 

° Coill-na-manach, i. e. the wood of the monks, 
now the barony of Kilnamanagh, in the county 
of Tipperary, which was O’Dwyer’s country. 

P East Corca-Bhaiscinn.—According to the 
Description of the County of Clare just referred 
to, “the Baronie of Cloynetherala [ Clonderalaw | 


conteyns East Corkewasken, and Tege Mac 
Mahone was chiefe in the same.” This Tege 
Mac Mahon was the father of the Murrough 
mentioned in the text. 

2 0’ Heyne-—Upon the surrender of his pro- 
perty to the Crown, he received a re-grant of an 
extensive estate in the original territory, in the 
thirtieth year of Elizabeth._See Genealogies, 


ge. of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 404. This is the last 


AMD oh ae 


1948 ANNQGCA RIOSHachtTa EIREGNN. 


(1594. 


IngM mic uf bia ana 1. onona msn comppdealbeng, mic Muipefpcang, 
mic Domnaill mic tardce bin pranaap mic emammn an calaid mic pranarp pucd 
buitilén décc. 

Sloiccead mon vo ciondl lap an iuptip, 7 painice Zan pacuccad can na 
cpiochaib poptap compoiccy: 06 Fan nac momfPuipeac 50 acc Fo hinip cfit- 
honn, 7 baoi 1 propbcap), 71 mompulde imon otnald, 7 Zelbicc an pluas pon 
cosail an mip lap na haomib ba hadlaice led, 7 nip pecanpace pip 50 po 
sabpac po ded, 7 paccbaid an iuptip bapoa 1pm mbanle, 7 do Cucmd oa 
v5 Japam. 

Maguidip tna 6d cuala prdoe an iuptip 00 poad pon cculaib po conoil 
poe an Lion ap lia connanaccain co mbaoi occ 1ompulde an boule ceona, 7 
po paid Teacca vO palgio ui vomnaill lod puad via cuINns1d pain Tect DIA 
pomom = Nip bo hGpltoac po pneacnad mopm laippium 6ip do cé1d dia Parsio 
co na pocnaide, 7 po sabpac ace ponbarm pon an otn 6 torpac 1un 50 moon 
augupc. Ro cnoichead,7 po cpeachloipecead lay an pocnaicce pin 1 mbaofs 


notice of the O’Heyne family in these Annals. 
Duald Mac Firbis continues the pedigree of the 
family of Leydican for two generations more, 
which brings the line down to 1666, when he 
wrote. The Hugh Boy above mentioned in the 
text, had a son Hugh Boy, who had a son Owen, 
who seems to have been considered the head 
of the family in Mac Firbis’s time. In 1612 
O’Heyne of Leydican was Conor Crone O’Heyne, 
On the 20th of Febru- 
ary, 1612, he enfeoffed his son, Bryan O’Heyne, 


who had a son, Brian. 


of and in his estates. This feoffment, the origi- 
nal of which is now before the Editor, runs as 
follows : 

‘To all Chresten people to whome these pre- 
sents shall come, Connor Crone Oheyn of the 
Ledigan, in the county of Galwey, gent. send 
greeting in our Lord God Euerlasting. Knowe 
yee that I, the said Connor, for sundry good & 
lawfull considerations me moving, and in espe- 
ciall for and in the regard and consideration 
both of my ffatherly care and affection, as well 
toward my sonne, Bryan Oheyn, as toward the 


establishment, continnuance, and succession of 
myn inheritance and living in myn owne kin- 
dred and familly, and the better ensuring and 
suportation of the same from ingerous chal- 
lenges, suits, and vexations therevnto to be at 
any time pretended, wherein the impotencie of 
age, and state and declining yeeres, disabling me 
to imploy the mindfull paines and travells 
therevnto behoofefull, the defence and vphold- 
ing of my said Inheritance in nature and right 
belonging vnto my said sonne, Bryan Oheyn, 
haue given, graunted, enffeoffed, and confirmed, 
like as be these presents, I doe give, graunt, 
enfeoffe, and confirme, vnto the said Bryan 
Ohein, the third parte of a cartron of Gorten- 
shine, the fourth parte of a cartron in the tear- 
mon, commonly knowen by the name of Bally- 
mollfargie and Pollantlynte and haulfe a cartron 
in Corroboye, being of my proper inheritance, 
with all and singuler the meadowes, moores, 
pastures, bogges, woods, vnderwoods, waters, 
watercourses, fishings, heats, montaines, com- 
mones, gardens, houses, land arable and land 


1594.) ‘ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1949 


The daughter of Mac-I-Brien Ara, Honora, daughter of Turlough, son of 
Murtough, son of Donnell, son of Teige, and wife of Pierce, son of Edmond 
an-Chaladh, son of Pierce Roe Butler, died. 

A great hosting was made by the Lord Justice ; and he proceeded unper- 
ceived through the adjacent territories without any delay, until he arrived at 
Enniskillen ; and he encamped around, and laid siege to the fortress ; and the 
army proceeded to destroy its wall with the proper engines, and they never 
And the Lord Justice left warders in the 
castle, and then returned to his house. 

When Maguire heard that the Lord Justice had returned back, he assem- 
bled the greatest number of forces that he was able, and beleaguered the same 


ceased until they finally took it. 


castle, and dispatched messengers to O'Donnell (Hugh Roe), requesting him 
to come to his assistance. This request was promptly responded to by him 
[O'Donnell], for he went to joi him with his forces; and they laid siege to 
the fortress from the beginning of June to the middle of August. [During this 


time] these forces plundered and laid waste all that was under the jurisdiction 


pasture, vnto them or any of them belonging, or 
in anywise appertaining; to haue and to hould, 
occupie, enioy, and possess, all and euery the 
premisses, with their appurtenances, vnto the 
said Bryan Oheyn, his heires and Assignes, to 
his and their proper vse and vses for euer. And 
further knowe yee that I, the said Connor crone 
Oheyn, haue couenaunted and agreed that my 
said sonne, Bryan shall pay vnto me some rea- 
sonable rent yeerlie, during myn owne lyffe, out 
of the before-mentioned parcells, and after my 
dicease to be to the vse of him, the said Bryan, 
his heires and assigns, as aforesaid, for euer. And 
further knowe yee that I, the said Connor crone 
Oheyn, haue constituted, and appointed my 
welbeloued Teig Enurgish of the Rahine, my 
true and lawfull Attourney, for me and in my 
name, to enter into all and euery the premisses, 


or into any one parte thereof in name of the 


whole, and thereof to take full and whole pos- 
session and seizen. And for me and in my 


name to deliver acctuall seizen anc possession 


vnto the said Bryan Oheyn, according the effect 
of this present, Deede. 
the said Cqnor Crone Oheyn, have hereunto 
put my hand and seale, the 20 of February, 
1612. 


In witness whereof, I, 


‘“¢ CONNOR CRONE OHEYNE, 
is marke & seale. . 


‘Being present when the within named Con- 
nor crone Ohein signed, sealed, and delivered 
this deede vnto the within named Bryen mac 
Connor Ohein, and as well to the within named 
attourney, Teig knurgish, those whose names 
doe follow : 

‘* JoHN BuRKE, 
is marke testis. 
THOMAS BURKE, 
is marke testis. 
‘THOMAS CONNOGHIN, 
testis.” 


‘Being present when the within named Teig 
Enurgish,” &e. &e. 


1950 ANNGzaG RIOshachtda ElREGNN. [1594. 


po pmace Fall ccpic omsiall 7 1 mbphpne uf ponsillg co ccapopat a mba 
7 a nnnle a lon plas ora nampord. 

baot 6 ovomnaill 1 ppoplonspont ace popbaiy pon mp ceitlenn 6 topac 
iun co mi Cugupc amoanl acpubpaman 50 ccaipnic a lon vo cait(m vo bapnoa 
an baile acc mad blcc. Rangaccan teaccta do pangsid ut vomnaill 6 na 
halbanchaib po c6cup.prum cuicce mia pin 1a hanynfip 06 co ctcangaccan 
co done, 7 pobtap iace tTangaccap an 04 pm oomnall sopm mac vomnaill 
7 mac lesio na hana. Oo taod 1apam ua vomnaill via momporttad co 
nuachad oa plog amaille pnip, 7 po paccanb opons mop ele ofb az Maguidin 
do Consnam lonp, 7 po pupcal poppa campiom ace 1ompuide an barle. 

lap prior peel don qupoip (1. Sip william pic3mlliam) co mbaoan banoa 
mnyp! ceitlenn ino eapbaid Lom 7 bid po Fopconsaip ap opoms moip ofeanaib 
mide, 7 ap ucaplib pagantleac 7 biongamac coicelg connace (.1.1m ploy occ 
mbionsam) toct vo bp hit Lom 50 himp cetlenn. Oo cocap na mate pin 1apam 
a cc{no a cele a ccomne an lom co caban bale ui pagillis, 7 po sabad leo 
laim ofp lé loc Eipne tne plpaib manac 50 pangaccan po tucipim chtpe 
mile oon batle. 

Od cualad Maguoin aod ocal an ctploigy pm vo bit sup an mbanle (lap 
na loincib pempaize) 00 CooplveE Co na pocnarve budén, 7 Sup an pocnaoe 
po paccanb o vomnanll Lap, 7 1m conbmac mac an bapa .1. veanbpactaip an 
ranla ui naill 50 po Zabpac aapln 1 nfhac endalca 1omcumang in no ba 0015 
le6 a poccam pum oia parsid. Ro ba tonba an Coannaige jpn, vain pan- 
Zaccan Zan pacuccad ooib badém 1 ccfnd muintipe mesumdoin ag bél ata 
rampfohaigh. Ro pigld ionsal aagmde amecpennoa, 7 pccamofp cnoda com- 
nanz (coppa acca 7 anall, co po pnaoinead po ved tMa nfpt 1ombualca 
la Maguidin co na pocnave pon an lucc nate co po paccbad ap cfno lay, 7 
po bot oce Whnmeain an madma co cian ap an mag pin. 6a oipim & cTop- 
cnatap vo paopclanoaib 7 oaopclanoaib 1p m 1omaipeace pin. Ro paccbad 
eic, anm, 7 évala 1lomda an of pin la caob na neac 7 na ccapall bacan po 
a neinedenb Loin vo poccain co himp cetlenn. Cépnacan pceolanga uate 


® Ara, now Arran, an island lying to the east writes the name across the Isle of Skye, Glenelg, 
of Cantire in Scotland. General Stewart in his and other places. 
curious map of the antient Highland districts, * At the mouth of a certain ford, ax bél ata 
in his Sketches, &c., of the Highlanders of Scot- pamp(oaig.—See note ™, under the year 1586, 
land, does not place Mac Leod on thisisland, but p. 1856; and note 4, under the year 1588, 


1594.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1951 


of the English in the territory of Oriel, and in Breifny O'Reilly ; and they gave 
their cows and flocks as provision stores to their soldiers. 

O'Donnell, as we have stated, was encamped, laying siege to Enniskillen, 
from the middle of June to the month of August, until the warders of the 
castle had consumed almost all their provisions. Messengers came to O’Don- 
nell from the Scots, whom he had before invited over, to inform him that they 
had arrived at Derry. And those who had come thither were Donnell Gorm 
Mac Donnell, and Mac Leod of Ara’. O’Donnell then set out with a small 
number of his forces to hire them ; and he left another large party of them with 
Maguire to assist him, and he ordered them to remain blockading the castle. 

When the Lord Justice, Sir William Fitzwilliam, had received intelligence 
that the warders of Enniskillen were in want of stores and provisions, he 
ordered a great number of the men of Meath, and of the gentlemen of the Reillys 
and the Binghams of Connaught, under the conduct of George Oge Bingham, to 
convey provisions to Enniskillen. These chieftains, having afterwards met 
together, went to Cavan, O’Reilly’s town, for provisions ; and they proceeded 
through Fermanagh, keeping Lough Erne on the right, until they arrived within 
about four miles of the town. 

When Maguire (Hugh) received intelligence that these forces were marching 
towards the town with the aforesaid provisions, he set out with his own forces 
and the forces left him by O’Donnell, together with Cormac, the son of the 
Baron, i. e. the brother of the Earl O’Neill; and they halted at a certain narrow 
pass, to which they thought they [the enemy] would come to them. ‘The am- 
buscade was successful, for they came on, without noticing any thing, until they 
fell in with Maguire’s people at the mouth of a certain ford®’. A fierce and 
vehement conflict, and a spirited and hard-contested battle, was fought between 
both parties, till at length Maguire and his forces routed the others by dint of 
fighting, and a strages of heads was left to him; and the rout was followed 
up a great way from that place. A countless number of nobles and plebeians 
fell in this conflict. Many steeds, weapons, and other spoils, were left behind 
in that place [by the defeated], besides the steeds and horses that were loaded 
with provisions, on their way to Enniskillen. A few fugitives of Meath and of 


p. 1866, supra. It was first written bel ata na are cancelled, and pamp(oag interlined in the 
mfipleac vo fonpad; but the four last words handwriting of Michael O’Clery. 


° 


1952 


ANNGZa RIOshachta €lREGNN. 


(1594. 


opeanab mide 7 v0 pascalleacaib ap an ccantionsail pin, 7 ni po hanad leo 
ploe 50 pangaccan 50 bneipne us Raagillig. Ga pi conan v0 deachad Seoinpt 
6ce bionsam sup an uachad ac pula lap ap an lataip pin cma Lfpccam 
clomne cobtas més pampadcain, tna bneipne ui puainc, 7 appide 50 rliccec. 
Ro claoclaio cinm pop an at aga touccad an mon mardm pin 1. bel at na 
mbmopecad vo FaIpm ve FO daIs an po Faccbad vo bmorpccanb, 7 vo blec 


bamngznanb oca an la pin. 


Oc cualaccan aoy comméva an baile pnaonead pop an plois v0 beantpac 
am carplén 00 Magmodip, 7 vo beanc pom mait(m nanacail ovoib. 


© Reillys.—The chief of the Reillys, or O’ Reil- 
lys, at this time was Sir John, the son of Hugh 
Conallagh O’Reilly. He died on the first of 
June, 1596, when his brother, Philip O’Reilly, 
was set up by O’Neill as the O’Reilly, though 
not without strong opposition from Maelmora 
Breagh, the son and heir of Sir John, who was 
supported by the English. 

“The Largan, a district in the barony of 
Tullyhaw, and county of Cavan.—See Choro- 
graphical Description of Iar-Connaught, p. 347. 

“ Bel-atha-na-mBriosgadh, i.e. Mouth of the 
Ford of the Biscuits. It is translated: Os vadi 
biscoctorum panum, by P. O’Sullevan Beare.— 
Hist. Cathol., fol. 135. The site of this battle is 
still traditionally remembered, but the name is 
obsolete. The ford is on the River Arney, in 
the barony of Clanawley, under Drumane bridge, 
about five miles to the south of Enniskillen. 

* Defeat.—Cox says that news was brought 
to Dublin on the 11th of August, 1594, ‘ that 
Cormock Mac Baron (Tyrone’s brother), who 
besieged Iniskelling, had defeated the English, 
being 46 horse and 600 foot, under the conduct 
of Sir Edward Herbert and Sir Henry Duke.” 
Philip O’Sullevan Beare gives the following 
circumstantial account of this rencounter in his 
Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 2, 
c. xi. fol. 133, 134, 135: 

‘*In hoc rerum statu Iniskellinne arcis pre- 
sidium ab Odonello circumsessum fame preme- 


batur. Ac filius quidem scrophe arcis proditor, 
qui in ea ab Anglis erat relictus, sus vorax 
esuriente ventre afflictus cum commilitonibus 
quinque noctu per lacum lintre missus, quod 
regionum, et itinerum expertus erat, nuncia- 
tum, quanto in discriminé versaretur arx, & a 
Catholicis interceptus vna cum socijs multis 
vulneribus interficitur. Nihilominus Angli an- 
gustiarum arcis minimé nescij suppetias ire 
Carnes salse, caseus, magna copia 
Presidiarij milites 


festinant. 
biscocti panis parantur. 
euocantur: Ibernorum delectus habetur; ex 
omnibus nuper conscriptis Ibernis, & Anglis 
presidiarijs duo millia, & quingenti coguntur, 
quorum erant equites quadringenti. His im- 
perator preficitur Henricus Dukus Anglus 
eques auratus Iphalie principatus preefectus, & 
castrametator Fool etiam Anglus, de quorum 
consilio certior factus Odonellus, legatos ad 
Tironum mittit, Protestantes Iniskellinne sub- 
sidio venire : id se vsque ad internecionem pro- 
hibiturum : quanto in periculo res sit sita, ma- 
nifestum esse, & ita Tironum a se pro hoste 
habendum nisi ipsi in tanto discrimine posito 
ferat auxilium. Qua legatione audita diuersis 
curis anxius Tironus distrahebatur, cum animo 
suo reputans Odonellum incerta spe Hispani 
auxilij gerere bellum, antequam Hispana signa 
in Ibernia videat ac ita rem Catholicorum in 
summo discrimine esse sitam, etiam si ipse ferat 
opem; sin minus Catholicis opituletur, Protes- 


1594. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1953 


the Reillys' escaped from this conflict, and never stopped until they arrived in 
Breifny O'Reilly. The route taken by George Oge Bingham and the few who 
escaped with him from the field was through the Largan", [the territory] of the 
Clann-Coffey Magauran, through Breifny O’Rourke, and from thence to Sligo. 
The name of the ford at which this great victory was gained was changed to 
’ Bel-atha-na-mBriosgudh”, from the number of biscuits and small cakes left there 


to the victors on that day. 


When the warders of the castle heard of the defeat* of the army, they sur- 
rendered the castle to Maguire ; and he gave them pardon and protection’. 


tantibus tamen se esse suspectum, & ita vtrisqué 
fore hostem iudicatum. Aduentante vero Re- 
gine exercitu Cormakus Onellus Tironi frater 
cum equitibus centum, & bombardariis velitibus 
trecentis ed Odonellum in castra venit, missusne 
a Tirono, an suo ductu, minimé satis omnibus 
constabat. Macguier, & Cormakus cum pedi- 
tibus mille ex Odonelli castris hosti obuiam 
eunt, vt illum incursionibus prohibeant, som- 
. noque, & quiete priuent, quominus strenué cum 
Odonello post@a prelietur. Interim Dukus non 
longius tribus milibus passuum sub vesperum 
consistit a Farnij fluminis vado. Vbi tenebris 
primis a Macguiere, & Cormako missis Sclopistis 
densissima plumbearum pilularum vi improuisé 
obruitur: quos contra Dukus quoque bombar- 
darios suos mittit. Ita vtraque parte per noc- 
tem totam ¢ minus preliante, regij periculo, & 
bombardarum sonitu somno priuantur. Postero 
die post lucis exortum Dukus ex vniverso exer- 
cituagmina tria instruens equitum, & sclopera- 
riorum alis munita, quod impedimenta magna 
habebat, iumentorum que commeatum baiula- 
bant, asinariorum, calonum, atque meretricum, 
ea in duas partes diuidit, alteram inter primam, 
& secundam aciem, & inter hanc, & vltimam alte- 
ram collocat. Quomodo instructus milites pre- 
teritz noctis vigilia semisomnes é castris mouens 
4 Catholicis continuo tela iacientibus gressum 
comprimere sepé compellitur, eosdem vicissim 


longius remouens. Ad horam diei vndecimam 


non longius bombard iactu a Farnio vado venit. 
Vbi equites ad pedes descendere iubet, quéd 
erat locus equestri prelio minus idoneus. Hic 
Macguier, et Cormakus cum peditibus mille totis 
viribus dimicant. Eorum bombardarij agmini 
primo fortius reluctantur, & vltimo non modo 
bombardarij, sed etiam hastati insistunt. Cete- 
rum primum agmen ferro viam aperiens, & hinc 
inde Catholicos arcens vadum agereditur. Inte- 
rim Catholici bombardarij, qui vltimum agmen 
impugnabant, Protestantium scloperariorum alas 
in agmen compellunt, illudque plumbeis glan- 
dibus continenter carpendo faciunt trepidare : 
ordinibusque iam laxatis incompositum Catho- 
lici hastati irruendo penitus disturbant, & cum 
altera parte impedimentorum primum confun- 
dunt: deinde ad medium agmen compellunt. 
Hic medium agmen duplex certamen inibat, 
alterum componendo vltimum agmen, alterum 
Catholicis resistendo: sed vtrumqué Catholici 
vrgendo confundunt, & per alteram partem im- 
pedimentorum pellentes agmini primo miscent. 
Ita totus exercitus turbato, confusoque tumultu 
penetrat vadum, relicto commeatu, & omni im- 
pedimento, equis tantum seruatus, qui precipue 
cure equitibus erant. Mox quid agendum sit, 
Dukus consultat. Georgius Binghamus Iunior 
redeundum esse censet, ne post amissum com- 
meatum omnes inedia vincantur pari fato cum 
Iniskellinne propugnatoribus, quibus opitulari 
non poterant. Contra castrametator Fool, quod 


11 Q 


1954 


aNNQZa RIOsShachca €lREGNN. 


[1595. 


Canaice tupcip nua NEpinn 1 mi ul na bliaona po. Sip wlham Ruprel 


a amm pein. Appead po cinnfd lap sac banle oa mbaof 1ppeilb na bainpiosna 


1nepinn lon 4 lan pconap do Cop ind DaImdeomn 1 mbaof ma azhaid. 


Ro 


poccpad lap oppeacnb mide, laag{, muman, 7 Connace codect 50 Lionman 


léntionoilce ina docom co bale ata luain an peipead la vécc 00 mf Sep- 


cemben. 


In ecmains na pee pm canaice an iupeip amail po tingeall 50 


hat luain, 7 po apccna appaide co poy comain. 


QOS CRIOST, 1595. 


Cloip Cmort, mile, cticc ced, nocat, a cticc. 


(po luperp na hépenn a. Sp ullham Ruppel vo tocc pop cappamns 


opungse vo comanranaib, 7 oo cobnfpaib Plachac mic aoda, pop prachad 


nomen stultum significat, stulte reclamat, & ob- 
testatur, vt arci Regine succurrant. Locus, in 
quo Protestans constiterat, humiditate impedi- 
tus erat, vbi equi in vliginem hausti vsui esse 
non poterant. Ideo a Catholicis magis impuné 
missilibus sauciatur. Ob hoc Fool alam sclope- 
rariorum contra Catholicos producit, vt eos re- 
moueat, dum rursus exercitus per ordines com- 
ponatur. Cexterum cito cepto destitit tragula 
traiectus, & occisus. Quo totus Protestantium 
exercitus consternatus desertis etiam equis vllo 
siné ordine, & imperio ad vadum quod ante 
pauld traiecerat, reuertitur. Quo prohibetur a 
Catholicis fulminatoribus, qui partim impedi- 
menta diripiebant, partim vadum ‘obsidebant. 
Vnde dubius, quid potissimum consilij caperet, 
ad aliud angustibus vadum, quod supra in flu- 
mine intra sagitte missum conspicatur, conci- 
tato cursu sese confert, & in illud precipitat 
Qua 
verO celeritate, & trepidatione penetrabat, & 
vadum erat altitudine, centum circiter milites 


prius, quam fuit 4 Catholicis occupatum. 


subruuntur, quorum super corpora ceteri tran- 
seunt. Protestantem ex Ibernis pauci sequuntur, 
quorum ille paucitatem spernens consistit pa- 
rumper, dum Dukus Anglici exercitus impe- 


rator cum alijs cohortium ducibus armis, & 
Quibus 
tamen exutis non satis leuatus, nec aptus cur- 


vestibus preter subuculam exuitur. 


rendo inter quatuor Ibernos milites ex suis 
trahitur. Fugientes & pauidos Catholici ex 
manibus dimiserunt, diripiendis*impedimentis 
animum intendentes. Nam pauci qui vitra va- 
dum fuerunt secuti, statim rediuerunt. Ob 
quod ex Protestantibus Angelis, & Catholicis 
Ibernis, qui cum illis stipendium merebant, 
pauci supra quadringentos flumine, ferroqué 
perierunt. Equi, magna strues armorum, com- 
meatus, & omnia impedimenta capta sunt. Inter 
qux vis biscoctorum panum ingens in ipso vado 
strata loco nouum nomen indidit. Exercitus re- 
gij fusi, © fugati diuulgato nuncio Iniskellinna 
arx ab Odonello circumsessa in deditionem venit, 
propugnatoribus ex pacto dimissis, & Maceuier 
est in integrum restitutus. 

‘“*Macsuinnius Tuethius vnus ex authoribus 
belli, qui obsidioni interfuit, breui post receptam 
arcem nature cedens triste sui desiderium Ca- 
tholicis reliquit: in cuius locum suffectus est 
Melmurius Macsuinnius Mauri Lenti filius an- 
tecessori constantia minimé par, vt inferius 


apparebit. Obsidione soluta Odonellus memor 


1595. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1955 


A new Lord Justice came to Ireland in the month of July of this year. Sir 
William Russell? was his name. He formed a resolution that provisions and 
stores should be put into every town in the Queen’s possession in Ireland, in 
despite of all those who were opposed to him. He issued a proclamation to 
the inhabitants of Meath, Leinster, Munster, and Connaught, ordering them to 
meet him at Athlone, with all their forces assembled, on the 16th of September. 
The Lord Justice accordingly went to Athlone at that time, and proceeded 
from thence to Roscommon. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1595. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-five. 


The Chief Justiciary of Ireland, Sir William Russell, marched to Baile-na- 
Cuirre* in the month of January, against Fiagh, the son of Hugh [O'Byrne], at 


truculentiz, qua feeminas, senes, & infantes ex 
Iniskellinne ponte Angli precipitauerant, cum 
omnibus copiis Connachtam, quam Richardus 
Binghamus heretica tyrranide oppressam tene- 
bat, inuadit : incursionibus longe, lateque factis 
Anglos colonos, & inquilinos diripit, fugat, oc- 
cidit, viro nulli a decimo quinto anno vsque ad 
sexagesimum nato, qui Ibernicé loqui nesciebat, 
parcens. In Inalia Lomphortum pagum, quem 
opherali ademptum Brunus Anglus Hereti- 
Protestantium preda 
Ea inuasione in 


cus possidebat, accendit. 
Onustus in Tirconellam redit. 
Connachta nullus agricola, nullus inquilinus, 
nullus: omnino Anglus mansit preter eos, qui 
arcium, & munitorum oppidorum menibus de- 
fendebantur. Nam qui igne, & ferro consumpti 
non sunt, bonis spoliati in Angliam secesserunt, 
illos, per quos in Iberniam deducti sunt, diris 
obsecrationibus prosequentes.”—Cap. xi. 

¥ Pardon and protection—O’Sullevan’ seems 
to have been misinformed on this subject. On 
his authority Leland asserts that the garrison 
were butchered by the Irish ; and he adds: 

“In all the barbarous triumph of incensed 
conquerors they pierced into Connaught, and 


committed the most afflicting outrages in all 
the well-affected quarters; besieged the English 
fort of Belleek ; cut off a detachment sent to its 
relief; and practised their usual barbarity on 
the garrison, when famine had compelled them 
to surrender. To complete his triumph, O’Don- 
nel was enabled to establish one of the degene- 
rate De Burghos, his associate, chieftain of the 
district, by the name of the Mac William: while 
Bingham, the Queen’s Lord President of Con- 
naught, was totally destitute of such a military 
force as might enable him to exert his usual 
vigor against such outrages.””—Book iv. c. 4. 

* Sir William Russell_He was the youngest 
son of Francis, Earl of Bedford. He landed at 
Howth on the 31st of January, 1594, and went 
the next day to Dublin, but refused to accept 
of the sword till.the Council had first given 
him in writing, under their hand, an account of 
the disturbed state of the kingdom; which 
being done, he was sworn on Sunday, the 11th 
of August, with great solemnity.—See Cox’s 
Hibernia Anglicana, vol. i. p. 403. 

* Baile-na-Cuirre, now Ballinacor, in Glen- 
malure, in the barony of South Ballinacor, and 


J is rane 


1956 ANNGZa RIOshachtTa ElRECANN. [1595. 


budém co barle na cuippe hi mi Januapn do ponnad. Jan nool omb 1 ccomh- 
foceup von baile pra prt painicc leo vol tan dopup an oinclad baof ma 
cimcell po clop co teccmaipeac fuaim opoma 6 na pargoitumb acc_ dol vo 
paiccid an baule. Ofoccarp piacha co na mumetipn, 7 at pagac co hobann, 4 
po Cup Opons dia MuInTIp DlIomCcopnam an donaipP co po cup a mumeip ule 
plab, macaib, mnaib cné doippb Ela an baile amac, 4 00 deachad pin 
ma Lfmam co puce lap ma momlaine 1act po dDampaib, 7 po dpoibelaib pa 
magi pop inmtl lonp. 

lan mbeit oprachand pon a 1omsabarl camic ma cfnd uatep mrabac mac 
Zeapailc mic tomar 00 Feanalcacanb cille vana. Oala an iupcip bai pide co 
c{no veic lai mbanle na cuippe ian na paccbarl opiachand, 7 po Fagaib banda 
nd 00 DO paursoiuipib aga 1omcorméce 7 tice Fin tan a aap co hae chat. 

Oo cHd ona uacén mrabac 7 apall vo clomn prachac mic aoda ap ionn- 
Pagid o1dce (In 1lonam covalca) po cfno coice La ndéce 1ap pico cnuimslinn 
1 noonap ata chacth. Ro loipecead 7 po léippecpiopad an banle pin led, 4 
puccpat Ina mbaoi ina ccumans o1iomcap von cfno lucide bot pon cflmpall 
an banle, 7 5€n 66 polléin popaipccpiona luipne 7 lapnaca an baile aga 
lopccad do pnaioib ata chat vo cod uacen ap Zan Puiliuccad san poip- 
ofpecad pain. 

(1 ccionn mip iap pm tuce uatep ammay pon baile oumne uapal oa 
(pccarpoib bai ina compocpanb,7 510 € an oume uapal baol pe co phtmeac 
fuipeacanp 1 ppoicill a ionopaigte via eapceaiporb. Cn can vo cuaid uacen 
co na mumtip pon mbarle po 1onnpaig an oume uapal co cpoda canlee nfim- 
neac 1 ccomne uactéip co jo tuainccpiot a cele co hainmin (pecampofmanl 
co po cpectnaigf uacen ina Cop don cup pn. Ruccpac a mumcin led hé 
sup an pliab ba comnfpa 0616, 7 po Cuppiot o1a LaSCp é m ppoctoll calman 
ap nap beolac aon tmaproip. Nip paccarbpioc ina pocaip acc aon buacall, 
isa ora pion tanuyb budém no chglo prde sac pé la vo tionol lunbhno po 
na collab ba comnfpa 00. Oo pala iomacallam 6p fpol etip € 7 opnons 
ofpecanporb uaceip $0 po nadmypioc pe pole, po tanpaing pide lion clngaul 


county of Wicklow. In the Leabhar Branach, the weir or dam. 
or Book of the O’Byrnes, in the Library of Tri- > Through the postern-doors, literally, ‘“ the 
nity College, Dublin, H. 1. 15, the name is escaping doors.” 


written baile na connu, which means, town of © Cruimghlinn, i. e. the crooked glen or valley, 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1957 


the instance of Fiagh’s neighbours and acquaintances.. Upon their arrival in 
the neighbourhood of the castle, but before they had passed through the gate 
of the rampart that surrounded it, the sound of a drum was accidentally heard 
from the soldiers who were going to the castle. Fiagh, with his people, took 
the alarm ; and he rose up suddenly, and sent a party of his people to defend 
the gate; and he sent all his people, men, boys, and women, out through 
the postern-doors” of the castle, and he himself followed them, and conveyed 
them all in safety to the wilds and recesses, where he considered them 
secure. 

While Fiagh was [thus] avoiding [his enemies], Walter Reagh, the son of 
Gerald, son of Thomas, one of the Geraldines of Kildare, came to join him. As 
for the Lord Justice, he remained for ten days at Ballinacor, after it had been 
deserted by Fiagh ; and, having left one or two companies of soldiers to defend 
it, he himself returned to Dublin. 

Fifteen days after this, Walter Reagh and some of the sons of Fiagh, the son 
of Hugh, set out upon a nocturnal excursion (in sleeping time) to Cruimghlinn‘, 
near the gate of Dublin. They burned and totally plundered that town [bally], 
and took away as much as they were able to carry of the leaden roof of the 
church of the town; and though the blaze and flames of the burning town were 
plainly visible in the streets of Dublin, Walter escaped without wound or 
bloodshed. | 

In a month after this, Walter made an attack on a neighbouring castle, 
belonging to a gentleman of his enemies. But the gentleman was wary and 
vigilant, in readiness against any attack of his enemies. When Walter and his 
people attacked the castle, the gentleman came to a bold and fierce combat with 
Walter ; and they struck at each other furiously and inimically, and Walter 
was wounded in the leg. His people carried him off to the nearest mountain, 
and they placed him under cure in a subterranean cave, with the situation of 
which no three persons were acquainted. They left with him only one young 
physician of his own faithful people, who was wont to go every second day to 
the nearest woods to gather herbs. A conversation privately occurred between 
this man and a party of Walter’s enemies ; and he, having leagued with them, 


now Crumlin, or Cromlin, near Dolphin’s Barn. Gate, which was then the outermost of the gates 
It is at least two Irish miles from St. James’s of Dublin. 


1958 aNNdZa RIOfhachcta elReann. (1595. 


vacfipn ina cfno. Rugad uacép 1anam s0 hat cliat, po cnochad tna, 7 00 
ponad cltpamna oe. . 

Coiccead ulad wile véipse in aon pann, 7 m aon conta im ashaio Zall an 
bliadam pi. 

Sloiccead La clanoaib néill kn mf pebpar nouchais bandin plane co nan 
pasbaccan atmaomn oa nop iy na cimb pm vanbap no ovarciuccad omoilib 
no oaipnfip. 

Sluciccead ele la clanoaib néill co cfnanoup co po millead, 7 co po mép- 
cupcelo an tip ma nuiptimcell leo. 

Sloiccead la Wlaguidip aod mac conconnact mic conconnacc 5 la Mazg- 
matsamna bnan mac aova oicc, mic aoda, mic plain bude co bperpne 
ui Raagilhs. Ro hmnopnao,7 po hancclo an cip co tmmneapnac led, 7 ona 
beor ni po paccaibpioc bot nat 1 nolonpalde Viap n6 TMIGp von cCaban wile san 


poplopccad cenmota mamiptip an cabain ina mbaccap soll an can pin. 


* Hanged and quartered._The following ac- 
count of the adventures and fate of this Walter 
is given by P. O’Sullevan Beare, in his Hist. 
Cathol. Ibern. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 2, c. ix. 
fol. 131: 

‘“‘Rursus Lageniorum parui tumultus reno- 
uantur, quibus ansam prebuit Petrus Giral- 
dinus Hereticus. Is ob inhumanam crudelita- 
tem iustiti# minister ab Anglis creatus non 
modo viros, sed etiam freminas, & infantes (ea 
erat truculentia) morte plectebat. Preecipua 
quadam libidine Vateri Giraldini Fusci sangui- 
nem appetebat. Eius pagum Gloranem cum 
sicariorum manipulo repente inuasit, sed frustra, 
nam tum Fuscus aberat, & eius vxor, que in- 
tererat, fuga salutem petiuit. Haud diu post 
Fuscus cum Terentio, Felmio, & Raymundo 
Obruinibus Fiachi filijs affinibus suis, equitibus 
duodecim, & peditibus feré centum Petri castel- 
lum improuis6 aggreditur. Foribus primum, 
inde reliquo castello igne iniecto illum cum fa- 
milia comburit. Interim Angli accole cum 
equitum turma, & peditibus aliquot Fuscum 
circumueniunt, in quos ille faciens impetum 


paucos vulneribus afficit, omnes in fugam vertit. 
Hinc Fuscus, & cum filijs Fiachus hostes indi- 
cati diligenter, & acriter ab Anglis impetuntur. 
Fuscus in municipio suo Glorane a Protestan- 
tibus, & Ibernis auxiliaribus, maxime Buttleris 
improuiso circumdatus sese cum paucis armatis 
in paruum munimentum, quod repentinos casus 
timens, vallo, fossaque obduxerat, recepit. Istud 
hostes oppugnant ; ille propugnare conatur. 
Hostium multitudine vndiq: aggrediente Fusci - 
frater Giraldus fortissimé prelians plumbea 
glande confoditur: Ceteri plerumque vulneribus 
afficiuntur. Fuscus, quod, & munimentum diu- 
tius tueri nequiuit, & commeatu carebat, per 
medios confertissimos hostes erumpens cum 
paucis euasit. Tempore minimé longo transacto 
cum vespertino crepusculo per pagos milites 
distribueret, ipse cum comitibus duobus domum 
A ceteris dissitam ingressus hostium milites 
sexdecim offendit. Strictis vtrinque gladijs regij 
quinque grauiter vulnerantur; alter ex duobus 
Fusci militibus occiditur: ipse mallei ictu fracto 
pene femore sternitur. 
alter comes, qui Georgius Omorra vocabatur 


Ducem humi iacentem 


1595. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1959 © 


[betrayed Walter], and led a party to where he was, who bound him. Walter 
was afterwards taken to Dublin, where he was hanged and quartered*. 

The entire province of Ulster rose up in one alliance and one union against 
the English this year. 

An army was led by the O’Neills, in the month of February in this year, 
into the country of the Baron of Slane, and left no property after them in those 
districts, of corn; dwellings, flocks, or herds. 

Another army was led by the O’Neills to Kells, and they spoiled and totally 
ravaged the whole country around. 

An army was led by Maguire (Hugh, the son of Cuconnaught, son of Cu- 
connaught, son of Cuconnaught), and by Mac Mahon (Brian, the son of Hugh 
Oge, son of John Boy), into Breifny O’Reilly, and they quickly plundered and 
ravaged that country ; and they left not a cabin in which two or three might 
be sheltered in all Cavan which they did not burn, except the monastery of 


Cavan, in which English [soldiers] were* at that time. 


. 


tollens, humeris impositus hostium manibum 
eripere molitur fugiendo ad comilitones qui in 
proximo pago diuersabantur. Quoties insec- 
tantium cursu superabatur, toties Fuscum humi 
relinquens stricto ferro cum quatuor, aut quin- 
que certabat, quibus in fugam versis, illum ite- 
rum sublatum, quam concitatissimo poterat 
cursu portabat, donec socij auxilio accurrerint. 
A quibus Fuscus absconditus cum curaretur, a 
custode suo ab Anglis deprehenso capitis timore 
proditur, & Dubhlinnam delatus ferreo veru 
Post 
Fusci necem Fiachus cum regijs copijs quater 


longo, & acutissimo infixus perimitur. 
signa prosperé contulisse. Sub quam victoria- 
rum prosperitatem fortuna minimé diu Catho- 
licis secunda vertit alteram paginam, Terentius 
Obruin trium filiorum, Fiachi natu simul, & 
virtute maximus, quod Anglis patrem prodere 
constituerit, insimulatur. Fiachus id ed facilius 
credidit, quod monitus fertur 4 Rosa Nituehile 
vxore sua Terentij nouerca que Dubhlinne ab 
Anglis custodia tenebatur, nimium ne mariti 
vite timente, an Protestantium arte, & falla- 


cia decepta, incertum. Ergo Terentio depre- 
henso, quia paternus, inquit Fiachus, amor me 
non sinit digna pena perfidiam tuam vlcisci, 
his te tradam, quibus tu me eras proditurus, vt 
sicut paternam pietatem es expertus, ita hostilis 
humanitatis facias periculum. Terentius Dubh- 
linnam vinctus delatus non modo se falso crimine 
purgauit, sed totam familiam longé honorificen- 
tissima morte cohonestauit : nam sepe ab Anglis 
rogatus, & premijs inuitatus, vt regia secte 
subscriberet, maluit Catholicam Christi lesu 
legem confitens acerbo supplicio mori, quam 
negans viuere, patri precipué triste sui deside- 
rium relinquens, qui breui quoque quodam, 
quem fidissimum habebat, prodente, & hostes 
ducente cum paucis familiaribus regiorum mul- 
titudine circumuentus capite truncatur. Nec 
ob id tamen eius filij ‘Felmius, & Raymundus 
arma & mora omiserunt.” 

¢ In which English were— Ina mbazcap soill. 
This should be: na mbazzan bapoa o gallaib, 
‘in which an English garrison was then sta- 


tioned.” 


~ 1960 GANNAGCA RIOShMaAchTad EIREGNN. [1595. 


Maccon mac concoiccyiche mic Dlapmata mic TaNDZ caimm wi clermsh 
ollamh uf oomhnonll hi pfichap, Saot pomnecthe, (n5na, ealadanca hi pln- 
chap,7 1 noan, poeplabnad pomste co mbuad nimpgm, neathips 7 nCplabpa, 
rp cnaiboeach caonoutpachcach viada vepfpcac vo écc 1 Litin maolain 1 
cToudoMumann. 

Sip Seon nopaip Zenenal coccamd na bainmogna oo tect 1 nEpinn oct ccéo 
véce paigoinp 1 noempead mi pebnu vo copce coccad ulleac, 7 céonnaccae. 

Slaccead la hua noomnall God puad vo dol 1 cconnaccob. Appls vo 
lmd cetup cap eipne (an tpfp la don manca vo ponnad) lam deap epi loc 
melge mic cobtang, 50 bealac uf memvdein, 7 aamypp hipude im adans pin 
cnep an mbperpne so bnaopliab, 7 vo nome comnaide an avhangs pin annpaide. 
Nin 66 podaing vopom ell no baogal opaccbal pon coiccead olnécemact an 
ionbad pin, an po baccap Zoill mo 1onaccact, 7 mm carccpebaib 1pm cepic co 
coiccionn, ] 50 ponpadac ina popcarb aipfcanp,7 ma ofnapuparb oiocoslangib. 
bai cecup Sip Ripoeno bmgam sZobepnoin coice:d connact 1 Ropp comenn, 
opong mon ele vo sallaib 1 mamipcip manac pil pop bnu bulle, opons ele 
hi ccullpece mm eiccipmfoon mage har pm part cpuachan anoip cruane. 
Opong ipin bpont nua (oun pe cladpiot na gorll bavdéin) ecip loc cé, 7 loc 
nanbac. Opong1 mbaile an motaig, 7 opong mon ele hn plicceach. Reinice 
plop Sccel sup an ngobepnoip co por comam go mbaoi 6 vomnaill ace tall 
von Tip, 7 ni po hanad laippoe co pact 50 maimypeip na binlle, 7 plo pop- 
conspao Lap pon a mbaof vo gallaib ip na benlcib pempaite teacc via 
parceid an oa pin, uaip ba vos Larp cond jpn conaip no cing5pead 6 vomnalll 
co na plogaib. 

(ce vol oua vomnall Fo colleib concobain po poncil pop a pocpavbe 
campim pm a mnneall 7 pm a ccapbénad. Oo ponad pap pum pm, 7 nip 
66 hadbal an lion bai hipwde uaip noca paibe ace chtpe céd nama pm 


f Erudite. —“ Foipgti .. teagaipgte.” — 
O' Clery. 

® Leitir-Maelain, now Lettermoylan, a subdi- 
vision of the townland of Glangee, in the parish 
of Dysart-O’Dea, barony of Inchiquin, and 
county of Clare. 

» The lake of Melge, the son of Cobhthach, now 


Anglice Lough Melvin.—See note ®, under the 


‘ 


year 1455, p. 994, supra. This lake is said to 
have derived its name from Melge Molbhthach, 
the son of Cobhthach, Monarch of Ireland, A. M. 
3696.—See O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, part iii. c. 39. 

' Ballaghmechin.—This is the name of a Roman 
Catholic parish forming the eastern portion of 
the parish of Rossinver, barony of Rossclogher, 
and county of Leitrim.—See this place already 


1595. ] ANNALS OF THE, KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1961 


Maccon, the son of Cucogry, son of Dermot, son of Teige Cam O’Clery, 
Ollav to O'Donnell in history, an erudite’ and ingenious man, professed in 
history and poetry; a fluent orator, with the gift of elocution, address, and 
eloquence ; a pious, devout, religious, and charitable man, died at Leitir-Maelain’, 
in Thomond. 

At the end of the month of February Sir John Norris, the Queen’s general, 
came to Ireland with a force of eighteen hundred soldiers, to suppress the war 
in Ulster and Connaught. 

A hosting was made by O’Donnell (Hugh Roe), to march into Connaught. 
He first crossed the Erne, on the third day of March, and moved on, keeping 
the lake of Melge, the son of Cobhthach", on his right, until he arrived at 
Ballaghmeehin’, where he stopped that night. He then proceeded on through 
Breifny, until he came to Braid-Shliabh*, where he stopped for one night. It 
was difficult for him at that time to get an advantage of or surprise the province 
of Olnegmacht', because the English held their abode and residence throughout 
the country in general, and especially in its chief towns and impregnable for- 
tresses. In the first place, Sir Richard Bingham, the Governor of the province 
of Connaught, was [stationed] at Roscommon; another large party of the 
English [was stationed] in a monastery which is [situated] on the bank of the 
Boyle ; another in Tulsk, in the very centre of Moy-Ai, to the north-east of 
- Rathcroghan ; another in the fort, a fortress erected by the English themselves 
between Lough Key and Lough Arrow ; another at Ballymote ; and a great 
party at Sligo. News having reached the Governor at Roscommon, that O’Don- 
nell was on his march into the country, he made no delay until he arrived at 
the monastery of Boyle, and ordered all the English of the towns above men- 
tioned to come to him at that place, for he thought that it should be by that 
way that O’Donnell would pass with his forces. 

O'Donnell, on his way to Coillte-Chonchobhair", ordered his troops to halt, 
to be drawn out in array, and reviewed. This they accordingly did, and the 
number he had there was not great, being only four hundred men fit for valour 


referred to at the years 1439 and 1480. of the province of Connaught, and the Nagnatz 
K Braid-Shliabh, now Braulieve.—See note’, of Ptolemy is probably an attempt at writing it. 
under the year 1586, p. 1581, supra. m Coillte- Chonchobhair, a woody district in the 


' Olnegmacht.—This is the most ancient name north-east of the barony of Boyle, dnd county 


ite 


1962 aNNaca RIOSshachfa EIRECNN. [1595. 


hfnsnam 7 pp huppelang: opis ni veacacan ploig ele ima coicfpcal an 
can pm Inge cenel cconaill, accmad uachad vo céiccead olnecmacc bacan 
_ace taipcélad, | acc péduccad conaipe 06, m concoban écc mac dIapmanda, 
717m conn mac an oubalcas, mic cuatail ui concobaip. Tiaganz an plog 
laparh ian na cccupbénadh 50 pangaccan von ball, 7 cragonc caipypl acc 
opoiclc enuic an biocana 1 nuptopac o1dce, apparde d61b tné mois luincc, 7 
Te mois naoi co placcaccan la ovobappollp: na maione co pout cnuacan. 
Ro léiccead pecaoilead 7 pccannad va pccemelcacaib amanl po cflecaipec 
piumh vob pé ccoct an ov pin. 6a fainping poipl(tan po Ulepac na laoc 
buidne 6 pole, an vo Cuald opong odiob vo OuThais us concobain puaid 7 
ui ainlisi, cwio0 ele 50 ODpoicec beoil ata Moda Fon puca, 7 opeam ele beoy: 
can an ccaiplén mabac rap. Ro bad lop vo diclht an cplog fp an olum- 
ced viad 7 ofchaige po lf o na poploipcetib mm sac aapm po sabpac an 
plocch va Zac let 1 nuiptimceall pata cnuacan. Cangacap an luct vo cod 
50 hat moda, 7 an poinfnd ele vo cummd Fo hainteac 7 50 cloinn chteapnars 
ua miom(oo6n Laot 50 part cnuacan, 5én bo oicumaing Ooibh coioeact mellma 
la havoble a ccneac, 7 a nevala, 7 po séboaip ni bad m6 via mbit ma 
ceumang a nzluapact no a momam iccip. Oo cHd 1apam 6 vomnaill, 7 an 
lucc pin co na ccpeachaib 50 hailpino, 7 bai achaid annpaide acc pupnaide 
an pecemelta vo cumd uada 50 oUThals ui concobaip pucnd 4 ui amligi. 
Ro apeena rapam a houlpmo laimd(p lé hat pupfn co huib bhiam. Onmpip 
ann an aohais pin co po tionoilpiot a muincip wile ina docom co na ccpeacaib 
leo. Ni no cionolead la haomneac vo saocidealaib pé pe cian oaimpin 
yamoul ma mbaot vo Cnod (oaincctib aen lao) an 08 pin. 
Ro poncongaipn ua oomnaill an a bapac ap a muimetip a ccpedca do con 
Tap plonainn, 7 po Pao a slaplait,7 Fac aon nan bo cualains apm oimbine 


of Roscommon.—See note 4, under the year 
1471, p. 1071, supra. 

" (noc-an-Bhiocara, i.e. hill of the vicar, now 
Knockvicar Bridge, on the River Boyle, about 
tive miles to the north-east of the town of Boyle, 
in the parish of Ardcarne, barony of Boyle, and 
county of Roscommon.—See the Ordnance map 
of that county, sheet 6. 


° Bel-atha-Mogha, i. e. mouth of the ford of 


Mogha, now anglice Ballimoe, the name of a 
ford, bridge, and village on the River Suck, on 
the borders of the counties of Roscommon and 
Galway. 

® Caislen-riabhach, now Castlerea, a small 
town in the west of the county of Roscommon. 
—See note °, under the year 1489, p. 1168, 
supra. 
9 Airteach.—This is still’ the name of a dis- 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1963 


and action; for no other forces joined his muster besides the Kinel-Connell, 
except a few from the province of Olnegmacht, who acted as spies and guides 
in pointing out the way to him, under the conduct of Conor Oge Mac Dermot, 
-and Con, the son of Dubhaltach, son of Tuathal O’Conor. This host, after 
having been reviewed, marched on until they arrived at the River Boyle, and 


1595.) 


crossed it at the bridge of Cnoc-an-Bhiocara’ early in the evening. From thence 
‘they proceeded through Moylurg and Moy-Nai, and next morning, by break of 
day, arrived at Rathcroghan. Here, as he [O’Donnell] had instructed them 
before they arrived at that place, marauding parties were detached and sent 
forth ; far and wide did these heroic bands disperse from each other, for one 
party of them proceeded to the country of O’Conor Roe and O’Hanly, another | 
to the bridge of Bel-atha-Mogha’, on the River Suck, and a third party west- 
wards, beyond Caislen-riabhach’. The dense cloud of vapour and smoke which 
spread in every place where these forces passed, all around Rathcroghan, was 
enough to conceal their numbers. The party that had gone to Ath-Mogha 
[Ballimoe], and those who had gone to Airteach* and Clann-Keherny’, returned 
to Rathcroghan before mid-day, though it was difficult for them to return in 
regular order, by reason of the immensity of their preys and spoils ; and they 
could have procured more, if they had been but able to carry or drive them. 
O'Donnell and these went on with their preys to Elphin, and remained there 
for some time, awaiting the party who had gone to the country of O’Conor Roe 
and O’Hanly. He afterwards proceeded on from Elphin, keeping Ath-slisean’ 
on the right, until he arrived in Hy-Briuin, where he remained that night, 
until all his people had come to him with their spoils. None of the Irish had 
for a long time before collected (by one day’s plundering) so much booty as he 
had there. 
- On the next day O’Donnell ordered his people to convey their preys across 
the Shannon ; and he sent his recruits, and all those unfit to wield arms, with 


trict in the modern barony of Frenchpark, in 
the county of Roscommon.—See its exact limits 
pointed out in note’, under the year 1297, 
pp- 468, 469, supra. 

¥ Clann-Keherny.—This is still the name of 
a district in the modern barony of Castlerea, in 
the west of the county of Roscommon.—See 


O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, part iii. c. 46. It is chiefly 
comprised in the parish of Kilkeevin. 

S Ath-Slisean, now Bellaslishen Bridge, on the 
road leading from Elphin to Strokestown, in 
the county of Roscommon, and about a mile to 
the south of the former.—See note ', under the 
year 1288, p. 446, supra. 


TER 2 


e 


1964 - @NNaza RIOSshachta e:REGNN. (1595. 


lap na cpeacarb 7 lap na hévalonb co muintip edlarp. On can baccap 
veipead an tplHy ace tect tap an at céona ap and vo accaccan slaplat 
7 aop ombpanet na ngall,7 vo bfpact veabard oa pole co po cnectnaigice 
7 50 po Fonarte dponga fcoppa. Up a aof vo veacaccan cenel cconarll 
capp an abaimn, 7 00 coctap da TTIFIb co na néoalanb ran mbuaid 4 copsap. 

Sléicchead ele la hua noomnaall (aod puad) 1 cconnaccab an coécmad 
la véce vo mi apml. bappl a ccéona hude can eipne lam dOfp Lé loc melse 
co mbaccan m aohaig pin Rop bin. Tiagarc an a banac co cill peansa, 7 
capipite annpade PN veinead a ploig vo bpfit ponna, 7 ian poccain véib 
locap 1apam cpép an mbpeipne co bhaoplab apparde co macaipe comacc, 
7 a noeachad uad Zan cneachad an an pluaiccead poime po cleclamad a 
ccneaca curcce 50 haon mangm don cup pin. Oo cord 1apam sup na harpec- 
cibh 7 sup na hévalai’ pm lap so liatopmm muimncme heolayp.an adag 
pm. 

Cn can ba 0615 la a eapecainoib e1piom do poad tap a ap 1 nulcanb ni 
hf pm do pome icip, act po pard ceacca F0 hinclfite vo pas meépsuroipn 
Cloda co ttiopad ma docom von angarle, 7 po la luct canpcelca pome pon 
an ccpic, ] po popconsaip foppa co cttioptaip ma docom 1 monad endalca. 
Ro aprecna poppm iapam co taof toit{nac co naimice co na plogaib an va 
angaile 1pm moicveadol (oucharg an oa ua plpsanl mopin cd pa pa po 
bacan soill acc pontamluccad ponpa) 7 po baci aon vo na sallaib padfin n 
bpont aaplcap uf pipgaal 2. cpfopcomp bpin a comamm. Rangaccan pipte 
panpluans ui oomnanll 7 megurdip 6 plab cainppe co hfitne co po cuppioc 
Zac ni sup a pangaccap vo na cimb pin po cpoimnell cemead, 7 po pmuic 
ce6 dDobapda ouibciac. Ro sabad led an longponc, uaip po cunpiot tene 
saca pl(pa 7 saca haincmn ve sun ab la céicc pépld cuccpac cmorptoin 
bnun co na cliamain, 7 co na mnarb anaon amac. Ro loipecead ona ctice pip 
vécc Do bnangoib an tcipe (baccap itlaim ace an ccmoptoip péempate) na po 
cuims(o vanacal no vo tfpanccain la tnltan, 7 la cfnoaloacc na cemead. 


‘ Ros-inbhir, now Rossinver, a townland and _ haire, and county of Leitrim. 
parish in the barony of Dartry, and county of “ Shabh-Cairbre, now anglice Slieve Carbry, a 
Leitrim. mountainous district in the ancient territory of 
* Cill-Phearga, i.e. the church of St. Fearga, Cairbre Gabhra, now the barony of Granard, in 
now Killarga, a parish in the barony of Droma- the north of the county of Longford.—See note °, 


1595. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1965 


the preys and spoils, into Muintir-Eolais. When the rear of the army was 
crossing the ford, they were overtaken by the recruits and musketeers of the 
English ; and a battle ensued, in which many were hurt and mortally wounded 
on both sides. The Kinel-Connell, however, crossed the river, and carried off 
their spoils, after triumph. 

Another hosting was made by O’Donnell (Hugh Roe) into Connaught, on 
the eighteenth day of the month of April. He first crossed the Erne, and 
marched on, keeping Lough Melvin on the right, until he arrived at Ros-inbhir‘, 
where he stopped for that night. From thence he went to Cill-Fhearga", where 
he waited for the coming up of the rear of his army. Upon their arrival they 
proceeded through Breifny to Braid-Shliiabh, and from thence into Machaire- 
Chonnacht ; and such part of it as had escaped being plundered on the former 
expedition was plundered now ; and they collected the preys together to him. 
After this he proceeded onward with these preys and spoils, and arrived the 
same night in Leitrim in Muintir-Kolais. 

Now his enemies thought that he would return into Ulster ; this, however, 
he did not do, but privately dispatched messengers to Maguire (Hugh), [re- 
questing] that he would come to him in Annaly ; and he sent spies before him 
through the country, and ordered them to meet him at a certain place. He 
himself then marched onwards, secretly and expeditiously, and arrived with 
his troops at the dawn of day in the two Annalys (these were the countries of 
the two O’Farrells, though the English had some time before obtained sway 
over them); and one of the English, Christopher Browne by name, was then 
[dwelling] in the chief mansion-seat of O'Farrell. The brave troops of O’Don- 
nell and Maguire marched from Sliabh-Cairbre” to the River Inny, and set every 
place to which they came in these districts in a blaze of fire, and [wrapped it] 
in a black, heavy cloud of smoke. They took the Longford, for they had set 
fire to every side and corner of it, so that it was [only] by the help of a rope 
that they conveyed Christopher Browne and his brother-in-law, and both their 
wives, out of it. Fifteen men of the hostages of that country (who had been in 
the custody of the aforesaid Christopher Browne) were burned [to death], 
who could not be saved, in consequence of the fury and violence that prevailed. 


under the year 1590, p. 1885, supra. more usually called Longphort-Ui-Fhearghail, 
* The Longford, i. e. the fortress. This is i.e. O’Farrell’s fortress, and from it-the town 


1966 QNNGCG RIOShachca EiRECGNN. [1595. 


Ro sabaice beop tedpa carypcialla ele la hua noomnaill 1pm lo céona. 
Ro mapbaicc, 7 po muvhanigic oaoine 1omda don Cup yn, 7 po bad ola paon 
Clanoab hobfpo, mac peansupa, mic bmam po manbad la Maguioip cpé 10m- 
naitne. Ro hepsabad mac an pmona uf parsillig la opus nate oon cploig. 
Ro léinteacclamad, 7 po laintiondilead m po ba lain led vo cnod na cmice 
ap Zac apd o1a parcchio. Coccap 1apam co na ccpeachaib 4 co na névalarb 
co po sabpac longpopz 1 cceallac ofnchada mm avohaig pin. Ro Liccitc 
pecermealca uata an na banac co maimpein an cabain our an bpmshiccip 
baogal pop na sallanb baccap 1 ppopbary) and, 7 o na puaippiot 1 ppéeccmanp 
an baile 1acvc vo beantypat leo Zac ni sup a pangaccap oia nevalaib. Can- 
Zaccan iapam an aohais pin co tellac eacoac alla Han vo bél ata concull. 
Ticeite 1apam dia cc1H16 1an mbuond neccpa don cup pin. 

O po ba ofpb la gallaib an ctianla 6 neill vo einse 1 ccommbarvh ui dom- 
noall 1p m ccoccad po Cun an lupcip 7 an comanple ofic ccéd laoc 50 Moban 
cim tnasa vo Ponbany! pon cenel neogam, 7 po seall an iupcip co na plogaib 
coct ina L(mmain vonccain 7,00 mllead an Tipe. 

Ro paro ua nell a ceacca hn ccfnd ui Domnall dia Cupid pain ceact 
vice Compuptacc m ashad an anpponlamn po oail ora pours. Nip b6 hhy- 
IMac po hfpcf pin la hua noomnaill uaip po cionolead a ploga lair, 7 
pcamice tpé tip eocéain 50 haipm 1 mbaof 6 néill, 7 00 céecap ap aon co 
pocano muintimne hi mi Man vo ponnad. Od cualad aniupcp a mbhiz 
ina oincrll orblimb an 08 pin po camp m at cliaé don cup pm. 

Seoipip: occ bingam bao 1 plicceac 6 Zobepndm Coico connacc Sip Rip- 
vendo binzam do cuaid an Seoiny1 pin Long co na porpinn lam ofp pi hépinn 


of Longford has taken its name.—See note ‘, 
under the year 1448, p. 957, supra. 

* The son of the Prior.—He was Maelmora, or 
Myles, the illegitimate son of Philip O’Reilly, 
who was commonly called the Prior, though he 
was not an ecclesiastic.—See note 4, under the 
year 1583, p. 1809, supra. 

* Teallach-Dunchadha, now the barony of 
Tullyhunco, in the west of the county of Ca- 
van.—See note’, under the year 1282, p. 437, 
supra. 


* To which they came.—This phrase, which is 


very common in this Annals, sounds awkwardly 
enough in English. The phrase ‘“‘ which they 
could finger,” so often used by Cox, would be 
better English. 

» Teallach-Eachdhach, now anglice Tullaghagh, 
or Tullyhaw, a barony forming the north-west 
portion of the county of Cavan.—See note’, 
under the year 1258, p. 371, supra. 

° Bel-atha-Chonaill, now anglice Ballyconnell, 
a small town in the barony of Tullyhaw. See 
it already mentioned under the years 1470, 
1475. 


! 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1967 


Three other castles were also taken by O’Donnell on the same day; and on 
those occasions many persons were slain and destroyed, of whom one of the 
freeborn was Hubert, the son of Fergus, son of Brian [O'Farrell], who was acci- 
dentally slain by Maguire. The son of the Prior’ O'Reilly was taken prisoner 
by others of the army. As much of the property of the country as they wished 
to have was collected and gathered, [and brought] to them from every quarter. 
They then proceeded with their preys and spoils, and pitched their camp that 
night in Teallach-Dunchadha’*. On the next day they sent marauding parties 
to the monastery of Cavan, to see whether they could get an advantage of the 
English who were quartered in it ; but as they did not find any of the English 
about the town, they carried off every thing of value belonging to them to 
which they came*. They marched that night to Teallach-Eachdhach’, west of 
Bel-atha-Chonaill°; and from thence they returned home, after the victory of 
expedition on that occasion. 

When the English felt satisfied that the Karl O’Neill had risen up in alliance 
with O’Donnell in the war, the Lord Justice and Council sent a thousand war- 
riors to Iubhar-Chinn-tragha*, to make war on the Kinel-Owen ; and the Lord 
Justice promised to follow them, and plunder and ravage the country. 

O'Neill sent his messengers to O’Donnell, requesting him to come to his 
assistance against the overwhelming forces that had come to oppose him. 
O’Donnell did not listen inattentively to them, for he assembled his forces, and 
proceeded through Tyrone, to the place where O’Neill was ; upon which both 
went to Fochard-Muirtheimhne*®. ‘This was in the month of May. - When the 
Lord Justice heard that they were both in readiness there to meet him, he 
remained in Dublin for that time. 

George Oge Bingham, who was [stationed] at Sligo under Sir Richard Bing- 
ham, the Governor of Connaught, went with a ship and its crew north-eastwards, 


4 Jubhar-Chinn-tragha, i. e. the yew of the 
head of the strand, now Newry.—See it already 
mentioned at the years 1526, 1593. 

© Fochard-Muirtheimhne, now Faughard, a 
celebrated hill; on which stand the ruins of a 
church, about two miles to the north of Dun- 
dalk, in the plain of Muirtheimhne, now the 
county of Louth. This place is much celebrated 


in Irish history as being the birth-place of St. 
Bridget, and the site of the battle in which 
Edward Bruce was slain in 1318.—See Colgan’s 
Trias Thaum., p. 566, note 13 ; Ussher’s Primor- 
dia, pp. 627, 705, 706, 884; and note ", under 
the year 1318, p. 520, supra. 

‘ Went.— An English writer would say 
‘* sailed.” 


1968 AGNNata RIOshachta ElRECGNN. [1595. 


pointtuad vo. venam posla hi ccenel cconaall, co po Zsabpacc hi ccuan na 
ymlse. Puapaccan poall popp an cip an can pin, co po mmpple moimpeip 
muine baof pop up na cpaga,7 puccpat a cculadaca oippinn 7 a carlipr led 
co névalaib ole. CAppaide vo deacattan 1apam co conars (oilén in po bin- 
vac colum cille an naoiméplam e1pide). Ro cneacpat 47 po oinccpioc 1 
mbaoi 1pm olén, 7 pangaccan 1apam cap a nap co pligeac. | 

Qo cuap oua domnaill, aomillead a cpice via Gp (la heaccpanncorb ) 
Ticcpive & Tip EOFaM dia Tappaccain, 7 nip bo cian an epnaide 001 TTip 
conaill an tan pangaccapn teacca ui nell via parsid, dia capnfip 06 an iupTciy 
co na plog 00 ToctT 1 TTIp EoZam. Socap ma Ppiting oopidiyp1 co pamic apm 
1 mbaof 6 néill. 6a paoho pum pmyp. 6a hadbal an cpocparve tanaice an 
upzp a. Sip uillam pupyell, uaip bot senenal coccaid na bammogna) nepinn 
a moalle pp 1. Sip Seon Nopurp, 7 1apla cuadmuman oonnchad mac concobarp 
ui Bam 1aopaive wile co na pocnaive. Ni po hanad leo pide co pangaccap 
co huban cimntpasa, appaide co hano maca. 6a ho po cmnproc hipwmde 
Zan capipiom so poccain 0016 50 habainn moip hi cefincmfoon cipe heoccam. 
Clee apecnam 1 péid DINsZe na conaipe 0b etip apomaca 7 abann mop ac 
conncacap an longpopc lan noaingfn, 7 an cipe comnant cata 1 mbacan 
cenel cconcall 7 eogain imon iapla ua nel 7 im ua noomnaill, 7 1ap na 
camiucéad pm von cpluas sall campos ipm mongin pin co an a banac. Oo 
éotcap lanam cap ancaip co hapomaca. Oo dveacaccap na Zaoroil ma Lin- 
main co po sabpac lonspont m atpoccup ovoib. bactan Pi né coicc La noéce 
ashad in ashad amlard pin Zan pagio vo neactan aca pon apoile, uain po 
baoi an iytip co na plog 1 noaingmsaib apoamaca acc coccbaal con 7 ace 
dDoimniuccad ofoce 1 ctcimceall an baile. Ro paccanb an iupcip a ccionn na 
pee pm tpi banna parson ag 1omcomectc anoamaca, 7 cho pon can a ap 
von iubap, 7 bactcap Zaoroil ma Unmain co oopup an iubaip. Oo taod an 


& Mary's Abbey—This was the Carmelite O?Clery. 


abbey of Rathmullan.—See note ", under the " _ k The Abhainn-Mhor, i. e. the great river, 
year 1516, p. 1334, supra. now the River Blackwater, which flows for 


" Torach, now Tory Island, off the north coast several miles between the counties of Tyrone 
of the barony of Kilmacrenan, and county of and Armagh.—See note *, under the year 1483, 
Donegal.—See note *, under the year 1202,  p. 1125, supra. By Tip Eogain the Four Mas- 
p- 132, supra. ters, at this period, meant the entire territory 

' Revenge.—‘ Tappaccam a. o1ogail.”— possessed by the O’Neills, and the other fami- 


/ 


1595.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1969 


to commit depredations in Tirconnell; [and they sailed round], keeping Ireland 
to the right, until they put into the harbour of Swilly. They obtained an 
advantage of the country at this time, so that they plundered Mary’s Abbey*, 
which was [situated] on the brink of the Strand, and carried off the Mass vest- 
ments, chalices, and other valuable articles. They then sailed to Torach" (an 
island consecrated by St. Columbkille, the holy patron), and preyed and plun- 
dered every thing they found on the island, and then returned back to Sligo. 
O'Donnell having been informed of the spoliation of his territory, in his ab- 
sence, by strangers, he returned from Tyrone to revenge’ it; but his stay had not 
been long in Tirconnell when O’Neill’s messengers came to him to inform him that 
the Lord Justice had arrived with an army in Tyrone. He, thereupon, went back 
to the place where O’Neill was, who rejoiced at his arrival. The army brought by 
the Lord Justice (i. e. Sir William Russell) was very immense, for he had with 
him Sir John Norris, the Queen’s general in Ireland, and the Earl of Thomond 
(Donough, son of Conor O’Brien), with all their forces. These never halted 
until they arrived at Newry, from whence they proceeded to Armagh. Here 
they resolved not to delay, until they should reach the Abhainn-mhor*, in the 
very middle of Tyrone. On their march over the direct road from Armagh 
to this river, they beheld the fortified camp, and the strong battle-array of the 
Kinel-Owen and Kinel-Connell, under the Earl O'Neill and O'Donnell; and 
when the English army perceived this, they remained where they were' until 
the next morning, when they returned back to Armagh. The Irish went in 
pursuit of them, and pitched their camp near them. They remained thus face 
to face for the space of fifteen days, without any attack from either side"; for 
the Lord Justice and his army were within the fortifications of Armagh, [en- 
gaged in] erecting towers, and deepening the trenches around the town. At 
the expiration of this time the Lord Justice left three companies of soldiers to 
defend Armagh, and he himself returned to Newry; and the Irish went in 
pursuit to the gate of Newry. In a week afterwards the Lord Justice set out 


lies of the race of Eoghan. At an earlier period magh and Monaghan, and, more recently, those 
the River Abhainn-mhor, which was originally of Louth and Fermanagh. 

called the Dabhall, would be described, not as ! Where they were, literally, ‘in that place,” 
in the middle of Tir-Eoghain, but as flowing which is rather clumsy. 

between Tir-Eoghain and Oirghialla; for the m From either side, literally, “‘ without either 
latter territory comprised the counties of Ar- of them attacking the other.” 


hd RS 


1970 GNNAZA RIOFHACHTaA EIRECNN. [1595. 


lupcip po cfhd pectmaine iapccain Lé lon 50 Mumeacan. 
co na plog co hat chat. 


Oo cod appde 


Ni po lampaz soill aon cploiccead vo bpiit co hullcoib 50 cfno atcha 
lap pm, acc aon cpluaiccead aman vo ponad la Sip peon nononp, 7 la Sip 
Tomayp opip a deanbnacaip .1. ppeploenp Oa Cuiccid muman, 50 nfinse amac 
muimneac 7 mideac vo dol. m ullcob. Oo cuap leo co Muban cim cpaga, 
lan nooli ngan v0 Ue na conaipe 
omb 1p ann do palacap na Zaoioil pop a ccionn, 7 po Zabpac acca ccarlcc, 7 
acca ccenttin acct ttollad, 7 ace& ceplsoad co nan \iccpot coolaoh no 
longa pocnace no padarle vob pm pé chiteona nuaip ppicte. Ni po lérccead 
ona aon tTpoicch peaca pm an a nagshaid 1acc, 7 pobcan bwid15 a monte vo 
poctam a nanmann led tan a nap sup an iuban, 1an ppaccbenl oaoine, eac, 
capm, 7 edala co hholanoa o61b. Ro gonad an senepal Sin Seon nop, 7 Sin 


7 po cmallpac apmde co hapomaca. 


comap a ofnbpacaip don cup pin. 
ccéiccead 1ap pin. 


Nip bo bin baosail voibpide ool ipin 


lap poad von tTpeomnp: pempaicte co plicceac 1ap nopecam maimptpe 


" Towards Armagh.—This should evidently 
be ‘‘ towards Monaghan ;” for we are informed 
by P. O’Sullevan Beare, who seems to have had 
the account of the rencounter between the Earl 
of Tyrone and Segrave from living witnesses, 
that this conflict took place at Cluain-tibrat, 
near Monaghan. The following is O’Sullevan’s 
account of this conflict, but it rests on his tes- 
timony alone, for no older or contemporaneous 
writer has handed down any account of it, and 
all subsequent writers have merely copied him: 

‘* Norris dux tantus cum exercitu suo Auri- 
liam Macmagannorum ditionem ingressus non 
procul 4 Munichano in campum, qui Pratum 
Fontis dicitur, peruenit: vbi copias suas hosti 
spectandas prebet. Onellus imperator nihil im- 
peritior, sed viribus longé impar oceurrit. Ibi 
duarum bellicosisimarum insularum duo longé 
clarissimi duces primum signa conferunt. Erat 
ille lochs planicies aperta, & patens sed humidi- 
tate parum impedita. Ex circumiectis vliginibus 
aque confluentes vadum faciebant, per quod 


Qlud 
vadum Onellus obsidet; adire tentat Norris; 
eum remouere Onellus conatur. Equestris simul 


erat Anglis commodius transeundum. 


pugna, & bombardariorum velitatio circum va- 
dum incipit. Equites regij armorum munimine, 
Iberni hominum dexteritate prestabant. Iberni 
fulminatores collineandi scientia longé antecede- 
bant. 
tis vtriusque erat: nam in regio exercitu sepe 


Quod commodum szpius commune par- 
plures erant Iberni, quam Angli, Regij bom- 
bardarij bis a Catholicis confutati sunt, recla- 
mante Norrise, qui vltimus omnium pugna ex- 
cedebat. Ac sub eo quidem equus plumbea 
glande confossus cadit. Omnes partis vtriusque 
equites Macguieri non iniuria primas concesse- 
runt. Cum Norris egrius ferret suos bis reiectos 
locum non sustinuisse, Iaimus Sedgreius eques 
Ibernus Midhiensis corporis, & animi robore 
excellens ipsum, & Bagnalem ita alloquitur. 
Mittite mecum equitum turmam, & ego polliceor 
vobis, Onellum esse mihi ex ephippijs saltem 
detrahendum. Consistebat Onellus ab altera 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1971 


with provisions, to [victual] Monaghan, and from thence he proceeded with his 
army to Dublin. . 
For some time after this the English did not dare to bring any army into 
Ulster, except one hosting which was made by Sir John Norris and his brother, 
Sir Thomas Norris, the President of the two provinces of Munster, with the 
forces of Munster and Meath, to proceed into Ulster. They marched to Newry, 
and passed from thence towards Armagh". When they had proceeded near 
halfway, they were met by the Irish, who proceeded to annoy, shoot, pierce, and 
spear them, so that they did not suffer them either to sleep or rest quietly for 
the space of twenty-four hours. They were not permitted to advance forward 
one foot further; and their chiefs were glad to escape with their lives to Newry, 
leaving behind them many men, horses, arms, and valuable things. The General, 
Sir John Norris, and his brother, Sir Thomas, were wounded on this occasion. 
It was no [ordinary] gap of danger for them to go into the province after this. 


The aforesaid George [Bingham] returned to Sligo, after having plundered 


parte vadi quadraginta equitibus, & bombarda- 
rijs paucis stipatus, inde prelium contemplans, 
& imperia dans. Tertio equites, & bombardarij 
pugnam redintegrant. Et Sedgreius quidem 
comitatus turma electissimorum equitum Iber- 
norum, et Anglorum vadum aggreditur. In ipso 
vado pauci equites cadunt a scloperarijs corporis 


Onelli custodibus icti. Nihilominus Sedgreius 


in Onellum irruit: vterque in alterius lorica 


hastam frangit. Mox Sedgreius Onellum collo 
deprehensum ex equo deturbat; Onellus inui- 
cem Sedgreium ex equo detrahit : ambo in cer- 
tamen valide lucte manus conserunt: Onellus 
prosternitur, qui tamen animo tanto fuit, vt 
iacens Sedgreium sub lorica inter femina per 
genitalia stricto pugione confossum interfecerit. 
Circum Sedgreium octodecim equites splendidi 
regij succumbunt, & signum capitur: ceteri 
fuga salutem petunt: vna quoque omnes regi 
copie pedem referre coguntur, septingentis plus 
minus desideratis Catholici pauci sunt vulne- 
ribus affecti: eorum nullus memorabilis nume- 


rus occisus. Postero die redeuntem Norrisem, 


& nitrato puluere non satis abundantem Onellus 
secutus ad viam Finnuis infestius occurrit : vbi 


Ohanlonus summus exercitus regij signifer 
-crure vulneratur, & alij glandibus plumbeis 


confossi cadunt. Munichanum arcem, quam 
tribus peditum cchortibus, & equitum turma 
Hinchus Anglus tenebat, inedia coactus dedidit, 
ipse ex pacto incolumis dimittitur.”— Hist. 
Cathol. Iber., tom. 3, lib. 3, ¢. ii. 

.The name here written Sedgreius by O’Sul- 
levan, is written Segrave by the Abbé Ma- 
Geoghegan. The descendants of this gigantic 
warrior are still extant in the county of Wick- 
low, and the present head of the family is six 
feet eight inches in height. Lombard states, in 
his Commentaries, p. 345, that Sir John Norris 
bore high testimony to the valour, discipline, 
and military skill of O’Neill and his native Irish 
soldiers on this occasion, and that he expressed 
a wish that he had had their assistance in his 
services abroad. 

° No gap of danger.—This should be Oip ba 
beann baogail, &e. 


11 s2 


1972 ANNAZA RIOShHacnTa EIREGNHN. (1595. 


naom muime hi part maolain, 7 eccarlm colaim cille 1 tcopans, nip bo pooa 
an pe plo Léicc D1a 06 Fan a nate pap, uaip bof oume uapal vo bupcacaib 
Ina caoimteact co noib laocaib vécc 1 maille pp 2. wllecc a bine mac 
Oo pavad ovimicecmn 7 tancaipne vopide pect nan la 
Ro ba pfeance 4 po ba lonoup laippiom 


péemamnn na pecuab. 
Sopp) 7 lap na gallanb ap cna. 
nopin, 7 po baci ma mfmmain ate a dfmada an Sheoinp o1a ccaompad 4 
TOcT 1apom1 munceapup ui vomnall an ba veanb Lap sup bd hinmll 06 bAT 
ina pocaip. PFucip prom iapam baogal an ctpeomp pémpaice la naén via 
mbaof 1 naipfecal 1 nuachad pochae Reaime piom dia paced, 7 po Cup ma 
acca a aimdlicchead 7 a@ eccoip pap, 7 ni PRUcIN Fpeasna ba Lamn lap 
o na puain TaIppngio a cloioeam, 7 Imp Fain co po b(n a cho oia chil 
mfioe. Geibid an bale 1apam, 7 po paid a teacca co hat pfnang baal 1 
mbaccan muincip ul oomnall. Cummopide teacta co tin eogain apm 1 
inbaoi 6 vomnall peippn. Ac praoac a pcéla 06,47 at Cuaid plum don 1apla 
ua néilliapccam. Robcan pailio oiblimb oon manbao fpm. Celebnaio 
ua oomnaill oon 1apla an a banac, 7 ni po aap acc a noiwcib co na pluag 
laip 50 pcanice co plicceaé po serb peulce 7 00 pace uillfce a bine an baile 
06, 7 ba parm laap a mfnma. 1 mi 1an do ponad moym. 

Qn can ac cualaccan 1 mbaccan pon oibfince vo Coiccead conoact 
(1. banemg 1oécanac, clann noomnaill, Siol cconcobaip, Ruapcang, 7 clann 
maolpuanaid, 7 ni Mao aman acc a mbaccan ap poccpa 7 ap paomnel ian 
na natcup 7 1ap na monnanbad la brongamacenb 1 nullcoib 7 1 nionavaib ele ) 


® Rath-Maelain, now Rathmullan.—See note §, 
p- 1968, supra. 

° Redmond-na-Scuab, i.e. Redmond of the 
Sweeping Excursions. The word peuab, which 
is cognate with the Latin scopa, literally denotes 
a broom or besom. 

' Was offered iusultt—P. O’Sullevan Beare 
states, that Ulick Burke was vexed because the 
Irish soldiers, who had accompanied George 
Bingham into Tirconnell, had not received a 
fair dividend of the booty carried off from that 
country : 

‘“‘In Connachta Georgius Binghamus Iunior 
Sligacham arcem cum peditibus ducentis, quo- 


rum pars erant Iberni, tenebat. In qua presidij 
causa relicto Vlligo Burko Raymundi filio nobili 
Iberno cum parte militum, ipse cum ceteris in 
Vitoniam duobus phasellis vectus Rathmelanem 
municipium Macsuinnij Fanidi, qui tune abe- 
rat, inuadens monasterium Carmelitarum diripit, 
religiosis in arcem fugatis. Onustus preda Sli- 
gacham reuertitur. Cum divideretur preda, 
milites Iberni iure suo fraudati Vlligo videntur: 
qui cum iisdem agit, quemadmodum Binghami 
& Anglorum iniurias viciscantur. Diem qua 
castellum illis adimat, constituit. Ea cum ve- 
nisset, Iberni Anglos aggrediuntur. Binghamus 


ab Vlligo pugione confossus, & ceteri, vel occisi, 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1973 


the monastery of the Blessed Virgin at Rath-Maelain?’, and the church of 
St. Columbkille on Torach ; but God did not permit him to remain for a long 
~ time without revenging them upon him, for there was in his company a gentle- 
man of the Burkes, who had twelve warriors along with him, namely, Ulick 
Burke, the son of Redmond-na-Scuab*. Upon one occasion he was offered 
insult’ and indignity by George and the English in general, at which he felt 
hurt and angry ; and he resolved in his mind to revenge the insult on George, 
if he could, and afterwards to get into the friendship of O’Donnell, for he 
felt certain of being secure with him. He afterwards got an advantage of 
the aforesaid George, one day as he was in an apartment with few attendants ; 
he went up to him, and upbraided him with his lawlessness and injustice 
towards him, and as he did not receive a satisfactory answer, he drew his sword, 
and struck at him till he severed his head from his neck. He then took the 
castle, and sent messengers to Ballyshannon, where O’Donnell’s people then 
were ; and these dispatched messengers to Tyrone, where O’Donnell himself 
was. They relate the news to him, and he then went to the Earl O’Neill; and 
both were much rejoiced at that killing. On the following day O’Donnell bade 
the Earl farewell, and, setting out with his army, did not halt, except by night, 
He was welcomed ; and Ulick Burke delivered up 
the town to him, which made him very happy in his mind. This happened in 
the month of June. 

When intelligence of the death of George Bingham, and the taking of Shgo, 
came to the hearing of those of the province of Connaught who were in insur- 
rection, namely, the Lower Burkes, the Clann-Donnell, the Sil-Conor’, the _ 
Rourkes, and the Clann-Mulrony‘, and not these alone, but also those who had 
been proclaimed, and roving after having been expelled and banished into Ulster 


until he arrived at Sligo. 


vel fuga salutem petentes deuastate religiose 
domus Carmelitarum peenas sacrilegi luerunt. 
Arx Odonello traditur, qui in ea Viligum pre- 
sidio prefecit. Sub idem quoque tempus Bale- 
anmotam castellum Georgio Binghamo Maiori 
Tumultachus, & Cathalus Macdonache eri- 
piunt.”’—Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, 
lib. 3, c. iii. fol. 139. 

s Sil-Conor.—These were the O’Conors of 


Sligo. The O’Conors of Machaire-Chonnacht, in 
the county of Roscommon, were, at this period, 
loyal to the English sovereign.—See Memoirs 
of the Life and Writings of Charles O’ Conor of 
Belanagare, p. 112. 

t The Clann-Mulrony.—This was the tribe- 
name of the Mac Dermots of Moylurg, in the 
county of Roscommon, and of the Mac Donoughs 
of Tirerrill and Corran, in the county of Sligo. 


1974 AQNNaza RIOshachta ElREGNN. (1595. 


manbad Seoinpi, 7 Zabaal pliceis cangzaccap 90 parsio ui Domnanll go pliccec, 
| 00 COD Fac aon aca laparh vo pag a atapda oilps badémn, 7 Zac arce- 
neabtas oan cuippic soll ina pefpanoanb (ina cane baccan pon an pocena) 
po sabrac leé map luce Linamna on ucnp pm amac. b6atcap 1apam epmon 
a paibe o pimn 1antapaice roppanp, 7 umanll co opobaoip oaon pann, 7 oaon 
aonca La hua noomnaill po cfno aon mopa. Nip b6 hiomoa caiplén n6 com- 
pamsth ip na cimb pm nac baot plan no bpipte pop a cumap pip an pé 
céontt. 

Tanace 6 comnaill iapam co otn na ngall, 7 bai 1 hipwde 50 meadon 
Ro haypnhdead vo pve tapccap albanac vo teacc 1 ccip itloc 
pebarl 1. Mac leovo na hana, 00 taéd pide Cuca dia PpoPTad. 


auguye. 
Sé céo pob- 
pap ito a Lion, J 1ap mbAc achad pm cip ian liceth a pop, 7 a mfipcm, 4 
ian na ppopcad lap, no cfeclamant a ploga co na amparb lap, 7 locan can 
eine, tap opobaoip, cap ouib capp an plceicch, can (p noana, cap plab 
n5am, 50 luigne appaide co pcamice Zo soipvealbachab. Gai 1onaccact 4 
catcpeabao ag Zallonb hi ccaiplén mon mec Sorpoealbarg an can pin, 7 po Zab 
ua oomnall co na plégaib ace 1ompuide an baile sun 66 hficcfn von banva 
an bale oo tabaint uata po deo1d. Oo tacd 1apam go pace ot mon 
mec peonaip. To pecaoilpoc a pecermelta 50 conmaicne, 50 mumein mup- 
chada, 50 Lacimel an macaine prabons, 7 50 Tuam oa sualamn. Ro sabao 
led cuplac mocam,7 pochaide mon 00 manthib an tine 1m Ripoeno mac mec 
peonaip. Rocpeachad 7 po lépmopead an cip na nuintimceall leo co pucc- 
pac a cpod, 7 a cltpa a hhonnmara, 7 a hevala ooneoc sup a pangaccan, 4 
poaic pon cculanb. 

Oc cualaid Zobepnoin coiceid Connacct .1. Sin Ripoepo bingam 6 oomnanll 
oo ool tap plan hi cconnaccaib po ciondil poe coice banna véce do pars- 


" The Sligeach, i.e. the river of Sligo, now 
called the Gity. 

“ Castlemore-Mac- Costello, i. e. Mac Costello’s 
great castle.—See note *, under the year 1284, 
p. 441, supra. 
he Dunmore-Mic-Feorais, i, e. the great dun or 
fort of Mac Feorais, or Bermingham, now Dun- 
more, eight miles to the north of Tuam-da- 
chualann, or Tuam, in the county of Galway.— 


See note *, under the year 1284, p. 441, supra. 

¥ Conmaicne.—The barony of Kilmaine, in 
the county of Mayo, was called Conmaicne Cuile 
Toladh, and the barony of Dunmore, in the 
county of Galway, was called Conmaicne Cineil 
Dubhain.—See map to Tribes and Customs of 
Hy-Many. 

* Muintir-Murchadha, a district comprising at 
this period about the northern half of the ba- 


1595. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1975 


and other places, by the Binghams, they came to O’Donnell to Sligo; and each 
of them went afterwards to his own patrimonial inheritance ; and every inha- 
bitant whom the English had established in their lands danme the period of 
their proscription adhered to them as followers from that hour forth. In the 
course of one month the greater part of the inhabitants of the district, from the 
western point of Erris and Umhall to the Drowes, had unanimously confede- 
rated with O'Donnell ; and there were not many castles or fortresses in those 
places, whether injured or perfect, that were not under his control. 

O’Donnell then went to Donegal, and remained there till the middle of 
August. He was informed that a number of Scots had landed at Lough Foyle, 
with their chief, Mac Leod of Ara; he went thither to hire them. 
six hundred in number. 


They were 
After being hired by him, and after remaining some 
time to rest and recruit themselves, he assembled his forces and hirelings, and 
they marched across the Erne, the Drowes, the Duff, the Shgeach", and Eas- 
The 
English held at that time abode and residence in Castlemore-Mac-Costello” 
O'Donnell with his forces laid siege to this castle ; and the warders were finally 
obliged to surrender it. He then proceeded to Dunmore-Mic-Feorais*, and 
dispatched marauding parties into Conmaicne’, Muintir-Murchadha’, to the bor- 
ders of Machaire-Riabhach’, and.to Tuam-da-ghualann. They took Turlach- 
Mochain’, and a great number of the chiefs of the country, together with 
Richard, the son of Mac Feorais. They plundered and totally ravaged the 
country all around them, and carried off its flocks and herds, its wealth and 
riches, from all those they had met on their route, and [then] returned back. 
When the Governor of the province of Connaught, namely, Sir Richard 
Bingham, heard that O'Donnell had passed by him westwards into Connaught, 
he assembled fifteen companies of soldiers, both horse and foot, and marched 


dara, across Sliabh-Gamh, into Leyny, and from thence into Costello. 


rony of Clare, and county of Galway. It appears 
from an Inquisition taken at Athenry in 1584, 
that the Earl of Clanrickard had a chief rent of 
twenty marks per annum, out of the territory 
or cantred called Moyntermoroghow, in which 
the abbey of Rosserill is situated.—See Choro- 
graphical Description of Iar-Connaught, p. 368. 
* Machaire-Riabhach.—See note *, under the 


year 1469, p. 1064, supra. 

> Turlach-Mochain, i.e. Mochan’s dried lough, 
now Turlough-vohan, near Tuam, barony of Dun- 
more, and county of Galway. In the Life of 
Hugh Roe O’Donnell, Turlach Mochain is called 
acastle in the country of Mac Feorais: ‘‘ Cup- 
lac Mocan carpaiall poe pil 1 noutaig meic 
feonaip.”” 


1976 GANNQGZa RIOshachta elReEAaNnN. [1595. 


oipib ecin mancaca 47 tTpoisteaca co pcinice 50 muincinec coippyleibe an 
das ammcap vo tabaunet fon ua noomnaill ace tionntud dia eactpa. lan 
na flor yin vua vomnanll po pillpioe cap a arp biuce co na aipcetib 7 co na 
évalaib on ccampa 50 cele 50 Zoipvealbchaib, 50 ligne o1ioccan 6 narlella 
cpép na cmb opoicfoab 1. onoicle cmle maoile, opoicle baile (ya oana, 
7 opoiclt pligise. 
pangaccan ip na conarmb pin. 
mancpluaig, ] po fopcongain poppa capipim 1 nofinead a plas an nac pas- 
baiccip uptopac an cyplois gall siollannad, n6 aop o1cipm oa MuMtp pum 


baccap cpa soll acca 1apmoinecc amail ay oéine con- 
Ro Hompdehg(pcain ua oomnaill opm 


1 mbaogal. Raimicc prum ianam co na chneachanb lap san nac ppotonccain 
co miact 1 ccompocnaib sleanoa vallamn. Canaice an sobepndip pon a loncc 
co no sab longpopc 1 mampcin pliccig opopbay pop banoaib us vomnaill 
baccan ip ccauplén. Ro patd ua vomnaill an a banac bmo(n mancplag oo 
taipcélad ponp na Zallaib, 7 Oprop pecél an ofmand 7 na noce baccan ano 
co pangaccan 50 himeal bond na habann sur an cenoc dia nganan Rat oa 
bplotoce, 7 atv ciad na soill pancan peacnén an banle. 

Ro bai 6cclaoc uallac bopppadac 1 ppannad Sip Ripoepo an can pin po 
ba mac pftan 06 buddfin captm mantm a ainm. Cp eppide ba cofpeac 
Ni po pulang pioe deccpan a namact 1 ccompoccup 06 Zan 
a ppuabaint, 7 tainice co na diopma cap opoicle plugis: anall. Od ciad 
muincip ui oomnaill iad via pausio poaic pon cctla (o nac pabaccap coimlion 


mapcplog 00. 


ppiu) amail ap véine connangaccap. Tiaganc na soll na noimid, 7 nip cap- 


paccap 1oIn poait 1apam pon ccula. Ro aipnhopioc muinzip uf oomnanll a 
rceéla, 7 amail po bap occa troospaim, 7 amail oo épnaipios la luap a nic. 
lan ccloipcect an pcecedil pin la hua noomnaill ba pé cance ap painice lay 


Ro clam 


celcc vo modell pon ciond na nallmuipeac ipm cconain ccéona. 


© Top.—* Muineinn «1, uaccan.”—O’ Clery, in 
Leabhar Gabhala, p. 3. 

4 Cul-maoile-—This was the old name of the 
place now called Cul-Mhuine, anglice Colooney. 
According to the tradition in the country the 
castle of Cul-Maoile was some distance from the 
present village of Colooney; but if we can rely 
on the maps of Connaught made about this pe- 
riod, the castle of Collounie, opposite which 


was the bridge, stood on the south side of the 
River Owenmore, close to where it receives a 
This is the exact 
situation of the present village of Colooney, 


stream from Loughdargan. 


which is certainly the Cul-Maoile referred to 
above in the text by the Four Masters. 

* Gleann-Dallain, a remarkable valley, situ- 
ated partly in the county of Sligo, and partly in 


Leitrim. The church of Cill-Osnata, now Kil- 


1595. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1977-7 


to the top® of the Coirrshliabh [Curlieu hills], with the intention of making an 
attack upon O'Donnell, on his return from his expedition. When O'Donnell 
received intelligence of this, he soon returned back, with his preys and spoils, 
from one encampment to the other, through Costello, Leyny, the lower part 
of Tirerrill, and over the three bridges, namely, the bridge of Cul-maocile*, the 
bridge of Ballysadere, and the bridge of Sligo. Through these passages the 
English went in pursuit of him as quickly as they could. O’Donnell detached 
a troop of cavalry, and ordered them to fall to the rear of his army, to prevent 
the van of the English army from coming into collision with the attendants or 
unarmed portion of his people. He afterwards moved on with his preys, till 
he reached the neighbourhood of Gleann-Dallain*, without any opposition. 

The Governor followed in his track, and took up his quarters in the monas- 
On the 
next day O’Donnell sent a party of cavalry to reconnoitre the English, and learn 
the state of the fortress, and of the men‘ who were in it; and they advanced 
to the banks of the river, to the hill which is called Rath-Dabhritog®, from which 
they espied the English moving up and down" throughout the town. » 

There was at this time along with Sir Richard his own sister’s son, a proud 
and haughty youth, Captain Martin by name, who was the commander of his 
cavalry. He could not bear to see his enemies so near him without attacking 
them, and proceeded with his squadron across the bridge of Sligo. When 
O’Donnell’s people perceived them advancing, they returned back as speedily 
as they were able, as they were not equal to them in number. The English 
pursued them ;sbut not overtaking them, they returned back. O’Donnell’s 
people then related how they had been pursued, and how they had escaped by 
means of the swiftness of their horses. When O’Donnell heard this story, the 
resolution he came to was, to lay a snare for the foreigners on the same passage. 


tery of Sligo, to besiege O’Donnell’s warders who were in the castle. 


asnet, in the barony of Dartry, or Rossclogher, 
in the county of Leitrim, is in it.—See Colgan’s 
Acta Sanctorum, p. 337. 

f Of the men, literally, ‘‘ of the youths.” 

8 Rath-Dabhritog, i. e. Dabhritog’s rath, or fort, 
now Rath hill, in the townland of Rathquarter, 
in the parish of Calry, barony of Carbury, Sligo. 
In the deed of partition of the Sligo estate, dated 


21st July, 1687, this townland is called Raghta- 
bretoke, Rathavritoge, alias Rath. The fort on 
this hill commands the entire town of Sligo. It 
is a square fort, evidently constructed from the 
materials of the original one during the civil 
wars of 1641, or 1688. 

Up and down.—“ Sancan .1.anonn 4 anall.” 


—O’ Clery. 


j iD Nae 


1978 aNNaza RIOshachta erReaNn. [1595. 


lapam an céd mapcac po ba veac oa pluag co comb céoaib tnoigteac co 
na ctpealmaib o1ubnaict 1. probaca co na parg(c bolccaib. Ro popcongain 
fonpa celce vo mneall pa mile vo plicceac, 7 ofpim blee mancpluais opaoto- 
ead uaca co himel bono na haband vo bnécead an cplors Fall, o1a criopta 
ma Limam san capipiom pp hiomarplce co poccamn 0616 can an margin m po 
hmolead an celcc. Oo ponad paippium pin ule. Oc connaine captin mantm 
an tuachad mancyploig pon up na habann vo cod co nodipim mon mancrplos 
a manlle pip ola ccéctTappaccam lLocap pom plmpa co hionmall améepecard 
an ccéona peact, nip bo clan vo na hoceab 1anam sun bod héice(n ooib 
bit acc eaclopccad a neac la a dfine 7 la a diogape po baccap Zoll ma 
noeavhaid. Ro cuinedd oeipead pop aon oiobmde 1. perlim mabac mac 
daueld, dict camdeoin La hionmanlle,a ec co nap bo cualains pnlpoal a muin- 
cine, 7 50 mbo hficcfn 06 campiom pm a noaamoib, 7 Teact tap popcongspa a 
TIZeapna 1. Tocap vo Fp na Zallaib. O pob enodalca lap a manbad po 
céoon.  Somp a shard pnp an ci ba nfpam 06 oon luct bacan ina Liman, 7 
pob eplde captin mayitin, 7 acc coccbail a Lamhe oopide In orncill a apm 
vIMIpT Pop an ci vo pala in eccomlann pop a cionn do pad peilim a méun hi 
puain(m an poga bai occa 1 neplame oia od1ubpaccad co po amaip captin 
maptin 1 ndeipc a occpanlle cec noipeac Fup tpesoaycaip a cmode ma chab. 
ba hose pium cpa cenmoca an tionad pin cmap po saocta. Jompaio na 
soll pon cctla rap nguin a ccpfinpip 7 a ccoipis 1omsona,7 vo benad leo hé 
pop iomcap paon potappna 1 ppanncany~ib écca co pangaccan an baile, 7 
puain bap m aohags pin. Ov connainc 6 vomnall na soll vo poad pon 


' Bank of the river.—P. O’Sullevan Beare says cum mille, & sexcentis militibus auxilia venire 
that Rothericus, the brother of O’Donnell, and. festinat. Apud Duraranem in hostis conspectu 
Felimy Mac Davet, crossed the river; but his tentoria pandit. Duobus primis diebus interla- 


account of this transaction seems anything but bens flumen vtriusque partis equitatus adequi- 


correct. His words are as follows: tans iaculis leuiter vltrocitroque velitatur. 


“ Sequente autumno, sub quod tempus Norris Tertio die Rothericus Odonelli frater cum Fel- 
cum Onello minus prospero marte contendit, mio Macdaveto, & alio equite fluuium traiectus 


tichardus Binghamus ad Sligacham recuperan-  castra contemplatur. In illum Martin Anglus, 


dam, & occisi consanguinei penas de Vlligo qui in Binghami exercitu prestantissimus eques 
sumendas facit expeditionem. Vlligum Sliga- habebatur, procurrit, turma sua, cuius dux 
che obsidione cinctum oppugnat. Vlligus cum erat, stipatus. Rothericus admisso equo ad suos 
propugnatoribus egressus pro munitionibus adcurrit. Martin sequens suorum primus va- 
. quotidie certat. Odonellus obsidionem soluturus dum  traijiciebat. Quem Felmius conuersus 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1979 


He then selected one hundred of the best horsemen of his army, and three hun- 
dred infantry with their shooting implements, namely, bows with their arrow- 
quivers ; he ordered them to lie in ambush within a mile of Sligo, and to send 
a small squadron of horse to the banks of the river, to decoy the English army; 
and should they [the foreigners] pursue them, not to wait for an engagement, 
until they should have come beyond the place where the ambuscade was laid. 
This was accordingly done. When Captain Martin perceived the small squadron 
of cavalry on the bank of the river’, he advanced directly with a numerous 
body of cavalry, to wreak his vengeance upon them. The others at first moved 
slowly and leisurely before them, but these young heroes were soon obliged to 
incite their horses forward, the English having pursued them with such speed 
and vehemence. One of them, namely, Felim Reagh Mac Devit", was [how- 
ever] compelled to remain behind, in consequence of the slowness of his horse; 
and, being unable to accompany his own people, he was obliged to disobey the 
orders of his lord, that is, to fight the English [before he had passed the ambus- 
cade]. As he was certain of being immediately slain, he turned his face to the 
nearest of his pursuers, who was Captain Martin ; and, as he [Captain Martin] 
raised his arm to strike his antagonist with his weapon, Felim placed his finger 
on the string of the javelin, which he had in readiness to discharge, so that he 
struck Captain Martin directly in the arm-pit, and pierced his heart in his breast. 
He was covered with mail, except in the spot where he was wounded. The 
English, seeing their champion and commander mortally wounded, returned 
back, carrying him, in his weakly condition, and in the agonies of death, in a 
recumbent posture, to the town, where he died on that night. When O’Donnell 
saw that the English had retreated, he was enraged, until the decoying party 


hasta traiectum, & interfectum in ipso flumine the head of the Mac Devits of Inishowen, who 
equo deturbat, & ipse cum Rotherico, & alio are, according to Cucogry O’Clery, a branch of 
commilitone incolumis euasit. Postero die ob- the O’Dohertys, and the very man who after- 
sidionis quarto, Binghamus, obsidio relicto do- wards burned the town of Derry, from which 
mum redit, quem Odonellus secutus missilibus circumstance the Mac Devits are even to this 
carpit.”—Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, day called ‘ Burnderrys” by their Presbyterian 
libs. 3,5 ¢aduifoly 140; neighbours. They are at present a very nume- 

K Felim Reagh Mac Devit.—He is still vividly _ rous sept in the neighbourhood of Londonderry, 
remembered in the traditions of the barony of and throughout the barony of Inishowen, in the 
Inishowen, in the county of Donegal. He was county of Donegal. 


1 la wep 


1980 AQNNAZa RIoshachta elRECANN. [1595. 


cctlaib po lomeagead eippive co po tomppioc luct na pdppuabanca cap 
cfnd pelim co na baoi ni via mdeaszanl san a manbad la captin mancim 
act mad an caén ponccom pin. Ro clatagepcain a mfnma ianam 6 pan- 
Zaccan pcéla cuicce ap a banac co po écc an capzin. 

Oala an gobepnona po lion poe OpAnce 7 do Lonnap iap manbad a bnactap, 
| po Poncongaip pon a plog cadme cogla an caipceoil vo dénam led dup an 
ccaémpaccip a ensabonl pon muimcip uf oomnanll bacan ann. Oo ponad 
leo pom moypin vo Cnanncaingel 7 00 cCubaclaib na ccéiled nvé, 7 0a Zac 
come pangacap a lfp bat ipm mampeim. Oo paota iapam picloa b6 7 vam 
pop na hondmib pin dia neaccaip. Ro puccta beop potada paof via pds- 
luapacc gup an ounaid. Ro lionta 1anam vo Laocpard, 7 00 latab sarte, 7 
vo paonaib 1 ppormom cogla an baile. Ro ctpéncaippnsf léo an lateac 
pin la vopcacca uptoppargs na howée co po puigte hé pm hullinn an caip-_ 
ceoil, 7 Zaberc pon pcaoilead an main iapccain batcan oimd pao ipm 
mbanle, 7 po sabpac acc blooad an balla po a nfrcomanp vo diubpaccad a 


' Bore testimony, po toinspioc.—In the Life 
of Hugh Roe O’Donnell the reading is: 

“ Oup piccfe pianlaé na pappuabanza hi 
ppeacnancup na placa (sép ba ooilig 0616 iz 
ap aioble a puapna) j azz piadazt amail oo 
pala d01b, 7 po coingpfe ule oap c¢fno an 
cupaid po Fon captin mapzin na bui ni nom 
benad app muna capoad an caon ponszomh 
The 
soldiers of the ambuscade came in the presence 
of the chief (though it was difficult for them to 


rm senmoca cumacca an coimdead. 


do so, on account of the intensity of his anger), 
and they related how it happened with them; 
and they all testified, in behalf of the champion 
who had” [mortally ] ‘‘ wounded Captain Martin, 
that nothing could have saved him except that 
one thrust, except the power of the Lord.” 
Here it will be observed that the language 
of the apology for Mac Devit is defective; for 
the cause of O’Donnell’s anger was, not be- 
cause Felim Reagh had saved himself by killing 
Captain Martin, but because he had remained 
behind the decoying party, and thus prevented 


O’Donnell’s ambuscade from cutting off the 
English pursuers. The apology should be thus 
worded: “ And they all bore testimony, in behalf 
of Felim, that his horse was lame, and that he 
could not by any exertion have prevented him- 
self from being overtaken by the enemy in the 
manner in which he was, and they shewed that 
this was demonstrated by the imminent danger 
to which he was brought, for that no human 
calculation could have anticipated that he alone 
could have killed a warrior cased in armed mail, 
at the head of a fierce troop of cavalry, or even, 
if he could, that this would have caused so select 
a body of cavalry to run away from a single Irish 
horseman, leaving their captain’s mortal wound 
unrevenged. O’Donnell, on considering that 
the laming of Mac Devit’s horse was accidental, 
and that it could not have been prevented by 
any precaution, suppressed his anger; and his 
mind was much consoled on hearing of the death 
of the haughty young Englishman.” 

™ Crannchaingedl, i.e. the latticed partition di- 
viding the chancel from the nave, in the abbey 


1595. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1981 


bore testimony’ in behalf of Felim, [that his horse was lame, which prevented 
him from keeping up with his party, and] that there was nothing to have saved 
him from being slain by Captain Martin, excepting the one [chance] thrust ; 
but his anger afterwards subsided when news reached him on the next day 
that the Captain had died. 

As for the Governor, he was filled with anger and fury after the killing of 
his kinsman; and he ordered his army to construct engines for demolishing the 
castle, to see whether they could take it from O’Donnell’s people who were in 
it. This they constructed of the crannchaingel", and of the bed-chambers of 
the Culdees’, and of other implements which they found befitting for the pur- 
pose in the monastery. They covered these engines on the outside with the 
hides of cows and oxen, and wheels were put under them to remove them to 
the fortress. They were afterwards filled with heroes, warriors, and artisans, 
for the purpose of razing the castle. This mighty tram® was drawn by them in 
the beginning of the night to the corner of the castle ; and they immediately 
proceeded to destroy the wall. At this time some artisans who were within 


the castle began to pull down the opposite wall, in order that the youths within 


church. 
laecaib 7 cleineib.”— Cormac’s Glossary. 
2 Culdees.—Here the term céile vé is used to 


“ Cnanncaingel «1. cpanncliat zip 


denote monks, or friars, 

° Mighty train.—The engines constructed by 
Bingham on this occasion were called sows. Sir 
George Carew, in his Pacata Hibernia, vol. i. 
p- 124 (Dub. ed.), thus speaks of one of them: 

“The castle, therefore, they besiege, and 
» placed an Engine, well known in this country, 
called a sovy, to the walls thereof, to supp the 
But the Defendants did so well acquit 
themselves in a sally, as they tare the sovv in 
peeces, made her caste her pigs, and slevv tvventy- 
seven of them dead in the place.’’ 


same. 


P. O’Sullevan Beare calls this machine, “ mu- 
chum Bellicum,” and describes this siege of the 
castle of Sligo briefly, but clearly and elegantly, 
in the following words: 

‘“‘ Neque Binghamus quidem dormit. Tomo- 
nie, & Clanrickarde Comites Ibernos euocat : 


_diarios, et equites Angloibernos recipit. 


Connactz delectum habet: Midhienses presi- 
Cum 
signis militaribus viginti quatuor Sligacham 
obsidione vallatam oppugnat. Vlligus Burkus 
cum propugnatoribus egressus cum munition- 
ibus acriter dimicat. Tandem ab oppugnatorum 
multitudine in arcem compulsus, ex turribus, 
pinnis, fenestris, et reliquis munitionibus mis- 
silia iaculando hostes arcet. Regij muchum bel- 
licum” [muc cogaid | “* machinamentum militi- 
bus subter agentibus arcis muro admouent, 
murumque forare, & subruere incipiynt, Viligus 
magne molis trabe funibus ligata ex arcis fas- 
tigio nunc dimissa, nunc in altum‘sublata mu- 
chum, & milites, qui sub eo latebant, conterit. 
Odonellus obsessis auxilio veniens appropinquat. 
Binghamus fugit. In oppugnatione regi) sex- 
centi milites obierunt. Arcem vero quod erat 
tam laboriosum, defendere, Odonellus demoli- 
tur.” —Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 3, 
c. iv. fol. 140, 141. 


1982 QNNaza RIOSshachta EIREGNN. 


mbiodbad vo na hoccarb baccap iptig. Oo covan anal ele von banda fon 
cablib an ounaid, 7 po sabpac pop cealccad tatleac ccyimpte, 7 cannacec 
cefnoganb poppa anuap sombcap miona mionbptice sac ni pup a ccom- 
paiccip. Tiagad tna opong ele vo lucc an baile pon peneptmbh 4 fon 
poplépaib an caupceorl, 7 sabare, pop o1abpaccavh a nubenll mealluare, 4 
a TTfoM Caon TTEIMNTIDE Poppa Fo po poippsicc an prallac bas 1p na cumvars- 
z1b clanaig oon cloictpeap, 7 von dian noubnpaccad pin. Ni po puilngic lap 
na salloab a cepéccnuccad ni bad m6, 7 6 na po péopac nf von ovéinadvh po 
fasaibple a cclSoay cogalca mtn, 7 pot ma premcms op 1ac bedgonca, 
7 pobcap burdis do poccain a nanmancc leo. ba cnad cide lap an ngobep- 
noin Sip Ripoeno bingam na caemnaccarp a aincmde ormipc pon banoab an 
vunald, Na Pop nac naon vo mumceip f vomnanll, 7 impodfoip pop a aap cap 
coppylab, cap mag nao co pamicc Roppcommam. Oo dveacaroh 6 vomnall 
ianam can éipne, 7 po léicc a albanmns uada ian ccabaipt a ctouapupcarl 
vdib. Caio tan a aip co plicceac co po bmp lap an carplén ouaman sall 
ola auTtpeabad. 

Cepoitc a bine mac uacéin ciotais, mic plam, mic olluencap mic Stain 
vo Zabaal popbaip: pon bel leice, benle pin 1 mbantntacc cipe hamalgano i 
cconntae maiged, 7 ba nav banoa an sobepnona baccan ano. lap poccam 
na peél pin sup an ngobepnosip, po Fonoanl pon a oveanbpacain 1. captin John 
bingam, an captin poal, ap captm mennypi 7 an a mac mlham bmde oto 
co nopuing mop do daoimb uaiple ele a maille pp vol opuncacc an baile 
co lon co napmail via past, 7 api paimice leo an bapoa opoipromn 
puain cepoicc a bine an bale. Ciagmopium tan a nap fo catmela, 7 po 
Zab cepoictce acca ctonmseact, acca coplsoad, 7 acca toimceallad aga 
mbuaidpead, 7 acca mbapuccad can an caomlaoi co po paccarbpioc vaoine, 
apm,7 €10ead 1omda. Ro manbad lap an la pin captin foal, captin mennyy, 


-] mac odpeacca uilham oud, 7 pocade ele 00 paopclanoab, 7 00 daop- 
° Tt preyed, literally, “It was anguish of heart of Kilmore-Moy, barony of Tirawley, and county 


to the Governor.” of Mayo.—See Genealogies, Tribes, and Customs of 
a, >) 


9 Bel-leice, i.e. Mouth of the Ford of the Flag, 
translated os rupis, by P. O’Sullevan Beare in 
Hist. Cathol. Iber., §c., fol. 136, now Belleek, a 
rocky ford on the River Moy, about a mile to 
the north of the town of Ballina, in the parish 


Hy-Fiachrach, p. 480, and the map to the same 
work. In an old map of parts of the coasts of 
Mayo, Sligo, and Donegal, preserved in the 
State Papers’ Office, London, this castle is shewn 


under the name of “Ca: Bellecke,” as on the 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1983 


might hurl the stones down on their enemies. Some of the warders also 
ascended to the battlements of the castle, and proceeded to cast down massy 
flags and ponderous, rough rocks, which broke and shattered to pieces every 
thing on which they fell. Others within the castle went to the windows and 
loopholes, and commenced discharging leaden bullets and showers of fire upon 
them ; so that the soldiers who were in the wooden engines were bruised by 
that dropping of the stones, and by the incessant firmg. The English did not 
remain to be wounded further; and, findme that they could effect nothing 
against the castle, they abandoned their wall-destroying domicile, and returned 
home, severely wounded, and glad to escape with their lives. It preyed? upon 
the heart of the Governor, Sir Richard Bingham, that he was not able to wreak 
his vengeance upon the warders of the fortress, or on any of O’Donnell’s people. 
He returned: back [homeward] across the Curlieus, and over Moy-Nai, [never 
halting] until he arrived at Roscommon; and O’Donnell [also] returned [home- 
ward] across the Erne, and discharged the Scots, having paid them their wages. 
He went back to Sligo, and demolished the castle, lest the English should 
inhabit it. 

Theobald Burke, the son of Walter Kittagh, son of John, son of Oliver, son 
of John, laid siege to Bel-leice’, a castle in the barony of Tirawley, in the county 
of Mayo; and it was then defended by the Governor’s warders. When the 
Governor received intelligence of this, he ordered his brother, Captain John 
Bingham, Captain Foal’, Captain Mensi, the son of William Boy Tuite, with 
many other gentlemen, to go to the relief of the castle with provisions and arms ; 
but, before they could relieve the warders, Theobald had obtained possession 
of the castle. They then returned home in sorrow ; and Theobald went in 
pursuit of them, piercing, surrounding, disturbing, and slaying them throughout 
that fair day, so that they lost many men, [and much] arms and armour. On 
this day he slew Captain Foal, Captain Mensi, and the son and heir of William | 
Tuite, with many others, both of the gentlemen and common people, not enu- 


west side of the River Moy, a short distance to Dudus, i.e. Tuite, an Anglo-Irishman; by Hugh 
the north of the point where it receives the and William Mosten, the sons of an Englishman, 
River Brosnagh. by an Irish mother; George Bingham, junior, 
* Foal.—P. O’Sullevan Beare calls him Fool- and Minche, who were Englishmen.—See Fist. 
lurtus, and states that he was accompanied by  Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 2, ¢. xii. 


- 


1984. GNNAta RIOsHachtTa EIREGNN. [1595. 


clanoaib naé aipméean. 6a vo conad Mgnama, eippiomail, 7 cateanpas 
eolaip po imtig sac a noeachcnd ap ofb an la pin. 

O Neill coinpdealbac luineac mac néill conallars, mic caupt, mic cunn 
mic enpii, mic eosain vo éce. ba hepvde aen ap.mo po veanlarc dionnmapanb 
7 vevalaib vérecyib, 7 ovollamnaib, 7 00 luct cuins(oa neith vo TiZeannadaib 
€Epeann ma compe, ucip po heppuaccpad uaidpide co mini fo enim oa 
sac aen bai la mappa nfic cowdeact ina vocom 1 ppéilib Zeme an cormde 
do fonnpad, ] 14a na ccappaccam ni cTHsZld aen po diomda uada Fan map ; 
cis(ina aga mbivip pocade ile pon a cullme 7 pon a cuapupcol, c1sCpna 
po ba poconang pm pid, 7 po ba comnant pn coccad conoup pala aofp, 7 
enipte 006, 7 po honoangfd odpe ma ionad vere mbliadna ma na bap ap an 
bpanlimenc po consmad mn at chat 1 namm na bamnpiosna elipabeth 1. Coo 
mac an pipoonca (1. an banun), mic cum mic cumn, mic enn, mic eosain 
oa po Zarpo 1apla ap an bpanlimine pin. 64 hand acbat ua nell pin pnac 
mban, 7 a& adnacet m ano pnaca. 

Mag aéngupa aod mac aoda, mic vommarll dice pp a atapda po bad mo 
cinm 7 epoeancup 1 ppladnony sall 7 saoidel eneann vécc Fo peaccnac. 

Compodealbac mac bia mic vonnchaid, mic vonnchad bacans TIFeapna 
conea banpemn iancantaise, pip po ba mon chips 7 cuapupecbarl an puo 
eneann oo pnéip a atanda (uain ni bar occa act tuca Céd nama) do écc 7 
a mac taocc catoc Do Zabaul a ion. 

Remann na pecuab mac wlhlce na 
Tuas dO Ecc. 


ccfno, mic Riocaino mic ullice cnuic 


S Superior knowledge, aiteapnaigy eolary.— of rent; but it was provided that the sons of 


The word aizeanpac, which is spelled aiziopac 
in O’Reilly’s Dictionary, signifies craft, science, 
or skill. 

‘ An hew.—This is not exactly correct, for 
the Parliament held at Dublin in 1585 only 
conceded to his rival, Hugh, the rank and title 
of the Earldom of Tyrone, leaving the posses- 
sions to be annexed thereunto, to the pleasure 
of her Majesty. In 1587 the Queen granted to 
Hugh, by letters patent, under the great seal of 
England, the Earldom of Tyrone, and the inhe- 
ritance annexed to it, without any reservation 


the late Shane O’Neill should have sufficient 
provisions allotted to them, and that Turlough 
[ Luineach ] should be continued Irish chieftain 
of Tyrone, with a right of superiority over Ma- 
cuire and O’Cahan. It appears from a patent, 
20th Elizabeth, that the Queen had intended to 
create Turlough Luineach Ear] of Clanoneill and 
Baron of Clogher; butit is quite clear that this 
patent was never perfected, as his son, Arthur, 
who makes so conspicuous a figure in the great 
There are still 
extant several Irish poems, addressed to Tur- 


rebellion, was simply knight. 


1595. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1985 


merated ; and all who escaped did so by virtue of their prowess, valour, and 
superior knowledge’. 

O'Neill (Turlough Luineach, the son of Niall Conallagh, son of Art, son of 
Con, son of Henry, son of Owen) died. He had bestowed most wealth and 
riches upon the learned, the Ollavs, and all those who sought gifts of [any of | 
the lords of Ireland in his time ; for he had often issued a proclamation through- 
out Ireland to all those who sought gifts, [inviting them] to come to him on 
the festivals of the nativity of our Lord; and when they came, not one departed 
dissatisfied, or without being supplied. He was a lord who had many soldiers 
in his service for pay and wages,—a lord prosperous in peace, and powerful in 
war, until age and infirmity came upon him ; and an heir‘ had been appointed 
in his place, ten years before his death, at the parliament held in Dublin in the 
name of Queen Elizabeth, namely, Hugh (the son of Ferdorcha the Baron, son 
of Con, son of Con, son of Henry, son of Owen), who had been styled Earl at 
this parliament. O'Neill died at Strabane, and was interred at Ardstraw. 

Magennis (Hugh, the son -of Hugh, son of Donnell Oge), a man, of his 
patrimony", of greatest name and renown among the English and Irish of Ire- 
land, died penitently. 

Turlough, the son of Brian, son of Donough, son of Donough Bacagh [Mac 
Mahon], Lord of West Corca-Bhaiscinn”, a man of great fame and character 
throughout Ireland, considering his patrimony, for he had but one cantred*, 
died ; and his son, Teige Caech, took his place. 

Redmond-na-Scuab, son of Ulick-na-gCeann, son of Rickard, son of Ulick 
[Burke] of Cnoc-Tuagh, died. 


lough Luineach, inciting him to shake off the 
English yoke, and become monarch of Ireland 
like his ancestors, Niall Frasach, Niall of the 
Nine Hostages, Con of the Hundred Battles, and 
Tuathal Teachtmhar, whose lineal heir he is_ 
stated to be, and whose example he is encou- 
But he was so old when he 
was made O’Neill, that he seems to have then 


raged to follow. 


retained little military ardour to tread in the 
wake of his ancestors; and he was so much in 
dread of the sons of Shane the Proud and of 
Hugh Earl of Tyrone, that he continued obe- 


dient to the Queen of England. 

u Of his patrimony, i.e. a man who was more 
famed and renowned than any other chieftain of 
equal territorial possessions in Ireland. This 
Irish idiom translates very awkwardly into 
English. 

~ West Corca-Bhaiscinn, now the barony of 
Moyarta, forming the south-west portion of the 
county of Clare. 

* Cantred, tpioca céd signifies a cantred, 
hundred, or barony, containing one hundred 
and twenty quarters of land. 


eg: 


1986 aNNaza RIOSshachta EIREANN. (1595. 


O Salleubaip Sip Edm mac cuactenl, pip po bad mop amm 7 oimofpcup 
as Zallonb, 7 ag Zaodelenb an canypm do écc .25. Apt. 

Mampcip mumeacan 1 noipgiallarb vo be ag gallarb an bhadamy, 7 
banne pangoimp aga Momcoméd do gnat. Raine p5éla uata co hat chaz 
co mbaccan 1 ccfince lom. Tap n& cloiptect pm von wpcip Sip mlham 
Ruppel, 7 00 Sip peon nomp po fpupalple pé banna picle parsoiuipide oo 
Sharancoib 7 ofinenncoib co noaoimb uaiple 1omda a manlle pmia oo con la 
lon 7 la Fac nadilcce pangaccap alfp so mumeacan, 7 pangzaccan pompa 
Zan patuccad Zan pmebeapnc sup an mbarle, 7 1469 mbhtm avhars pin 1 muin- 
eacan o61b po cmallpac imteacc ap a bapac vo dol don 1ubap. An can 
cpa pangaccan (% bicc 6 mumeacan pop vo pala muincin uf nell oo’ pop 
accion. 64a hammin (pccapotinanl an praducéad pugappioc annpin ucop po 
sabad asa ccaiteam 7 aga ccompuabonnt asa mapbad, 7 aga muducchad 
on cceteona huain pra moon laf co puinfo nell nona co nan bo hupuya piom 
no aint m po paccbad vo MuIntTIp aniupTip ecip Paop 7 Oaop,7 Mm po Pace- 
bad bedp veacanb,7 oé10(0 vammnanb, 7 o1olpaobnanb, veanpad, 7 véoac uarpal, 
Ro 


_ sabad poplonsponc leo in yompocnaib an iubaip, 7 cangacan banda ma 
ccomne 6niuban ap maiom ap na manac, 7 peb fpbadac mpbtpnac po baccap 


vo caiplib, 7 00 chabcaib lom m Zac conaip po imespioc an la pin. 


acc vol sur an mbaile pin, 7 nf po paoilple ag pasbanl ata chat 50 ppw5- 
beofp a hionnamal pm oviomansoil m ullceoib. CG mi man vo ponpad oo 
pipad an tpfpcomare pm. 

Capzin Pelli oume uapal oo muincip na bainmiogna aga mbot uplamup ae 
ljomcomeéd a Feanann on nZ5obennoin do manbad 1 ccauplén m aincin 1 pprull la 
a muintip pon. 

O vomnaill vo tionol a plois 1 mf vecemben do dol 1 ccdiccead connact. 
(yp { conaip vo luid vo plicceac Fo thmg neotuile, co tip Flacpach, 7 capyp 


Y Sir John.—In Ware’s Annals of Ireland, and 
in Moryson’s History of Ireland, he is called 
Sir Owen Mac Toole, which is tolerable; but 
Cox calls him Sir Owen O’ Toole, which is totally 
incorrect, though copied by all modern compi- 
lers. He was detained in prison for some years 
by the bribe-accepting Sir William Fitz- William, 
Lord Deputy of Ireland. 


« A message, literally, ‘‘news or tidings.” 

* For Newry.—P. O’Sullevan Beare gives-a 
brief account of an engagement which took 
place about this period (but he does not give 
the exact date), at the church of Kilclooney, 
eight miles from Newry, where six hundred of 
the English party, and two hundred of the Irish, 
were slain. 


1595.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1987 


O’Gallagher (Sir John’, the son of Tuathal), a man of great name and 
renown among the English and Irish of this time, died on the 25th of April. 

The monastery of Monaghan in Oriel was this year in the possession of the 
English, and a company of soldiers constantly guarding it. A message’ from 
them reached Dublin that they were in want of provisions. When the Lord 
Justice, Sir William Russell, and Sir John Norris, heard this, they ordered that 
twenty-six bands of English and Irish soldiers, together with many gentlemen, 
should be sent with provisions and all other necessaries to Monaghan. And 
these marched onward to the town without being noticed or opposed ; and, 
having remained that night in Monaghan, they prepared the next morning to 
set out for Newry*. When, however, they had gone a short distance from 
Monaghan eastward, they were met by O’Neill’s people ; and ungentle and un- 
friendly was the salute they received there, for they [O’Neill’s people] proceeded 
to shoot, strike, kill, and destroy them, [and the engagement lasted] from the 
fourth hour before noon until the dusk of the evening; so that it would not be 
easy to reckon or enumerate all those of the people of the Lord Justice, both 
gentle and plebeian, who were lost, or the number of steeds, of coats of mail, 
of arms, of various weapons, of wares, of rich raiment, of horses, and hampers 
of provisions, that were left on every road over which they passed on that day. 
They [i.e: the survivors] pitched a camp near Newry, and companies [of sol- 
diers] came for them the next morning ; and deficient and broken? were they 
in going to that town. Little had they thought, when leaving Dublin, that 
they should receive such an attack im Ulster. This conflict took place in the 
month of May. — 

Captain Felli, a gentleman of the Queen’s people, who had the superinten- 
dence and care of the lands of the Governor [of Connaught], was treacherously 
slain in the castle of Aircin® by his own people. 

In the month of December O’Donnell mustered an army to march into Con- 
naught. The route he took was to Sligo, Traigh-Eothuile, Tireragh, and across 


» Deficient and broken were they, pob (pbadaé then effected, all the patents of West Connaught 
uipb(pnac po bazcap. This should be, “de- were granted to be held as of ‘‘the Queen’s 
ficient and broken were the companies.” manor, or Castle of Arkyne.”’ In Cromwell’s 

© Aircin.—This castle stood at the village of time it was pulled down, and a large fort 
Killeany, on the Great Island of Aran, in the erected on its site.—See Chorographical De- 
bay of Galway. In 1585, on the composition — scription of Iar-Connaught, p. 78. 


iho 2 


‘ 


1988 


AaNNdza RIOshachTa ElRECGNNH. (1595. 


an muaid co tip namalgada. Gacapn clann mllam bine 1 ppmtbeanc pm a 
pole im wiZeapnap an cipe, ucip an oan la sac pln vib ba 06 badéin po bao 
vin. Tangaccap pom ule po tosainm uli oomnaill 1ap ccodECcT 06 Don TIN 
po baof prom aga pecptoad pM a comaiplichanb cia o1iobpaide dia NZoinpead 
cicc(nna. Conad pain 00 Ccinnyplot Fa DEOID TIZeapna do Saipm oo tepeice 
«a bupc mac uatein ciotaig, mic Sfain mic oiluenaip, ap oas ap € Do Deachald 
cuicce pum cetup lap nat 1onnapbad vo sallaib ap a oucthong, 7 po cingeall 
pom 06 co noiongnad a cobain via ccaompad, 7 po baci beop1 comle a aoipe 
ppl pomodin mmMg 7 eccualaing an coccad 1 mbaof pum. Ro saipead rapam 
a zainm plata ve 1 FpIaoNaIp! na plog a ccoitcimne Fé po baccan apall ora 
cenel po ba pine, 7 ba moa an aof ngapma map. Oo navad geill 7 aiccipe 
6 na bancacaib ole baot 1 ppitbeape ppp pon Lam tepsicc ian na oipsnead. 
Ro ap 6 vomnaill by pann mec william po noolaice mop na bhadna pot 
mbantncacc cille mfooin, 7 1p na bpis1b mn cclomn muipiy. 

bo apo iupcip na hepeano 2. Sip uilham Ruppel 1 ngcallim m ronbaid yin. 
Ro lucd(o plotcain go cho Da Miop Zan uppada Zan apac ecip ua noormmanll , 
J connactaig 00 Lit, 7 an iupcip von Lat ele acc paccbail na 5cullme do. 
Ni baof aon conntae hi cconnactab cenmota conncae an clap nama na 
bacan wile no vponga oipime ap Zac conntae vib vaon pann 7 vaon Lhe la 
hua noomnaill oon cup pm 6 opnebaoip co conmancre mapa, 7 6 mud co 
pionaim. 6accan ann ona piol cceallans cenmoca concoban mac oonnchad 
iabaig, mic caocc omb us ceallons ucapn po sabad lap proe an calad ap 
pipdopnca mac ceallais mic vomnanll, mic aeda na ccanlleac us ceallang. Oo 
cold Tha peapoonca Zur an lion bat hi ccfnd us vomnall, 7 posaip 6 vomnall 
viseapna ve. Ro ems(ccan piol mavagain 1pin ccoccad ccéona act 6 mava- 
Zain aman 1. comnall mac peaam, 7 a mac Anmcao. Coccan clann Remainn 


4 He.—In the original the verb is in the third 
person plural, which destroys the unity of the 
sentence. 

* Walter Kittagh, 1. e. Walter the left-handed. 

‘ Cill Meadhoin, i.e. the middle church, now 
the barony of Kilmaine, in the south of the 
county of Mayo. 

° Brees, a castle in the parish of Mayo, in the 
barony of Clanmaurice,—See Genealogies, Tribes, 


and Customs of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 482. 

‘ Conmaicne-mara, now Connamara. 

i Fhe Callow, a castle in the barony of Kal- 
connell, and county of Galway. 

K Hugh na gCailleach, i.e. Hugh of the nuns, 
or hags. 

' Except the O’ Madden.—It would appear from 
the Journal of Sir William Russell, Lord Deputy 
of Ireland, preserved in the British Museum, 


1595. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1989 


the Moy into Tirawley. The Clann-William Burke were at variance with each 
other concerning the lordship of the territory, each man of them [i. e. of the 
candidates] thinking that he himself was entitled to it. They all came at the 
summons of O'Donnell, on his arrival in the country ; and he consulted with 
his advisers as to which of them he would nominate lord ; he* finally decided 
upon nominating as lord Theobald Burke, son of Walter Kittagh*, son of John, 
son of Oliver, because he had been the first to come over to him after his ex- 
pulsion from his country by the English ; and he [O’Donnell] had promised to 
assist him, if in his power. Moreover, this Walter was in the bloom of youth, 
and able to endure the hardships and toils of the war in which they were 
engaged. His title of chief was conferred on him in the presence of the forces 
in general, although there were others of his tribe older and greater in point 
of dignity than he. Hostages and pledges were delivered into the hands of 
Theobald by the other Burkes who were in opposition, after his election. O’Don- 
nell remained with Mac William in the barony of Cill Meadhoin‘, and at Brees* 
in Clanmaurice, during the Christmas of this year. | 
At this time Sir William Russell, the Chief Justiciary of Ireland, was at 
Galway ; and, on his leaving Galway, a peace of two months was proclaimed, 
but without pledges or hostages, between O’Donnell and the Connacians, on the 
one side, and the Lord Justice, on the other. There was not at this time any 
county in Connaught, excepting the county of Clare only, in which the inhabi- 
tants, or great numbers of them, had not joined and united with O’Donnell, trom 
the Drowes to Conmaicne-mara", and from the Moy to the Shannon. Among 
them were the O’Kellys, excepting Conor, the son of Donough Reagh, son of 
Teige Duv O’Kelly; for he had (forcibly) taken the Callow' from Ferdorcha, 
the son of Kellagh, son of Donnell, son of Hugh na gCailleach* O'Kelly ; upon 
which Ferdorcha, with all his number [followers], went over to O'Donnell, who 
appointed him lord [of Hy-Many]. The O’Maddens rose up in the same war, 
except the O’Madden! alone, namely, Donnell, the son of John, and his son, 


manuscript add. 4728, fol. 61, 6, that the Lord 
Deputy believed that O’Madden himself. had 
joined this rebellion, for his secretary writes : 
‘“‘ Q’Madden himself being gone out in action 
of Rebellion, and had left a ward of his principle 
men in his castle” [of Cloghan], whoe assoone 


as they perceaved my Lord to approach neare, 
they sett three of their houses on fire, which 
were adjoyninge to the Castle, and made shott 
at vs out of the Castle, which hurt two of our 
souldiers and a boye. And being sent to by my 
Lord to yeild vpp the Castle to the Queene, 


1990 ANNQGza RIOShaACchTa EIREANN. (1595. 


na pcuap mic ullice a bunc, 7 an lucc aopubpaman so po Zabad 7 co po 
bnip(o, miliuc uf mavaccain, Tip acam,7 upmon bailcfo na cine leo cenmota 
an Lonsponc. Ro lomad 7 po Léippemorpad cluam peanta bnénainn 7 po sabao 
eppuce an baile led. bai annpive eogan oub mac maoileaclamn bonlb 
ui mavasain 6 cucat lupmaigi hn ccuma caré. Oo cuap led 1anam cap pronaimn 
1 noealbna 1 pefpab ceall, 7 acc poad oo1b cap a nap co bna pionna vo 
ccppnsead oa banna pengoipide bat ap opda 1pm mide Ina Mapmorpeact, 7 
ni place pabao no patuccad plmpa Zo actaoap Fan Flop Zan aipiuccad co 
po 1adpac 1mon mbale 1 mbaccap na poslaoa co po manbad oponga oibpwoe 
im anmchaid mac maoileaclaimn mooapda mic maoileaclamn mic bnfpall, 4 
im cobtac 6ce mac cobtais ui mavagoain. CTépnacap clann Remaim a banc 
én mbpfpim pm co nupmon a muimntipe amaille pme. 

Ro bmpead la hua noomnall von cuains pin tp carpléin décc vo canple- 
naib connacc. lan ctcoce vua oomnaill Tap Muad co Tip Placnac po Fainpoe 
ua ouboa 00 tadce mac tadcc abarcch mic eogain, 7 6 h(Sspa prabac i- 
luigne. * * * 7 Mac vonnchaw cine hoilella 00 Mhunslp caoe mac taioce 
an tmubaip, 7 mac vonnchaid an copcunn vo Ruopmse mac aedva, 7 mac 
dlapmaoa marge luipcce do Conéobapn mac taroce mic Diapmava. Oa ble 
laip 1apam bnaigve Zac cine sup a pamicc 1 ngioll Lé comall, 7 pomp can a 
op 50 panic Tap émpne iap ccprocnuccad a Tupaip. 

Opagsove comacc ule (oupmon) bacap lam 1 ngcallim on ngobennoin 
Sin Ripoepo biongam. Peace and o1a mbatcan mlpsta mfpaigce ap nol 


their answere was to Capten Thomas Lea, that 
if all that came in his Lordship’s companie were 
Deputies, they would not yeild, but said they 
would trust to the strenght of their castle, and 
hoped by to-morrowe that time that the Deputy 
and his companie should stand in as great feare 
as they then were in; expecting, as it should 
seeme, some aid to relieve them.”—See this 
famous reply of O’Madden’s people referred to 
in Brewer’s Beauties of Ireland, vol. ii. p. 152 ; 
and Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, pp. 149, 
189; where the whole account of the siege is 
printed from Sir William Russell’s Journal. 

™ Meelick-I-Madden, now Meelick, on’ the 
brink of the Shannon, in the barony of Long- 


ford, and county of Galway.—See it already 
mentioned at the years 1479 and 1557. 

2 Tir-athain, now anglice Tiran, a district in 
the parish of Killimor-Bulloge, in the barony 
of Longford. ‘The district so called is now di-_ 
vided into several townlands. 

. ° Longphort, now Longford, a castle of consi- 
derable strength lying in ruins in the parish of 
Tirinescragh, in the barony of Longford, to 


which it has given name. This was O’Madden’s 


chief castle-—See Tribes and Customs of Hy- 
Many, p. 151. 

P The bishop.—The bishop of Clonfert at this 
period was Stephen Kerovan, a native of the 
town of Galway. He succeeded in 1582, and 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1991 


Anmchadh. The sons of Redmond na-Scuab, son of Ulick Burke, and those we 
have mentioned, went and took and destroyed Meelick-I-Madden”, Tir-athain’, 
and all.the castles of the country, except Longphort®. They plundered and 
totally devastated Clonfert-Brendan, and took the bishop? of that town prisoner. 
Among the rest, on this occasion, was Owen Duv, the son of Melaghlin Balbh 
O’Madden, from the district of Lusmagh*. They afterwards proceeded across 
the Shannon, into Delvin and Fircall ; and, upon their return to the banks of 
the Shannon, two companies of soldiers, who had been billeted in Meath, were 
drawn in pursuit of them’. These soldiers advanced unnoticed, until they had 
surrounded the castle [of Cloghan], in which the plunderers were, when they 
slew many of them, and, among the rest, Anmchadh’, son of Melaghlin Moder, 
son of Melaghlin, son of Breasal [O’Madden]; and Coflagh* Oge, the son of 
Coffagh O’Madden. The sons of Redmond Burke, with the greater part of 
their people along with them, escaped from conflict. 

On this occasion thirteen of the castles of Connaught were broken down 
by O'Donnell. After crossing the Moy into Tireragh, he conferred the title of 
O’Dowda upon Teige, the son of Teige Reagh, son of Owen, the O’Dowda; in 
Leyny he nominated * * * the O’Hara Reagh; and he appointed Maurice Caech, 
the son of Teige-an-Triubhais", the Mac Donough of Tirerrill; Rory, the son of 
Hugh, the Mac Donough of Corran ; and Conor, the son of Teige, the Mac 
Dermot of Moylurg. He took away hostages from every territory into which 
he had come, as a security for their fealty ; and he [then] returned home across 
the Erne, having terminated his expedition. 

The hostages of the greater part of the province of Connaught, who had 
been imprisoned in Galway by the Governor, Sir Richard Bingham, being in- 


1595.] 


died in 1602.—See Harris’s edition of Ware’s 
Bishops, p. 642. 

4 Lusmagh, now Lusma, a parish in the south 
of the King’s County, adjoining the county of 
Tipperary, and bounded on the west by the 
River Shannon. This was a part of O’Madden’s 
country of Sil-Anamchy, and still belongs to 
the diocese of Clonfert. 

° Drawn in pursuit of then.—These were in- 
duced to come into Fircall by some of Teige 
O’Molloy’s people who were aiding the English. 


S Anmchadh.—In Sir William Russell’s Jour- 
nal he is called ‘“‘ Ambrose Mac Molaghline 
Mottere O’Madden, of Clare-Madden, Gentle- 
man.” 

t Coffagh—In Sir William Russell’s Journal 
he is called ‘‘ Coheghe O’Madden of Clare- 
Madden.” Fora list of the chief men who were 
slain or taken on this occasion, see Tribes and 
Customs of Hy-Many, pp. 150, 151. 

u Teige-an-Triubhais, i.e. Thaddeus or 'Timo- 
thy of the Trowse, or pantaloons. 


1992 GNNaZa RIOshachTa E€IRECNN. [1596. 


plona ipm ccéd mi oposmap na bhadna po co po iompaiopioe (coppa pin 
elagh ap in bpmopain 1 pabatan, 7 imteacc oaip no déiccean. Jap ccmbdead 
na comaiple pm o61b vo cuinpiot a nglarp 7 a ngfimle ofob, 7 bacap von 
an baile epplaucte an can pin, 7 ba bonam ppomniste vo cac 1 ccoiccmne 
uaip ba huptopac oidce ann do colDploc Tapp an oopup pap von baile. Ro 
sabad an opoicle ponpa sup bo hficcfn ob an abann ags5anb oionnpaiccr 
po a nupcomaip, 7 ba anaomplcc baccan parde ag pasbaal na habann 4 aor 
ocebaid an baile 1a: nool cap opoicle an baile ma ccomaipncip. Ro mapbad 
culo 00 Lataip, 7 po hompaiofo an curio ele ofob sup an bpmoptn op imas- 
(oan. Jap nool vo na pcélanb pin sup an ngobepnoip, Ro cup de pgpibenn 
so saillim dia popcongna Zac aon po aontaig elud von cup pm a cpochad 
san puineac. Ro cpochad an pupal(m an sobepnona Mac mec wmlhiam bine 
a.Emann mac Ripofino anianaimn, Mac ui concobain puaid * * * mic tatdce 
éice mic ctaldcc bude, mic catail pucnd Wlac mec oawmo hob(po mac haibfpo 
bude, mic william, mic tomaip Mupchad éce mac munchmd na touasy mic 
Taloce ui placbtpcars Oomnall mac Ruaidm mic candce uf plartb(ptms, 7 
maoflip mac cfpoit, mic uacein pao. 


QOS CRIOST, 1596. 
Cloip cporc, mile, cticc céd, nocat, a ye. 


Mag cantas mop vécc 1. Oomnall, mac vomnaill, mic copbmanc laopas 
mic taroce, 7 Zép b6 Mag cantons mop vo Zaipc ve plo hoinonfoh co hononac 


ina iapla pap an can pin hé an poncongpa ppionnpa paran. Ni baof oodpe 


“ Created Earl.—He was created Ear] of Clan- 
care [Clann Canzaig], and Baron of Valencia, 


English commissioners sent to treat with him : 
“T keep a lacquay as noble as he. But let 


on the 4th of June, 1565.—See Cox’s Hibernia 
Anglicana, vol. i. p. 320. Hooker says that 
when John or Shane O’Neill [Prince of Ulster, 
as he styled himself] heard that Mac Carthy 
More had surrendered himself and his posses- 
sions to the Queen of England, that he had been 
graciously received, his lands restored to him, 
to be held of English tenure, and that he.him- 
self was created a lord of Parliament by the 
name of the Earl of Clancare, he said to some 


him enjoy his honour; it is not worthy of 
O’Neale. I have indeed made peace with the 
Queen at her desire; but I have not forgotten 
the royal dignity of my ancestors. Ulster was 
theirs, and shall be mine. With the sword they 
won it; with the sword I will maintain it.” 

It should be remarked, however, that Hooker 
is not to be depended upon in his report of 
what Shane O’Neill said on this occasion ; for 
it appears from Shane’s evidence in England 


1596.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1993 


toxicated and excited after drinking wine, plotted together in the Ont of 
August in this year to make their escape from the prison in which they were, 
by stratagem or force. This resolution being adopted by them, they knocked 
off their chains and fetters. This was in the early part of the night, while the 
gates of the town were still open ; and it was the time at which all in general 
were dining, for it was the beginning of the night, when they passed out through 
the gate of the town westward. The bridge was gained upon them, so that 
they were obliged to face the rough river which lay before them ; but, at the 
same time that they were leaving the river, the soldiers of the town, who had 
crossed the bridge, were ready to meet them. Some of them were slain on 
the spot, and others were turned back to the prison from which they had fled. 
When the news of this reached the Governor, he sent a writ to Galway, order- 
ing that all those who had consented to escape on this occasion should be 
hanged without delay; and there were hanged by order of the Governor, 
namely, the son of Mac William Burke (Edmond, the son of Richard-an-Iarainn); 
the son of O’Conor Roe, i.e. * * * ; the son of Teige Oge, son of Teige Boy, 
son of Cathal Roe ; the son of Mac David (Hubert, the son of Hubert Boy, 
son of William, son of Thomas); Murrough Oge, the son of Murrough of the 
Battle-axes, son of Teige O'Flaherty; Donnell, the son of Rory, son of Teige 
O'Flaherty; and Myler, the son of Theobald, son of Walter Fada [Burke]. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1596. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-siz. 


Mac Carthy More died, namely, Donnell, the son of Donnell, son of Cormac 
Ladhrach, son of Teige; and although he was usually styled Mac Carthy More, 
he had been honourably created Earl” by order of the Sovereign of England. 


that he was a man of astute mind; and itis whom they had rendered the most servile tri- 


quite certain that he would not, when in boasting 
mood, have condescended to compare himself to 
the Earl of Clancare, who had but a few years pre- 
viously emerged from slavery, for it was not till 
the year 1565, that he was emancipated from 
the yoke of the Earls of Desmond, whose vassals 
his ancestors had been for many centuries, to 


butes in Earl’s beeves, and in ‘the damn’d 
exaction of coyn and liverie.” 
curious list of the rents and services rendered 
to the Earls (of Desmond) by the Mac Carthys 
and others, preserved in the Carew Collection of 
Manuscripts at Lambeth Palace, No. 617, p. 212. 
That this Earl of Clancare possessed but little of 


There is a very 


ix 


1994 


AQNNaZa RIOShachTa EIRECANN. 


[1596. 


pda oia é1p nd hoipnpide ma ionad cenmozta aen msm vo pala na mnaoit 
ay mac mes cantars mabars 1. acc pinsin, 7 po ba 0615 la cac sup bo h{pde 
po bad odpe an an mag cancargy pm acbat .1. vomnalt. 

Mac puibne na ccuat eogan occ mac eoccam occ mic eoccam mic vom- 


naill pf cotactac comnb(ptac, na po cull camnpium, no capcaipne on o Zab 


the heroism of his ancestor is quite evident from 
all that we know of his history; and one can 
hardly avoid concluding that he was a craven 
coward, from his submission to Sir Henry Sid- 
ney, beginning, ‘‘ The most humble submission 
of the unworthy and most unnatural Earl of 
Clancahir, otherwise called Mac Carthy More, 
unto the Right Honourable Sir Henry Sidney, 
Knight,” preserved on Patent Roll, 13 Eliza- 
beth, and printed by Mr. Hardiman in his An- 
cient Irish Deeds (Zransactions R. I. A., vol. xv. 
Antiquities, pp. 73, 74). But it should be borne 


in mind that since the death of the Red Earl of - 


Ulster, in 1333, O’Neill’s ancestors were not 
only free from all Anglo-Irish exactions, but 
that they compelled the English of the Pale to 
pay them ‘“ black rent.” The comparison be- 
tween O’Neill and Mac Carthy is, therefore, a 
mere stupid joke of Hooker. It is, however, 
repeated by Leland, who has given many An- 
zlo-Irish fables as true history. 

x Who could be installed.—Donnell, Earl of 
Clancare, had one natural son, Donnell, who 
usurped the name and title of Mac Carthy More; 
but Fineen, or Florence, the youngest son of 
Donough Mae Carthy Reagh, who was married 
to Ellen, the only daughter of the Earl of 
Clann-Cartha, claimed the name and title of 
Mac Carthy More, and by the influence of the 
Earl of Tyrone he was established in that dig- 
nity. The writer of Carbrie Notitia, already often 
referred to, after giving the pedigree of Mac 
Carthy More, has the following remarks upon 
the disputes between the different families of the 
Mac Carthys, about their respective rights to the 
headship in 1686, when this writer flourished : 


“ By this pedigree it appears that Mac Carthy 
Reagh, in the person of O Donnell Gud, became 
a separate branch of this noble family in the 
time of Donnell More in Curragh, who probably 
gave them Carbry for their portion and inheri- 
tance ; and that Mac Donough did the like some 
time after and received their Estate in Duhal- 
low, from their father, Cormock Fune; and that 
the Lords of Muskry more lately, in the person 
of Dermond More Muskry, became a distinct 
branch of this family, and were seated in Muskry 
by their father, Cormock mac Donell Oge. 

‘Tt is likewise manifest that Donell, Earle of 
Clancar, dying without,issue male, his daughter 
and heir was married to Florence Mac Donough 
Mac Carthy Reagh, whose pedigree shall follow 
more at large. By virtue of which marriage 
Florence claimed the name and title of Mac 
Carthy more, which Donell, naturall son of the 
deceased Karle of Clancar, had usurp’d; and by 
the help of Tyrone, who was then come into 
Munster, he was establisht in that name and 
dignity, and his grandson and heir, Charles, is 
at this day ownd and stild Mac Carthymore. 
Nevertheless the foHowers of these great men 
doe often dispute which branch of this family is 
the principall, or chief of the Clancarthyes. 
Mac Carthymore alleages that he, having the 
title and name, and being likewise, by his grand- 
mother, heir to the last Earle of Clancar, ought 
to be acknowledged chief without dispute. 

“To this the others Answere, that by the 
father’s side (which is chiefly regarded in Ire- 
land), he is younger son of Mac Carty Reagh, 
and ought not to exalt himselfe above the Chief 
of his house. That an Irish title and name must 


1596] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1995 


There was no male heir who could be installed* in his place, [or any heir], 
except one daughter [Ellen], who was the wife of the son of Mac Carthy Reagh, 
i.e. Fineen; and all thought that he was the heir of the deceased Mac Carthy, 


i. e. Donnell. 


Mac Sweeny-na-dTuath (Owen Oge, the son of Owen Oge, son of Owen, 
_ son of Donnell), an influential and generous man, who had never incurred 


be governe’d by the Irish Law of Tanistry, 
which, like the royal Law Salique in France, 
will not admit women to inherit estates and 
principalities,—suitable to the Law of Entailes 
in England, which excludes this very Mac Car- 
tymore from being Earle of Clancar, tho’ he be 
his heire at Common Lawe ; neither had Tyrone 
any legall power in Munster to conferr the title 
of Mac Cartymore on any body that had not 
just right to it. 

‘“‘Mac Carty Reagh alleages that he is the 
eldest branch of this noble family, which, by 
the Law of Tanistry, ought to be preferred; 
that he is a degree nearer of kin to the com- 
mon ancestor, Donell More in Curragh, King of 
Cork” [recte, Desmond] “ than any of the pre- 
tenders ; that Carbry is an antienter princi- 
pality than either Muskry or Duhallow ; and 
that Mac Cartymoreas a younger brother of his 
house. 

“But the lords of Muskry say that because 
Mac Carty Reagh is the Eldest branch of this 
family, that is, the first that separated from the 
common stock, he is therefore excluded from 
the inheritance till all the later branches are 
lopt of by death ; for the Tanistry respects the 
age and meritt, yet designs only impotent age ; 
and, therefore, a man’s vncle thatt be Tanist, 
but not his great grand vncle if alive; and soe 
by the Law of England, a brother shall be pre- 
ferred before an unckle, and an unckle before a 
great unckle; soe that by both Laws the nearest 
of kin to him that was last seizd shall be his 
heir, and the Lords of Muskry are the undoubted 


heirs male to Cormock Mac Daniell Oge, Prince 
of Desmond, and to all his ancestors, even to 
Donell More in Curragh, from whom Mac Carty 
Reagh descends; and they deny any difference 
in their degrees of kindred to the said Donell 
More ; and if there were it matters not, since a 
man’s grandson and heir ought to be preferred 
before his second son. As for the antiquity of 
Carbry, it prooves nothing in this dispute; and 
as for the relation between Mac Cartymore and 
Mac Carty Reagh, whatsoever it may argue 
amongst themselves, tis nothing to a third per- 
son; and, therefore, they conclude the Crown of 
England has done them justice in giving, or ra- 
thér restoring, to them the stile and title of 
Earle of Clancarthy. 

“ But, be this as it will, my province leads me 
to the particular pedigree of Mac Carty Reagh, 
who were lords of this great territory of Carbry, 
and had the greatest chief rents out of it that 
was paid out of any seigniory in Ireland, insoe 
much that the Mac Cartyes have been stiled 
Princes of Carbry, as well in many antient his- 
torys and records, as in his severall letters Pat- 
tents from the Kings of England. I begin with 
Donnell Gud, because I have already shewn his 
pedigree upward to Calahane of Cashell, King 
of Munster.” He then gives Mac Carthy Reagh’s 
pedigree down to his own time, 1686. 

There is a very curious tract, on the subject 
of this dispute between the Mac Carthys, pre- 
served in the Carew Collection of Manuscripts 
at Lambeth, No. 601, p. 241, entitled: “ Flo- 
rence Mac Cartie’s Reasons to prove that the 


ix 2 


1996 AQNNazZa RIOshachta EIREGNN. [1596. 


ceanour a cpice co lo a eitprocta pip caitmeac congaineac oeanlaicteac 
oaonnactac comnant Fn cotuccad asmup ppl honnyaisid co mbuand ccéille 
7 ecomainle pp pid, 7 Fp pococead vo ecc 26. lanuapn, 7 mac a o(pbpacan 
a1. Maolmume mac munchaid mall vo sabarl a ronaro. 

O Rasilhs 1. San pucd mac aooa conallarg mic maoflmonda mic Slain 
vo écc, 7 Fé vo honoagf mantle lé compophpion a hucc na bainpfogan 
achad map an can pin ticcfpnap a outce plin vo bhé ag Zac aon do pliocc - 
maoilmopoa ui Raigilhs po sap ua néill aod mac pipdonca o papills do 
pip mac aoda conalleng pon an mbpeipne uile, 7 niop bo cranpaoslac pom 
lap ngcapm TIsZeapna ve ucap po mapbad pia ccionn Ue parte go clsmanpeac 
la muincip ui nell (Lap po hoiponead eipium) 7 po Zaipead 6 pousilis vemann 
mac maoilmonda pinnpean an oa tTIZeapna plmpaice. 

Mac 1apla ofpmuman vécc 1. tomar mac Sémaip, mic Slam mic comcanp 
DONolcls acta. 

Cepoic mac Pianaip mic emainn buicelén tTiZeapna catpac oamiapeeais, 
7 tpfna cluana meala vo écc. Pp veaplaicceach quar mop po ba m6 ouan- 
cape opronngallaib eneann oupmon eipde 7 a mac tomar vo Zabanl a ronan. 

Maz eocaccan 1. mall mac Ropra mic connla vécc. 

Remann mac seanale ciZeapna cuaite bnotanll vo bapuccad 1 ccopcas 
Tne cioncaib a oibeincce in ashard gall. 

An tan tna po plop an iupcip, 7 comannle na h€peann calmact 7 com- 
nant na nZaoweal ina nashai, 7 Fac aén vo pavpacc Fo pomamaigte odib 
badém jap an can pm ag dol oaoin Lat ppp na saoideloab pémpaice ma 
nashaid, ba pi comainle anpicc led tecta do Con do pang ui néill,7 ut vom- 
naull do cuingld Ploda 7 Caoncompaic ponpa. 6a pad po tcosad pm hiom- 


Earl of Clancare’s land ought to descend to © Cathair-Duna-Tascaigh, now Cahir, a well- 
Ellen, his [Florence’s] wife.” known town in the county of Tipperary.—See 
¥ John Roe.—This was Sir John O’Reilly.— note ”, under the year 1559, p. 1570, supra. 
See note >, under the year 1583, p. 1804, supra. 4 Trian-Chluana-meala, i. e. Clonmel-third. 

* Descendants of Maelmora.—See note 4, under This was the name of the barony of Iffa and 
the year 1583, p. 1809, supra. Offa East, in the south-east of the county of 

“ Edmond, the son of Maelmora.—See note °, Tipperary.—See note °, under the year 1559, 
under the year 1583, p. 1806. p- 1570, supra. 


» Thomas of Drogheda, i.e. who was executed ® Tuath-Brothaill, i.e. the district of Broghill. 
at Drogheda.—See note “, under the year 1468, This is still the name of a manor, with a castle, 
p: 1050, supra. near Charleville, in the north of the county of 


1596. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1997 


reproach or censure from the time that he assumed the chieftainship of his ter- 
ritory to the day of his death ; a sumptuous, warlike, humane, and bounteous 
man ; puissant to sustain, and brave to make the attack ; with the gift of good 
sense and counsel in peace and war; died on the 26th of January ; and his 
brother’s son, Mulmurry, the son of Murrough Mall, took his place. 

O'Reilly, i.e. John Roe’, the son of Hugh Conallagh, son of Maelmora, son 
-of John, died. And though, by a composition made some time anterior to this 
period, by the Queen’s authority, it was ordained that each of the descendants 
of Maelmora’ O’Reilly should [exclusively] possess the lordship of his own 
territory, yet O'Neill (Hugh, the son of Ferdorcha) nominated Philip, son of 
Hugh, the O'Reilly over all Breifny; but he did not live long after being styled 
Lord, for he was accidentally slain by O’Neill’s people (by whom he had been 
inaugurated); and [then] Edmond, the son of Maelmora*, who was senior to 
the other two lords, was styled the O’Reilly.. 

The son of the Earl of Desmond died, namely, Thomas, the son of James, 
son of John, son of Thomas of Drogheda’. 

Theobald, the son of Pierce, son of Edmond Butler, Lord of Cathair-Duna- 
Iascaigh® and Trian-Chluana-ineala*, died. He was a liberal and bounteous 
man, and had the largest collection of poetical compositions of almost all the 
old English of Ireland ; and his son, Thomas, took his place. 

Mageoghegan, 1. e. Niall, the son of Rossa, son of Conla, died. | 

Redmond Fitzgerald, Lord of Tuath-Brothaill*, was executed at Cork, for 
his crimes of insurrection against the English. 

When the Lord Justice and the Council of Ireland saw the bravery and 
power of the Irish against them, and that all those who had previously been 
obedient to themselves were now joining the aforesaid Irish against them, they 
came to the resolution of sending ambassadors to O’Neill and O'Donnell, to 
request’ peace and tranquillity from them. The persons selected for negociating 


Cork.—See Smith’s Natural and Civil History 
of Cork, book ii. c. 6. Roger Boyle, the third 
son of Richard, Ear] of Cork, took the title of 
Baron from this place.—3 Car. I. 

* To request.—Leland says, book iv. c. 4, that 
‘the Queen, now principally attentive to the 
affairs of France, and the progress of the Spanish 


arms in this country, was well pleased at any 
prospect of composing the vexatious broils of 
Treland.”» And he adds that O’Neill, “‘ having 
discovered the real weakness of his enemy, de- 
termined to recommence hostilities without the 
slightest regard to promises or treaties, which 
he considered as mere temporary expedients.” 


1998 GQNNACA RIOSNAChTd EIREGNN. (1596. 


luad naitipee (conpa a. comap buicilép 1apla upmuman, 7 aipoeappoce capil 
Ramicec 1apla upmuman so cpas baile, 7 amp 
annpfin,7 po patd a teacca go hua nell o1a capnfiyp 06.na Topcca mma Teainice. 


maolmuipne magcnaic. 


Pain ua neill na pecéla céona dionnpangid uf Domnanll. Oo cod ua Domnall 
dipim mancplos 50 haipm 1 mbaof ua neill, cagac ofblimb co pocaipo muip- 
temne. Tanaic an ciapla, 7 an capveppoce dia pais. Uc pétpac vo na 
plaidib mm coipee ma Ttangaccap 1. Sun ab vo cungid pioda do deacactan, 
7 at pétpac na comada po tingeall aniuptip .1. olpucchad céicerd concobain 
odibpiom Zénmoca an mblow cine pil 6 oGn vealgan co boimn in po aice- 
peabpac soll 6 cin main map an can pin,7 po seallpac pp pin na qopcoay 
soll ponpa can copaimn cenmocac na soll baccap hn ccapnaice plpsupa hi 
ceaiplino, 71 muban cinntpasa vo léicced pm cneic 7 connadh vo pion, 7 na 
léiccplde maoin né lucc tobaig cfopa no cana via paiccid act an cior vo 
pacca pop a pmnpeanab (peact piam) vo 10odnacal ooibpium co hat cliac, 
7] na cuinglope sZerll no eiccine opna act mad pin, 7 oo bénta an ccéona do 
na Zaowelaib accpacc bi ccommbad us vomnaill hi ccéiccead Connacc. Oo 
cmd tna 6 neill, 76 ovomnall, 71 mbacap ma prappad vo maicib an Céiccid 
do pecpuoad a ccomaiple m na hacfpecaib pin vo bnlta cuca, 7 14ap mbhicz 
achad pooa ovoibploe 7 00 na maiaib ancfna acc ponaitm(e an po ctopgaeta 
ta gallaib 6 vo maccacap Eninn la bnécctingeallcoib na po comaillead 0616 
loin, 7 an lion vo deacacan oodfoaib anaipce oa napeacanb via nuaiphb, 
7 00 paonclanoanb poicenélcoib cén nac tuccait itip, act Do ZaITT a nat- 
apoa ponaib, Ro imecclaigpiot co mon co na comanllpe pia an no cingeallad 


& Mulmurry Magrath—He wrote his own Dundalk, in the county of Louth.—See note °, 


He was of the Ma- 
graths of Termon-Magrath, on the borders of 


name ‘‘ Milerus Magrath.” 


the counties of Donegal and Fermanagh. He 
was a Franciscan friar, and had been appointed 
Bishop of Down by Pope Pius V.; but after- 
wards, embracing the Protestant religion, he 
was, in 1570, promoted to the bishopric of 
Clogher, and soon afterwards elevated to the 
archbishopric of Cashel, which he governed for 
forty-two years.—See Harris’s edition of Ware’s 
Bishops, pp. 206, 483. 


" Faughard-Muirtheimne, now Faughard, near 


under the year 1595, p. 1967, supra. 

i To request a peace.—* A mean solicitation on 
the part of government to Tyrone.”—Leland. 

k The province of Conchobhar, i.e. of Ulster, 
which in Conchobhar Mac Nessa’s time extended 
to the Boyne. 

' Stewards, i. e. sheriffs. 

m They feared.—This fear on the part of the 
Irish arose from the practises of the Marshal 
Bagnal, who was doing all in his power to ruin 
O’ Neill and the Irish chieftains of Ulster. When 
O’Neill saw that it was impossible to remove 


1596.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 1999 


between them were Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond, and Mulmurry Magrath®, 
Archbishop of Cashel. The Earl of Ormond repaired to Traigh-Bhaile [Dun- 
dalk], and there halted ; and he sent his messengers to O'Neill, to inform him 
of the purport of his coming ; upon which O’Neill sent the same intelligence to 
O'Donnell ; and O’Donnell came to the place where O’Neill was, with a body of 
cavalry, [and] both set out for Faughard-Muirtheimne”. Here the Earl and the 
Archbishop came to meet them. They stated to the chiefs the object of their 
embassy, namely, to request a peace’; and they stated the rewards promised by 
the Lord Justice, namely, the appropriation to them of the province of Concho- 
bhar*, except the tract of country extending from Dundalk to the River Boyne, 


in which the English had dwelt long before that time. They promised, more- 


over, that the English should not encroach upon them beyond the boundary, 


excepting those who were in Carrickfergus, Carlingford, and Newry, who were 
at all times permitted to deal and traffic ; that no stewards’ or collectors of 
rents or tributes should be sent among them, but that the rents which had been 
some time before upon their ancestors should be forwarded by them to Dublin ; 
that beyond this no hostages or pledges would be required; and that the Irish 
in the province of Connaught, who had risen up in alliance with O’Donnell, 


should have privileges similar to these. 


O’Neill, O'Donnell, and all the chiefs 


of the province who were then along with them, went into council upon those 
conditions which were brought to them ; and, having reflected for a long time 
.upon the many that had been ruined by the English, since their arrival in Ive- 
land, by specious promises, which they had not performed, and the numbers of 
the Irish high-born princes, gentlemen, and chieftains, who came to premature 
deaths without any reason at all, except to rob them of their patrimonies, they 
feared” very much that what was [then] promised would not be fulfilled to them; 


the Marshal, or to enjoy peace, or do any ser- 
vice by which he could distinguish himself 
whilst Bagnal was Marshal of Ulster, he refused 
to meet her Majesty’s Commissioners, stating by 
letter, that “he could not attend the Commis- 
sioners with safety or with honour; that he had 
little hope of any performance of articles, as he 
had been already deceived by confiding in the 
Queen’s officers; that the intentions of the 


Lord General were ever just and honorable, but 
had been fatally counteracted by the Deputy : 
and as Sir John Norris was speedily to be re- 
moved from his command, and the grievances of 
the Northerns to be submitted to a new Chief 
Governor, whose principles and character were — 
entirely unknown, he had the less reason to ex- 
pect an equitable conclusion.” —Leland’s History 
of Ireland, book iv. ¢. 4. 


2000 ANNAZA RIOshachtTa EIReEANN. [1596. 


voib comd pap oeip1o Leo po dEHId an TLIO vo Eims(o. Ro aipnhoypiot 1apam 
in aut(pee von iapla, 7 do CHd Pde co hat chaé do paisid an wypcip 7 na 
comainle, 7 at péc vob a d1alead IM6n pit, 7 a pnlecna 6 na ZFanrdelaib. Ro 
cuin an iuptip 7 an comaiple teacca 50 Sarcaib oo paisid na bainpiogan 
oaipnaip a peél oipde cond ano fo clpo pi iolap noaofne 50 hepinn co na 
naomib cecca led co nan b6 luga oloace pice mile a lion vaop cuapuycatl, 
5 vampoib po baccap m upnpaicill cocca1d vo Zaodealab. Ro cfeclamao 
rapam ploiccead lan mon la genenal coccad na bammogan m Epinn «1. Sip 
lohn nop vo dol 1 ccoiccead connact ap ois in po Eipish 1 ccombaioh 
cocead na ngaowel ofob vo cfnnpucchad. Taimcc iapla clomne piocaino 
a. Uillecc mac Riocaipo Shaccpanaig, mic mllice na ccenn co lon a poc- 
paicce ina ccionol. Canaice tna 1apla cuadmuman .1. Donnchad mac con- 
cobain, mic vonnchand ui bmam co na pocparcce on movh cceona. Tanga- 
TTA TNA Oponsa oipime nach ammeean cenmotacpade. Acc c(na acbenat 
anole na po tionoilead pM pé clan oaimpip in epimn pon peilb an pnronnpa 
pamanl von tpluasead.1pim an Lonmaine a lentionoil, ap allmupodacc 4 ap 
lonspnaite a minmll, 7] a neccoipee. lan tcoppaccam ooib péin ule 50 haon 
baile 1. 50 hat luain vo paigid an senenala Loccan 1apam co Ropcoman, 4 
f ccompocpaib mampcpe na binlle 1anccain7 o na puainpiot connactaig pop 
a ccionn ann pin amanl po paoilpioc, 1lompato can a nap prap hi pann Mheic 
uilham 50 clonnlaca, 7 50 maigin 50 po sabpac campa compaipping la caob 
abann Rooba. 

Qn can no bacan an cpocnaitce lan mop ace ctomaitlm cocc an dt pin, 
Ro paid Mac wlliam bunc tepoicc, a tecca 50 hUa noomnaall ora cumsioh 
pain cToeEce DIA Fortin, nip bo paullgcech po pneccpad moypm la hua nvom- 
naall uain pob enlam e1pide vo tect 1 ccoiccead mfoba apu pangaccan na 
cTeacta via Pago. Scprobcap ltpe, 7 pemblmna uada 50 Zaoiwdelaib coicciw 
olneccmact dia Popcongpa poppa ToldEct Ina Hocom Fo honad enoalea bai 
Popp an cconap vo pargio longpont an senenala Sip John nomyp,7 vo deachard 
buofin hn ecfnn cploa co na plog lap cap eipne, can Sliccec, Lar ofp pm 


" His having been refused the peace—An Eng- ° Ceann-lacha, i. e. the Head of the Lake, now 
lish writer would say: ‘he informed the Lord Kinlough, a townland in the parish of Shrule, 
Deputy and the Council of the answer given by in the barony of Kilmaine, and county of Mayo. 
the Irish, and how they had rejected his pro- It is so called from its situation at the head or 
posals for a peace.” extremity ‘of Lough Corrib. 


1596. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2001 


so that they finally resolved upon rejecting the peace. They communicated 
their decision to the Earl, who proceeded to Dublin to the Lord Justice and 
the Council, and related to them his having been refused the peace", and thé 
answer he had received from the Irish. The Lord Justice and Council sent 
messengers to England to the Queen, to tell her the news; so that she then 
sent a great number of men to Ireland, with the necessary arms. Their number 
was no less than twenty thousand ; and they were composed of mercenaries 
and [native] soldiers. A great hosting was mustered by the Queen’s general 
of war in Ireland, namely, Sir John Norris, to proceed into the province of 
Connaught, in order to reduce all those who had risen up in the confederation 
of the Irish in the war. The Earl of Clanrickard, 1. e. Ulick, the son of Rickard 
Saxonagh, son of Ulick na gCeann, came to join his levy with all his forces. 
The Earl of Thomond, 1. e. Donough, the son of Conor, son of Donough O’Brien, 
came likewise with his forces; and also many others besides them, not enume- 
rated, came to join him. In short, some say that no army like this had for a 
long time before been mustered in that part of Ireland possessed by the Sove- 
reign [of England], in the numbers of the muster, the exotie and strange cha- 
racter of their equipment and appearance. When all these had come together 
at Athlone to meet the General, they then proceeded to Roscommon, and after- 
wards to the vicinity of the monastery of Boyle ; but, not finding the Conna- 
cians there before them, as they had expected, they returned back, and marched 
towards the territory of Mac William, to Ceann-lacha’, and to Maighin®, and 
pitched a spacious camp on the brink of the River Robe. 

When this great army was threatening to come to this place, Mac William 
Burke (Theobald) sent his messengers to O’Donnell, requesting of him to come 
to his relief. Not negligently did O’Donnell respond to this [request], for he 
had been prepared to proceed into the province of Meave [Connaught] before 
the messengers arrived. He sent letters and writings to the Irish of the pro- 
vince of Olnegmacht [Connaught], to request of them to meet him at a certain 
place on the road, leading to the camp of the General, Sir John Norris; and he 
himself set out on his journey with his army across the Erne and the Sligo, 


a 
® Maighin, now Moyne, a townland containing Mayo.—See Genealogies, Tribes, and Customs of 
the ruins of a church and castle, in the parish Hy-Fiachrach, p. 494, and the map to the same 
of Shrule, barony of Kilmaine, and county of — work. 


Licy 


2002 aNNQaZa RIOshachtd elReEaNN. [1596. 


rpmb pleibe 5am cpe luigne,7 tne cprch gailfns. Tangacan cpa saooil an 
coiccld Fan lompuipeac pon tosainm 1pm. Canaicc ann cetup Onian dcc 
(1. 0 pucipe) mac bmain mic bmain mic Cogan uf pucanc. Tanaic ann 6 con- 
cobain puad, 6 cealleugh, Mac o1anmaca mange luincc. Tangacap ann an oa 
mac ovonnchaid, an oa Ua (Shpa, 7 ua ouboa. lan cconpaccam na ngaoweal 
rm co hcut naén baile, nf po hanad leo 50 no gabpac longponc pon ionchaib 
Sin lohn nomp oon caob anonll oon Rodba ceona. 

Ro bar 1omazisioh fconpa anonn 7 anall amail bid pm proh 7 pp caip- 
pine, 7 nin b6 hf 6n ian pfrip, acc ba vo bnat 7 carpcélad 7 vo tabaine 
bnéicce 1mo poile via ccaompaccaip. OAimypiec achai amlaio pin ashad 1 
nashard co ccoaupnic a lomce vo na gallaib conad é ni po chinnpiot véinse an 
punt 1 mbaccap 6 na po cumainspioc ni vo na Zaowdealaib. Oo sniacc 
pamlaid 7 vo cHid an Zenepal 50 Zaillim, appoe 50 baile ata luam, 7 po 
paccanb parson In ccunsa, 7 map an cceona1 ngaillim, 1 mbaile ach an 
pos, 17m mullach mép ua maine, hi cell conaall 1 mbél ata na pluaigead 1 
Ropp comain, hi ccoullpsi, 7.1 mamptip na barlle. 

Ua concobaip pligis 00 tecc in epinn co ngallaib 1omoda lap bn ppogman 
na blhiadna po. 

Oo cuinfd Sip Ripvepd biongam co na bnartpb a cumaccaib céiccid Con- 
nact, ] puccad iavpioe co hat cliat, 7 vo cupie apparoe 50 Saxoib 7 po 
cuinead neach ele ba pfpp map ma ionad 1 ngobepnonact cocci connact 
1. Sin Conenp chpopt a comainm. 6a pip tiodnaicte péd 7 maoine vo Zal- 
lab 7 00 Zaoidelaib eipide, 7 ni cainicc vo Zallaib 1 nEpimn ip na ofio{ncoib 
nech ba pfpp map. lan ccocc vo co hat chat po bai ag comcnuimmuccad 
vaome 7 acc uncmall anmala oo dul hi cconnaccab. Oo cow iapam co 
lion ploig, 7 pocade co baile ata lua, 7 00 pecaoil a banvada 1 ccampa 4 
hi ppoplongponc ap baileib 6 manne, 7 cloimne Riocaipo 1. Zanllim, baile ata 
an piog, an mullac mon, conga, 7 an lacimnp. Oo coccan opongs mop vo 
mancib céiccid connact do parsid an Zobepnona, 7 vo Zabrac lap po oas a 
allad 7 a ano cuanupecbala. Ro ba oibmde 6 concobain puad 1. oo mac 
coippoealbars pucid,7 mac diapmaca .1. concoban, 7 po narompiot a ccapactc- 
pao ppp. 

* Brian Oge.—Charles O’Conor adds in the ° Mullaghmore-Hy-Many, now Mullaghmore, 


margin that this Brian Oge was the son of near Mount-Bellew. This castle is now a heap 
Brian-na-Murtha. of ruins.—See Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, 


1596. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2003 


keeping the stream of Sliabh-Gamh on the right, through Leyny and the terri- 
tory of Gaileanga. The Irish of the province came at the summons to meet 
him ; and, first of all, O'Rourke (Brian Oge’, the son of Brian, son of Brian, son 
of Owen) ; thither came O’Conor Roe, O'Kelly, Mac Dermot of Moylurg; thither 
came the two Mac Donoughs, the two O’Haras, and O’Dowda. When these 
Irish came together at one place, they made no delay until they pitched their 
camp, confronting Sir John Norris, on the opposite side of the same River Robe. 

There was a communication between them on both sides, as if through 
peace and friendship ; but this, in truth, was not so, but to spy, circumvent, and 
decoy each other, if they could. Thus they remained, face to face, until the 
English had exhausted their provisions ; and the resolution they came to was, 
to leave the camp in which they were, as they could not do any service upon 
the Irish. They [accordingly] did so; and the General proceeded to Galway, 
and from thence to Athlone ; having left soldiers in Cong, Galway, Athenry, 
Mullaghmore-Hy-Many’, Kilconnell, Ballinasloe, Roscommon, Tulsk, and the 
monastery of Boyle. 

In the autumn of this year O’Conor Sligo returned to Ireland with a great 
number of Englishmen. 

Sir Richard Bingham and his relatives were deprived of their power in the 
province of Connaught ; and they were brought to Dublin, and sent off from 
thence to England ; and a far better man than he was appointed in his place to 
the governorship of Connaught, by name Sir Conyers Clifford. He was a dis- 
tributor of wealth and jewels upon the English and Irish ; and there came not 
of the English into Ireland, in latter times, a better man than he. On his arrival 
in Dublin, he proceeded to muster men and arms, to proceed into Connaught. 
He afterwards marched, with the entire of his troops and forces, to Athlone, and 
distributed his companies in camps and fortresses among the towns of Hy-Many 
and Clanrickard, namely, Galway, Athenry, Mullaghmore, Cong, and Lehinch’. 
A great number of the chiefs of the province of Connaught repaired to the 
Governor, and adhered to him, on account of his fame and high renown. Among 
these were O’Conor Roe, i. e. Hugh, the son of Turlough Roe, and Mac Dermot, 
i,e. Conor, who formed a league of friendship with him. 


note “, p. 18. mon, barony of Kilmaine, and county of Mayo.— 
S Lehinch, a castle in the parish of Kilcom- See note ", under the year 1412, p. 811, supra. 


10) i aay: 


2004 AQNNaZa RIOshachta ElREANN. [1596. 


O concobain Shigis tna 1ap cToocT 06 a Saroib co hEpmn po sabe as 
cfnopuccad Connacc amail ap ofch po plo a hucc gall, 7 po sabrac clann 
noonnchaid cule muime lap. bai beop baile an mocaig an a cumay. Ro 
sabpac man an ccéona muincin Canc lap, vain ba hhavopoe poptap cap) 
DFlon a 1onald Do Spep,7 popcan paoths ora poccain o1a pargio, 7 po honpac 
ouaill, 7 00 diomay, 7 po sabpace acc beng 7 acc bagan apn cenel cconarll. 

O vomnall ona 6c cualais pde popccad an pcceoil pin, 7 a@ noolpoem 
1ccombad sall ma asand, ni po camp pm cecclamad ploig cenmoca ampars 
| aép tuapupcail 7 vo cTaéd 1anam cap Slicceach pran 50 Rory oipce an 
poptan camp: la hUa cconcobain in gach 04 1 mbatcap 1 noiampaib, 7 1 
nopoibelaib oamgne an tine co na no paccarb mil mnmte led, 7 ni po cneach 
act 1adpom nama, se po corccill vob co minic pome an a noinnme 7 an a 
nofpoile 50 pop bnort a mbmactpa o1ampaca, 7 a naincmide na po Feopat oo 
oicleit Ua vomnaill ora nongain an tan pin. 

Concoban, mac cards, mic concobap wi ban o bél ata an comhpaic vo 
dol pop oibfince 7 pon posal, ucop baiprohe, 7 opong vo clomno typichish 
amaille pip ap ionnanbadh o na natapda anaon la saoidealaib an cuaip- 
ceimc, 7 Tainic ina m(nmam poccain oa tein, 7 appead Loccap vo clomn Rio- 
caind, 00 Shleb eccge,4 o1occan clomne cule. Ro bap ina lfnmain o gach 
Tip do Tin co no sabad Concobap pa oeoroh ap m ccorll morp, 7 puccad é n 
ccfnd an ppeploenp ip ccéd mi Dposmap do ponnnad, 7 po baparszead he 
1 ccopeals an tepma na Samna. 

Cadcc, mac tompdealbais, mic vonncha, mic concobain uf bmam (sap 
mbht pé pooa pon posal) vo sabail 1 mbuitilepachab, 7 a bapuccad che 
comaiple 1anla upmuman. 

* Cul-muine.—This is the present Irish name See note ‘, under the year 1589, p. 1879, supra. 
of Collooney, in the barony of Tirerrill, and “ Sliabh-Echtghe, now Slieve Aughty, a large 
county of Sligo; but it is more usually called mountainous district on the confines of the 
Cul-Maoile, or Cuil-Maoile, in these Annals— counties of Clare and Galway. See it already 
See the years 1291, 1526, 1586, 1601. mentioned at the years 1263, 1570, 1572, 1578. 


“ The O’Harts—These were seated in the * The lower part.—This phraseology of the 


north of the barony of Carbury, in the county Four Masters is different from the present local 
of Sligo, between Grange and Bunduff, and op- 


use of the word ioccap, lower, which means 
posite the island of Inishmurry. 


that part of the county next the Lower Shannon. 
* Bel-atha-an-chomhraic, now Ballycorick, near ¥ Coill-mhor.—There are several places of this 
the town of Clare, in the county of Clare— name in Munster; but as Conor O’Brien was 


1596.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2005 


O’Conor Sligo, after his return from England, proceeded, on behalf of the 
English, to reduce Connaught ; and he was joined by the Clann-Donough of 
Cul-muine’, and he had also Ballymote in his power. The O’Harts" also ad- 
hered to him, for they had always been faithful to the man who held his place ; 
and they rejoiced at his arrival, and were filled with pride and arrogance, and 
began to defy and threaten the Kinel-Connell. 

When O’Donnell heard this fact rumoured, and that these people had joined 
the English against him, he did not wait to muster an army, except his soldiers 
and mercenaries, and proceeded westward across the [River] Sligo, and plun- 
dered all those who paid obedience to O’Conor, wherever they were, [even 
those] in the wilds and fast recesses of the country; so that he did not leave a 
single head of cattle among them. He plundered but these only ; and though 
he had often spared them on former occasions, on account of their littleness and 
insignificance, yet their own haughty words and animosity, which they were 
unable to repress, provoked O’Donnell to plunder them on this occasion. 

Conor, the son of Teige, son of Conor O’Brien, of Bel-atha-an-chomhraic’, 
went into insurrection, and began to plunder; for he, together with a party of 
the Clann-Sheehy, having been expelled from their patrimonies, were along 
with the Irish of the north. It came into their minds to return to their own 
territory ; and they passed through Clanrickard, by Shabh-Echtghe” and the 
lower part* of Clann-Cuilein. They were pursued from territory to territory, 
until Conor was at last taken in the Wood of Coill-mhor’, and brought before 
the President in the first month of autumn; and he was hanged at Cork in the 
[ensuing] November” Term. 

Teige, the son of Turlough’, son of Donough’, son of Conor O’Brien, after 
having been a long time engaged in plundering, was taken in the country of the 
Butlers, and executed by advice of the Earl of Ormond. 


third Earl of Thomond, and was 


executed at Cork, it looks very likely that he 
was taken at Coill-mhor, a celebrated haunt of 
insurgents, near Charleville, in the north of the 
county of Cork.—See it already mentioned at 
the years 1579, 1580, 1581, 1582. 

% November Term, i.e. Michaelmas Term, as it 
is called by the lawyers. 

* Turlough.—He was the brother of Conor 


O’Brien, 
hanged in 1581. 

> Donough.—He was the second Earl of Tho- 
mond. This Earl Donough left three sons, 
viz., Conor, his successor; Turlough, who was 
hanged in 1581; and Teige, who, according to 
Duald Mac Firbis, had three celebrated sons, 
viz., 1, Col. Dermot, surnamed the good ; 2, 


2006 aNNazZa RIOBshachtTa elRECHN. 


[1597. 


Uaatne, mac Rudpaige dicc, mic Rudpaige caoic, mic conuill ui moda vo 
bfich ina oune uapal hi ccfpoaib coccand an tan pa, 7 laoigip 00 Linpeemop 
laip etip 10t, apbap, 7 aiciuccad co na& baof énni 1pm tip o slap slca no 
baéouin amaé nach baof pop a cumap. Ro mapbad ona lap oume uapal vo 
Sharancoib bar In ppdobanle lLaoigip) aga parbe blad mép von cin a hus- 


dappap an ppionnpa a. Corbi mac marsiptip Fpauup a aim. 

Clann emainn an caland, mic Semaip, mic Pianaip puaid mic Semuip, mic 
émainn mic Iipofipd buicilep 00 dol pon pogail beop tne 1omtnut le hiapla 
upmuman, 7 a nataip emann an calend vo Zabal tne na ccioncaibypive. 

Emann, mac Ripofino, mic Piapay puaio oo sabonl map an cceona. 

Pracha mac Coda, mic Sfain o slionn maotlugpa vo bhit ag millead Longin 


| mide an Tan pa. 


QOIS CRIOST, 1597. 


Cloip Cort, mile, cuice céo, nochat, a peachc. 


Ua vomnaill od puad, mac Coda, mic Masnaya vo bht 1 ppoplonspopnt 
1 mbpeipne connacc pm pliab oa En anoip on can po hoipccl pammumncip 


Turlough, who attended the Parliament held at 
Dublin in 1585 ; and 3, Col. Murtough O’Brien, 
who was living in 1664. The Editor is of opi- 
nion that this Col. Murtough was the father of 
Donnell Spaineach, the ancestor of Terence 
O’Brien of Glencolumbkille, notwithstanding 
the evidence of the manuscript pedigree already 
quoted at p. 1834, A. D. 1585. 

© A gentleman of the English.—This was Alex- 
ander, third son of Francis Cosby. Francis, 
Alexander’s eldest son, was also slain on this 
occasion.—See note *, under the year 1580, 
p- 1739, supra. 
following account of the conflict between Oweny 
O’More and the Cosbies, from an original MS. 
which belonged to the late Admiral Cosby : 

‘In the year 1596, Owny Mac Rory O’ More,” 
[ex-] ‘Chieftain of Leix, demanded a passage for 
his men over Stradbally bridge, and the request, 
being considered as a formal challenge to fight, 


Mr. Hardiman has given the 


was refused. On the 19th of May, Cosby, hear- 
ing that the O’ Mores were on the march, headed 
his kerne, and proceeded to defend the bridge, 
taking with him his eldest son, Francis, who 
was married a year before to Helena Harpole, of 
Shrule, by whom he had a son, William, born 
but nine weeks before this fatal battle of the 
bridge. Dorcas Sydney (for she would never 
allow herself to be called Cosby), and her 


daughter-in-law, placed themselves at a window 


of the abbey, to see the fight, and for some time 
beheld their husbands bravely maintaining their 
ground. At length Alexander Cosby, as he was 
pressing forward, was shot, and dropped down 
dead. Upon this his kerne, with melancholy 
and mournful outcries, began to give way; and 
Francis Cosby, the son, apprehensive of being 
abandoned, endeavoured to save himself by leap- 
ing over the bridge, but the moment he cleared 
the battlements he was also shot, and fell dead 


1597.] 2007 


Owny, son of Rury Oge, son of Rury Caech, son of Connell O’More, was at 
this time a gentleman [skilled] in the arts of war; and Leix was totally ravaged 
by him, both its crops, corn, and dwellings, so that there was nothing in the 
territory outside the lock of a gate or a bawn which was not in his power. He 
slew a gentleman of the English, who was [seated] at Stradbally-Leix, who 
possessed a large portion® of the territory by authority of the Sovereign, namely, 
[ Alexander] Cosby, the son of Master Frauus’. 

The sons of Edmond of Caladh, son of James, son of Pierce Roe, son of 
James, son of Edmond, son of Richard Butler, also turned out to plunder, in 
consequence of their animosity towards the Earl of Ormond ; and their father, 
Edmond of Caladh, was taken prisoner for their crimes. 

' Edmond, the son of Richard, son of Pierce Roe [Butler], was also taken 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 
4 


prisoner. 


At this time Fiagh, the son of Hugh, son of John [O'Byrne], from Glen- 
malure, was plundering Leinster and Meath. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1597. 


The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-seven. 


O'Donnell (Hugh Roe, the son of Hugh, son of Manus) encamped in Breifny 
of Connaught’, to the east of Slabh-da-en, after having plundered, as we have 


The feuds between the 
O’Mores and Cosbies still raged with violence. 
The infant” [William] ‘“ having died, Richard 
Cosby succeeded to the estate, and became leader 
of the kerne. Eager to revenge the deaths of 
his father and brother, he challenged the O’Mores 
to fight a pitched battle. They met in 1606, in 
the glen of Aghnahely, under the rock of Duna- 
mase, and the engagement was the most bloody 
ever fought between these rivals. After a long 
and doubtful conflict, fortune declared in favour 
of Cosby. The O’Mores were defeated, with 
considerable loss, and seventeen of the principal 
of the clan lay dead on the field. The revolu- 
tions of the seventeenth century completed the 
destruction of the O’Mores, but confirmed the 


into the river, &c. &c. 


Cosby family in its possessions.”—Jrish Min- 
strelsy, vol. ii. p. 165. 

4A large portion—The Cosby Manuscript, 
quoted by Mr. Hardiman, states that the Cosbys 
at one time possessed half the Queen’s County, 
and a township over. 

© Master Frauus, Magipemp Fpau3.—This is 
a mere error of transcription, for ‘ Magipzip 
Fpancip.” 

f Meath.—P. O’Sullevan Beare gives an ac- 
count of several engagements which took place 
about this period between O’Neill and the Eng- 
lish, in the neighbourhood of Armagh, but 
without any minute chronology. 

8 Breifny of Connaught, i.e. Breifny O'Rourke, 
or the present county of Leitrim, so called to 


2008 ANNaza RIOsHhachTa elRECGNN. [1597. 


ui concobarp Lap amcnl pemebencmap. Ro baipoe ag epnaige a pocpaicce, 
5 a torchepcal vo bpat pop ap saé capm 1 mbaccap 7 1ap ccecclamad vob 
Dia Paugid 1 noGipeadlanuapy appead loccan 1 Trpoca ced ua noilella, apparde 
Don Conann, cpe Macampe connacc, hi cclomn conmarsh hn cepich mame. Tan 
ctoct vo 1 nhoipmfoon Ua mame po lice pecermelca pemobluata uad pa 
cuae an calaw, 7 pa uactap na tine, 7 do beptpac bo tate 1omda, 7 eplca 
comadble Leo hi ccomne ui vommanll 50 baile ata an mos,7 Fe po pobaunpiot 
an bapoa an benle vo bapoace nip bo conba vob an cimnpeclecal uaip po 
eumpplot muincip ui Domnall cTeimnce 7 cMhoala pM ovoipyb ocansfh notnta 
an banle, 7 cuccpac opfimipfoa dDlomopa DIA paiccid, 7] po Cupplot pip na 
mupab iao go nofchpac pop caiblb an mip. Ro lngpioc 1apam vo na 
caiblib 50 mbacan pon ppadibh an banle,7 po enplarcpiot na vomppr don lucc 
bacap mums. Habarcc 1anam pop toganl na cris lo ctcaipecfoa, 7 na tcegoap 
ppomiaca co puccpact eipcib ma mbaot moib oronnmapaib, 7 veoalarb. 
Qopipit in adhang pin pin mbanle bn pm. Nip bo podams piom no captm ma 
puccad ouma, 7 Danann vevach 7 ounadh apm mbaile pm ap na manach. ba 
hap an mbanle ceovna pin no Lice pecfimealca uad vanccain clone mocaipo 
an sach caob oabamn. Ro leincneachad, 7 po lammopnead lap na pcemel- 
cobh pio Uchpait 50 mag pincomlad. Ro loipccead, 7 po lomainecead lar 
an cemd eile o1b 0 banle [ata] an piog 7 6 pat FSoippsin pan so pinn mil, so 
mfopaide, 7 50 Dopup na seullme. Ro loipecead leo c(Fh bmighve 1 novopup 
ppapp na geallme. Oo ponad popad, 7 paplongponc ta hua noormnanll co 
na plogaib im avhans pm ecip uanan mop 4 saallim ag cloich an linyigh So 


distinguish it from Breifny O’Reilly, or the 
present county of Cavan, which was at this pe- 
riod a part of Ulster. 


' Rath-Goirrgin, i.e. the Rath of Goirrgin, 
one of the chiefs of the Firbolgs, who flourished 
here in the first century. It was anciently 


" Caladh, now Callow, a district comprised 
principally in the barony of Kilconnell, in the 
county of Galway.—See map to Tribes and Cus- 
toms of Hy-Many. 

i Leathrath, now Laragh, a townland contain- 
ing the ruins of a castle in the parish of Kilimor- 
Daly, and about six miles north-east of the 
town of Athenry, in the county of Galway. 

* Magh-Seanchomhladh, i. e. the Plain of the 
old Gate. This name is now obsolete. 


called Aileach Goirrgin. The name Rath Goirr- 
ginn is still retained, and is anglicised Rath- 
gorgon, which is applied to a townland in the 
parish of Kilconerin, barony of Athenry, and 
county of Galway. It contains a moat, which 
was originally surrounded with a fosse, and the 
ruins of a castle of considerable extent. 

™ Rinn-Mil, i.e. the point or promontory of 
Mil, one of the Firbolgic tribe called Clann- 
Uathmoir. The name is now pronounced in 


1597.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2009 


said before, the faithful people of O’Conor. He was awaiting [the arrival of] 
his forces and muster from every quarter where they were ; and when they 
had all assembled, which was at the end of the month of January, they marched 
into the territory of Tirerrill, from thence into Corran, through Machaire-Chon- 
nacht, and into Clann-Conway and Hy-Many. Having reached the very centre 
of Hy-Many, he sent forth swift-moving marauding parties through the district 
of Caladh", and the upper part of the territory; and they carried off many herds 
of cows and other preys to O'Donnell, to the town of Athenry; and though the 
warders of the town attempted to defend it, the effort was of no avail to them, 
for O’Donnell’s people applied fires and flames to the strongly-closed gates of 
the town, and carried to them great ladders, and, placing them against the 
walls, they [recte, some of them] ascended. to the parapets of the wall. They 
then leaped from the parapets, and gained the streets of the town, and opened 
the gates for those who were outside. They [all] then proceeded to demolish 
the storehouses and the strong habitations ; and they carried away all the goods 
and valuables that were in them. They remained that night in the town. It 
was not easy to enumerate or reckon the quantities of copper, iron, clothes, 
and habiliments, which they carried away from the town on the following day. 
From the same town: he sent forth marauding parties to plunder Clanrickard, 
on both sides of the river; and these marauders totally plundered and ravaged 
[the tract of country] from Leathrath' to Magh-Seanchomhladh*. The remaining 
part of his army burned and ravaged [the territory], from the town of Athenry 
and Rath-Goirrgin' westwards to Rinn-Mil” and Meadhraige”, and to the gates 
of Galway, and burned Teagh-Brighde’, at the military gate of Galway. 
O'Donnell pitched his camp for that night between Uaran-mor? and Galway, 


Irish Rinn mil, and anglicised Rinvile. It isa 
townland in the parish of Oranmore, not far from 
the town of Galway; and there is a castle in 
ruins in the western part of this townland, said 
to have belonged to the family of Athy. 

" Meadhraighe, now anglice Maaree, a penin- 
sula extending about five miles into the bay of 
Galway, to the south of the town. It is exactly 
coextensive with the parish of Ballynacourty.— 
See map to Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, and 
Chorographical Description of Lar-Connaught, 


p- 42. 

° Teagh-Brighde, i.e. St. Bridget’s house. This, 
which was otherwise called St. Bridget’s Hos- 
pital, was situated on the east side of the town 
of Galway. It was built by the Corporation in 
1542.—See Chorographical Description of Iar- 
Connaught, p. 40. 

P Uaran-mor, i.e. the great well, or cold 
spring, now Oranmore, a considerable village, 
situated at the head of one of the arms into 
which the upper end of the bay of Galway 


Liz 


2010 QNNawa RIOshachta elREaNN. (1597. 


pommnad. Oo taflo 6 vomnall ap na mapach so menmpeip an cnc 1 noopup 
na saillme, 7 po bai 1omatigid uad 50 luce an baile ag cuingio cpfice 4 
cfnnaighecta a neppad neccpamail, 7] a néogad nuapal pon anall vo na 
cpfchanb. Cppead po chinn 1anam poo tan a ap, 7 munbad thoma na 
ctionol cpeach, 1omat na nainccnead, 7 aroble na héoala po bad ooig na 
hanpad don pfim pin 50 sont mmnp1 Suaine hi ccenel aoda na heccge. Cuo 
ua oomnaill co na plosaib 7 co na ccpeacaib Leo tne cfpclap coiccid connact 
hi pppiting na conaine céona, 7 ni po camp 50 po Zab longpone In ccalpaige 
pp Slicceach anoip, 7 po paoid a siollanpaid, 7 a aép ofaipin la apanll oa 
cneachab tap Samaoin bad cuando. 

Oala ui concobaip pliccis (oonnchad mac catail dice) po tleclamad plos 
tan mon lair vo sallaib 7 00 Zaowelaib san bcc 1ap frei bnigZove vo toct 
50 Slicceach. 

O vomnall cna baipoe In ccalpoanse (amanl pemebencman) hi prorcill 
foppa 47 oo b(fpc ammuy pop plos ui concobaip mia pra pangacan so Slieceach. 
Ni po hanad pripplde 10ip, accmad uatad tapptap do deipead an tplorg 
as tnais neotule, Fontan, boacc{p iaopaide. Ro mapbad ann mac meric 
wtham bune 1. mac Ripofipo mac oluenap, mic Slam, 7 opong ole nac 
capmettp cenmotapom. Oo cafo ua concobaip pop ccila,7 mp b6 plan lap 
a minma im toecc an cunap pm. Tanaic tna Ua vomnaill o1a TZh, 7 po 
lice pecaoilead o1a ploisaibh vo léccad a pecip: oatle a naipcip imchfin. 
| po paccaib a ampa 4 a aép cuapupcail 1 cediccead connacht 1 nupfaicill 
coccad ui concobain 7 na ngall baccapn lonp, 7 mall sapb mac cuinn, mic an 
calbaig uf vomnanll 1 ccoipiszecc ponna. Ro sabrac pem pon mopead 4 
caomillead na ngZaoidelcuat po Gnslccan 1 ccommbaid ui concobaip 7 na 
ngall 50 ccapoyac pon ccila vo dP) Opons mon o1b 1m Mhac orapmaca 
Concobap toipech marge luincc, 7 puccad e1pide 00 paisid ui Domhnarll Fo 
no(pna a mumc(pup pip an cana pect, 7] co ccapac a pap 06. Oo ponpac 


branches. On the shore of the bay are the ruins the Hill, or. Knock Abbey. 

of Oranmore castle, erected by the Earls of Clan- ° Gort-insi-Guaire, i. e. the town of Gort, in 

rickard, now attached to the residence of Mr. the territory of Kinelea-of-Slieve Aughtee, or 

Blake. O’Shaughnessy’s country.—See it already men- 
1 Cloch-an-Lingsigh, i. e. Lynch’s stone, or tioned at the years 1571, 1573. 

stone house, or castle. This name is now obsolete. ‘ Calry, a parish in the barony of Carbury, 
* Mainistir-an-chnuic, i.e. the Monastery of lying between Glencar and Lough Gill, to the 


1597. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2011 


precisely at Cloch-an-Lingsigh*. On the following day O’Donnell proceeded 
to Mainistir-an-chnuic’, at the gate of Galway, and communicated with the inha- 
bitants of the town, requesting traffic and sale of their various wares and rich 
raiment for some of the preys. He then resolved upon returning back; and were 
it not for the burden of the collected preys, the multiplicity of the plunders, and 
the vastness of the spoil, it is certain that he would have not stopped on that route 
until he had gone to Gortinnsi-Guaire* in Kinel-Aedha-na-hEchtge. O'Donnell, 
with his forces and their preys, returned by the same road, through the very mid- 
dle of the province of Connaught, and never halted until he pitched his camp in 
Calry*, to the east of Sligo; and he sent his calones and the unarmed part of his 
people to convey some of the preys northward, across the River Samhaoir’. 

As for O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge), he mustered a 
numerous army of English and Irish troops, a short time after the festival of 
St. Bridget”, to march to Sligo. 

O’Donnell, as we have already mentioned, was in Calry, in readiness to meet 
them; and he made an attack upon the army of O’Conor before they could 
reach Sligo. None of O’Conor’s army waited to resist him, excepting a few in 
the rear, who were overtaken at Traigh-Eothaile. These were wounded or 
drowned ; and the son of Mac William Burke, namely, the son of Richard, son 
of Oliver, son of John, and many others not enumerated, were slain. O’Conor 
returned back ; and he was not happy in his mind for having gone on that 
expedition. O'Donnell also returned home, and dismissed his tribes, that they 
might rest themselves after their long expedition ; and he left his soldiers and 
hirelings in Connaught, under the command of Niall Garv, the son of Con, son 
of Calvagh O'Donnell, to carry on war against O’Conor and the English people 
who were along with him. These proceeded to plunder and destroy the Irish 
tribes who had risen up in confederacy with O’Conor and the English; so that 
they won over a great number of them [to the Irish side] again, and, among 
others, Mac Dermot (Conor), Chief of Moylurg, who was brought before 
O'Donnell, and formed a league of friendship with him a second time, and gave 


east of the town of Sligo. This district was See Keating’s Hist. of Ireland, Ualiday’s edition, 

anciently called Calraighe Laithim.—See map _p. 168; and O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, part iii. ¢. 3. 

to Genealogies, Tribes, §c., of Hy-Fiachrach. w The festival of St. Bridget.—This falls on the 
u Samhaoir, an old name of the River Erne.— Ist of February. 


1122 


e 


2012 QNNAtA RIOShachTa EIRECNN. (1597. 


coipls na ccuat bavan pm coippyhab a cuaid an cceona, 7 00 pattypac a 
ngeill, 7 a naiccipe 0Ua vomnalll. 

Ceitne bonmille, 7 peche ppicic barmlle ptoain vo tect on mbaunpiosam 
50 hat cliat hi mi manta vo paigio a mumnezipe. Jan ccon an pioam hi 
ctip po cainpnglo € co ppaio an fiona co mbaoi ule m aen 1onavh ap sac 
caeb don tTppaid, 7 do Deachad aorbel clin 1pm bptoan. Ni plp cpa an 
do mm, pa a talmam camic an Splange hip, act cfha po meabend na bainil- 
leda ina naén bned Lappac 7 luamamcfinlo an 13 00 manta do fonnnad, co 
po toccbad cinpte cloc,7 cumodaiste cnomn na ppdaicce va ppotaib pulains, 
7 va bpopoavhaib consmala ip in aép foanbuap co mbiod an trail piotpooa, 
7 an cloc clan tuimgte, 7 an dune ina Eccorce Conpanda fon foluarnain 
ym aen op chho an baile la cunnpium an then puodaip conac e1dIp pfom, 
amt, no apnir an po millead vo daoimb ononca, oaép sacha cfinde, vo 
mnoaub, oo margofnarb, vo clannaib oaoine uapal cicclo ap Zach ano vemminn 
vo venam poslama von catpais. Nip bo oamna eccaome an po millead 
_ d6p, né oains(cr, no vo pomaome paogalca in aatpecchad in po millead 7 m 
po mudaighead vo oaoimb lap an conamnncl(p pm. Nip bo hi an tpndo pm 
amain po o1otaicchead don cup pin, act an cltpame pa nfpa o1 von cCatpaish 
ceond. 

Ua concobaap Oonnchad mac catal dice vo cingal canpolpa, 7 capacc- 
pad ecip a chamain (mac mec ulham bunc) 1. tepoitct na long mac Rip- 
ofipd an 1apainn, mic vaio, mic Emainn, 7 Sobepnoip coiccid connace .1. Sip 
Conepp chponc. lan noenam a ccovaig pe pole voib 00 tannaing tepoicc 
an Zobepnoin 7 bannada coiccid connacc 1 trip amalgaoa, 7 hi pann merc 
uilham 50 po hatcuin(oh, 7 50 po Monnanbad leo Mac wlliam (cepsice mac 
uacteip ClocaigZ mic Sam, mic oluenap) app a atanoa hn cefnd uf domnalll. 
Ro lomad 7 po Linpecmoypad leo sac aén pip a mbaoi a pann 7 a Capaccpad 
ip cin via ip. Ro sab an tip von cup pin la cepoicc na long 4 lap an 


* Wine-street, now Winetavern-street. Harris the city.”—History of the City of Dublin, p. 321. 
notices the ignition of this powder, under the ¥ Placed on both sides of the street, literally, 
year 1596, thus: ‘‘ After the putting of the powder to land, it 

“A.D. 1596. A great quantity of gunpowder was drawn to the street of the wine, so that it 
being landed at the Wood-quay, to be conveyed was all in one place on both sides of the street.” 
to the Castle of Dublin, by accident took fire on To O’ Donnell.—This is a strange idiom. The 
the 11th of March, and did great damage to meaning is that they expelled him from his ter- 


\ 


1597. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2013 


him due submission. The chiefs of the territories bordering on the Curlieu 
Mountains did the same, and delivered up their hostages and securities to 
O'Donnell. 

One hundred and forty-four barrels of powder were sent by the Queen to 
Dublin, to her people, in the month of March. When the powder was landed, 
it was drawn to Wine-street*, and placed on both sides of the street’, and a spark 
of fire got into the powder ; but from whence that spark proceeded, whether 
from the heavens or from the earth beneath, is not known; howbeit, the barrels 
burst into one blazing flame and rapid conflagration (on the 13th of March), 
which raised into the air, from their solid foundations and supporting posts, the 
stone mansions and wooden houses of the street, so that the long beam, the 
enormous stone, and the man in his corporal shape, were sent whirling into the 
air over the town by the explosion of this powerful powder ; and it is impos- 
sible to enumerate, reckon, or describe the number of honourable persons, of 
tradesmen of every class, of women and maidens, and of the sons of gentlemen, 
who had come from all parts of Ireland to be educated in the city, that were 
destroyed. The quantity of gold, silver, or worldly property, that was destroyed, 
was no cause of lamentation, compared to the number of people who were in- 
jured and killed by that explosion. It was not Wine-street alone that was 
destroyed on this occasion, but the next quarter of the town to it. 

O’Conor (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge) established friendship and con- 
cord between his brother-in-law (the son of Mac William Burke), i. e. Theobald- 
na-Long, the son of Richard-an-Iarainn, son of David, son of Edmond, and the 
Governor of the province of Connaught, i. e. Sir Conyers Clifford. After their 
reconciliation Theobald drew the Governor and the companies of the province 
of Connaught into Tirawley, and into Mac William’s country, and expelled and 
banished Mac William (Theobald, the son of Walter Kittagh, son of John, son 
of Oliver) from his patrimony, to O'Donnell’; they despoiled and totally plun- 
dered all those who remained in confederation and friendship with him in the 
territory. The country [generally], on this occasion, adhered to* Theobald-na- 


ritory, leaving it optional with him to go wher- * Adhered to.—Ro gab an zip, &., la tepoizz, 
ever he wished; but that he fled to his friend literally, ‘“‘the country on this occasion took 
O’Donnell, as the person most likely to shelter with Theobald of the Ships, and with the Go- 
him, and assist him to recover his patrimony. yernor.’”’ This idiom is still in common use. as: 


2014 GANNaGZa RIOSHachTA EIREGNN. [1597. 


ngobepnoip. lompair an sobepnoin ian pin 50 banle ata luain, 7 po pecaorl- 
plot na bandas) an a ngcaipypronaib. Oa voaipnfip a puccpac oaincenb 4 
vévalab a pann meic william an can pin. 

Oala meic wlliam ian ctcoct Dopom co haipm 1 mboi 6 vomnaill oacaome 
a immMd ppp po capip ma Fochaip co mi mfoom pampaio. Oo sni O ovomnantl 
1aplam ploiccead hi ccdiccead connact do congnam la Mac wlham, 7 poarnic 
cap muaid ua namalsaoa Zan nac noognams. Ni cumsacan (no caemnac- 
catap) an tip pnitbeanc pip so po Zab a ngialla,7 a naivcine, 7 vo beapc 
rom na bnaisve 1pm v0 Mhac william, 7 paccbarp an cmioc pa umla 06. 
7 poppaccarb Rudpaise Ua oomnaill a ofpbpatenn budfipin cana: ceneoil 
cconaall Ina pappad oia nfptad 1 nagaid a namace Z0 plog mon ora mLloab 
cTpoigcedc, 7 via ampob amaille pmpp. Jompadip Ua vomnaill ma pmiting 
ola Tip. 

Ro cionoil Ua concobain 7 tepoicc na long plos mop vo sallaib, 7 00 
Zaowelab iap ppacecbail na cine oUa vomnall oo diosail a namcmvde fon 
Mhac wlham 7 poronnapbrac Mac wliiam an oana peacc, 7 Rudpaige von 
cup pm ap im cip an m pabacappide commlion oaome pnd. 6 pi comaiple 
appice la Ruoparge 7 la Mac uillham ma mbaoi ma ccompocnaib do énod 7 
oinmle an Tipe co na naiccpeabcachaib, 7 co na muimntfpanb oo con plmpa 
cap muaio ua namalgada, 7 cpé tip Placpac muaide do toct po mamup 
uf ovomnaill 50 pangaccan plab sam wa navhaig, 7 sabaicc acc apecnam 
cmap an pliabh poo na hoiwhche. 

Imtapa an soibepndopa 6 po cup pum ua concobarn,7 cflpdice na long co 
na plogaib vo diocup meic wlham ap an cip, Ro clgloampide lion a poc- 
paicce pon cino Meic william 7 Ruopage ipin conaip na po cumamsyioc vo 
peachna no viomgabal. Roptap iad bacan vo paonclanoaib 1 pranpad an 
soibepnopa an can pin a. Uill(cc mac Riocaipo Shaccpanans, mie wllicc na 
ccfno, 1apla clomne Riocaipd co na mac Riocano banin oie collin erode, 
Oonnchad mac concobaip, mic vonnchad wi bmn iapla cuadmuman, 7 
Mupchad mac Mupchad mic anmaca ui bmam banain mnpr ui cumn so 


‘““cuip uaiz oo L{ndn 7 gab le 0’ Céad mnaoi: » Equal to their’s, i. e. Mac William and Rury 
Put away thy coneubine, and take with thy O’Donnell had not forces sufficient to contend 
first wife.’—See the Editor’s Irish Grammar, with those of Theobald of the Ships and the 
part ii. c. viii. p. 310. Governor. 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9015 


Long and the Governor. The Governor then returned to Athlone, and the 
companies of soldiers were distributed among the garrisons. The preys and 
spoils taken from Mac William’s people on this occasion were indescribable. 

As for Mac William, when he went to O’Donnell to complain to him of his 
sufferings, he remained with him until the middle month of summer. O’Don- 
nell then made a hosting into the province of Connaught to assist Mac William, 
and he crossed the Moy into Tirawley without meeting any danger ; and the 
country was not able to oppose him, so that he seized their hostages and pledges; 
and he delivered up these hostages, and left the country in obedience to him; 
and he left Rury O'Donnell, his own brother, Tanist of Tirconnell, with him, 
to strengthen him against his enemies, a great number of foot-soldiers, and other 
troops. O’Donnell [then] returned back to his own country. 

When O’Donnell left the country, O’Conor and Theobald-na-Long mustered 
a great army of English and Irish, in order to wreak their vengeance on Mac 
William ; and they banished him a second time, and Rury along with him, on 
that occasion, from the territory, for they had not a number of men equal to 
their’s®. The resolution then adopted by Rury and Mac Wilham was to send 
all the property and cattle of the territory in their vicinity, together with the 
inhabitants and families, before them, across the Moy of Tirawley, and through 
Tireragh of the Moy, to come under the jurisdiction of O'Donnell. [This they 
did], and they arrived before nightfall at Slabh-Gamh, and during the whole 
night they continued crossing the mountain. 

As for the Governor, as soon as he had sent O’Conor and Theobald-na- 
Long to banish Mac William from the territory, he mustered all his forces, to 
meet Mac William and Rury on a road which they could not shun or avoid. 
The noblemen who attended the Governor on this expedition were these : 
Ulick, the son of Rickard Saxonagh, son of Ulick-na-gCeann, Earl of Clan- 
rickard, with his son, Rickard, Baron of Dun-Coillin®; Donough, the son of 
Conor, son of Donough O’Brien, Earl of Thomond; Murrough, the son of 
Murrough, son of Dermot, Baron of Inchiquin ; and many other distinguished 


° Dun-Coillin, now Dunkellin, in the parish or chair, called Clanrickard’s chair, which is 
of Killeely, which gave name to the barony of believed to be the place where the Mac William 
Dunkellin, in the county of Galway. Not far Oughter was inaugurated, before he became | 
from this castle is a hill with a rude stone seat, Earl of Clanrickard. 


2016 GQNNGtG RIOshachta eEIRECNNK. (1597. 


rochaioib ole 00 dagoaomib cenmotac. 6a hann vo pala oon soibepnomn 
bht an adhags pm mn ccanplen cule maofle pl pop abcaann moip pp puiab Zam 
aman [recte anoip], 7 pm pliab oa én anoip [recte amap] co ccoicc céd DEecc 
laoc vo sleipe scupecfoach ma focaip ann. 6a conaip corccfnn nap bo poo- 
ams 00 peachna an mongfn 1 mbao pum. Ac cuap 00 Rudpaige ua vomnanll 
7 vo mac william an sobepnoip oa bAt plmpa pop an cconomn na po peopat 
vo pecna. Op pap po chinnprot 6 pangacapn pra maom 1 nZappoccuyp don 
cauplen, a ccltpa, a mmmile, a ngiollanpad, 7 a naép o1cipm do Lésad uata 1 
pusid ba hmmlle mar an conaip m no bad mfnmanc leo budfin vo sabanl, 
imehian on caiplen, 7 140 budfipm vo oul cap an abainn san patuccad Wn 
ccompocnaib an caipceditl 6 nac pabpat comlion plois pm a mbioobadanb. 
Oo covap pom tna Zan amiuccad Zan poncloiptecc can an aban 50 mba- 
cap oon taob anall. Cnoap leo pom cfna vo eenpac anacal 7 moflsarl 
oa cefchpab 7 oa ngollannaid, Nip bo hamlend capla ooibpde icp vain 
po clop binnead béicead na mbo tamtead, 7 na nanmann neicciallad, 4 
posupnuall aopa a momana ipin muicovedoil. Oo lLiccle mancplors an soib- 
epmona ma nopongaib 7 ina nofonmaib po compan na ccltpa oup an ccarp- 
piccip 1ao. Ruccpacc om pon moilib 1omdaib, 7 00 Deachaid mm po bad moo 
uadaib o10b. Ro mapnbad onong mon do na sillib 7 oaop na Momana. ba 
don cup pin vo manbad Maolmuine mac Conulad meic an baino paof pipdana 
po bat apn monctib a ceneoil budfin. Ni po péopac a muinncin budfipin anacal 
vo cabot ooibpide la hhomaz an cyplois vo pala pon a moncaib. 6a méla 
mop lap an ngobepnoin a nool peaca pera cappard spiim poppa. CTiagarc 
na Zaoil app amland co pangacan cany an eine bud cuaid. Soaip an sobep- 
non Ina Peng, 7 nip bo plan lap a mfnma 6 vo (nncuple a ncarmde vada ran 
na prasbail m uachad amlaro pin. 

Piacha mac CQlooa mic Sain o sl(no Mhaolugna vo twieim ian ccap- 


* Abhainn-mhor, i.e. the Great River, now 
anglice Avonmore, a river which rises in Temple- 
house lake, and joins the Coolany river between 
Collooney and Ballysadare. 

© Sliabh Gamh and Sliabh-da-en.—These are 
mountains in the county of Sligo. The gap be- 
tween them, in which the little town of Col- 
looney stands, was anciently called Bearnas-mor 


Tire hOilella, i.e, the great gap of Tirerrill— 
See map to Genealogies, §c., of Hy-Fiachrach. 

f This was not the case, literally, ‘‘ Not thus 
it happened to them indeed.” 

8 Of the irrational animals, na nanmann néic- 
ciallaid. This would be written na n-aimmide 
n-€gcialloa, according to the modern system of 
orthography. The prefix €, when negative, 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2017 


men besides them. ‘The Governor lay on the first night in the castle of Cul- 
Maoile [Collooney], which is situated on the Abhainn-mhor*, to the east of 
Sliabh Gamh®, and to the west of Sliabh da-én, having fifteen hundred select 
warriors along with him there. This place where he remained was a general 
passage, and it was not easy to avoid it. Rury O’Donnell and Mac William 
were informed that the Governor was before them upon a road by which they 
could not avoid [passing]. And when before morning they had arrived ata 
place very near the castle, they resolved on sending off their herds and flocks, 
their calones, and the unarmed portion of their forces, by a way at a great dis- 
tance from the castle, and more secure than that by which they themselves 
intended to proceed, whilst they themselves should cross the river without 
being noticed, at a short distance from the castle, as they had not a force equal 
to that of the enemy. They crossed the river [accordingly] unnoticed and 
unheard, and landed in safety at the other side; and they thought that they 
had ensured the safety and protection of their cattle and attendants; but this 
was not the case’, for the loud lowing of the herds of kine and irrational 
animals®, and the shouts of their drivers, were heard early in the morning from 
the castle; and the Governor’s cavalry set out in troops and squadrons in the 
direction of the lowing of the cattle, to see if they could take them. They 
seized upon.a great number of cattle, but the greater part of them escaped 
from them. A great number of the servants and drivers were killed. It was 
on this occasion also that Mulmurry, the son of Cu-Uladh Mac Ward, a learned 
poet, and one of the most distinguished men of his own tribe, was killed. Their 
own people were not able to protect them, in consequence of the great numbers 
that were opposed to them. It was great annoyance to the Governor that they 
should have passed him by before he could lay hold of them. The Irish thus 
made their way northwards across the Erne. The Governor returned back ; 
and he was much dejected because his enemies had thus escaped from him. 
Fiagh, son of Hugh", son of John [O’Byrne] from Glenmalure, was slain 


eclispes the consonant to which it is prefixed. 

» Fiagh, son of Hugh.—He was chief of that 
sept of the O’Byrnes called Gaval-Rannall, and 
had his residence at Ballinacor, in Glenmalure, 
in the county of Wicklow. Though not the 
chief of the O’Byrnes he was by far the most 


warlike and powerful man of his name since the 
death of Dunlang, the son of Edmond, who was 
the last inaugurated O’Byrne.—See note ‘, under 
the year 1580, p. 1746, supra. There are several 
poems on his battles and victories preserved in 
the Leabhar Branach, or Book of the O’ Byrnes, 


IN 


2018 


aNNaca RIOshachta elREGNN. 


[1597. 


paing ceilcce va combpataip pop an pupcal(m apo iupcip na heneann Sin 
ulham Ruppel ipin cid mi vo pampad na bliadna po. 


preserved in the Library of Trinity College, 
Dublin, H. 1. 14, from one of which it would 
appear that all the O’Byrnes acknowledged him 
as their leader, if not chief; but it is quite evi- 
dent that some of the senior branches of the 
O’ Byrnes were very jealous of his greatness, and 
that this led to his betrayal and death is but 
too evident from these poems, and all contempo- 
raneous authorities. P. O’Sullevan Beare briefly 
alludes to his betrayal in his Hist. Cathol. Iber., 
tom. 3, lib. 3, c. x. fol. 145: 

‘* Tam me Lageniorum res vocant, qui tametsi 
paruis viribus, magna tamen constantia, & vir- 
tute pro Catholica religione manum conserue- 
runt. Postquam Fiachus Obruin vir strenuus, 
& Hereticorum hostis acerrimus fuit per prodi- 
tionem extinctus, eius filij Felmius, & Raymun- 
dus arma a patre mota non omiserunt. Dum 
Raymundus in Lagenia tumultus in Hereticum 
excitatos ducit, Felmius in Vitoniam ad Onellum 
contendit auxilium petitum.” 

There is a curious poem in the Leabhar Bra- 
nach, fol. 110, p. a., on the death of Fiagh, in 
which the writer states that he saw his body 
quartered and his head spiked on a tower in 
Dublin,—a sight which pierced his heart with 
anguish. 

I. Fiagh O’Byrne left three sons, namely: 1, 
Felim, who was M. P. for the county of Wicklow 
in 1613, and who was living in 1629. 2, Red- 
mond, or Raymond, of Killaveny, J. P. in the 
county of Wicklow in 1625, the ruins of whose 
castle are still to be seen, and are shewn on the 
Ordnance map as ‘‘Raymond’s Castle.” This 
Redmond had three sons: Felim of Killaveny ; 
Feagh of Kilcloghran, proclaimed a rebel, and 
a price set on his head, 8th February, 1641; 
and John. 3, Turlough. And one daughter, 
who was married to Walter Reagh Fitzgerald, 


of whose fate some account is given under the 
year 1595. 

II. Felim, son of Fiagh. He married Una, or 
Winifred Ni Toole. He was living in 1629, a 
prisoner in Dublin Castle. In his complaint to 
the Privy Council of his unjust trial and con- 
demnation at Wicklow in 1628, he says that his 
wife, the mother of his five sons, who was in 
previous good health, died within two days after 
his condemnation : ‘‘ her hart stringes broke.” — 
MS., F. 3. 17, T. C.D. He had eight sons: 1, 
Brian, who, with his brother Turlough, was 
committed to Dublin Castle in 1625, and was 
living in 1629; 2, Hugh, Lieutenant-Colonel 
of the Confederate Catholics in 1641, and who 
was proclaimed a rebel by Parsons and Borlase, 
Lords Justices, 8th February, 1641; 3, Gerald, 
living in 1604, and seems to have died young, at 
least before 1628 ; 4, James, living in 1603; 5, 
Turlough, living in 1628 ; 6, Feagh, alias Luke; 
7, Cahir, living in 1629 ; 8, Colla ; and a daugh- 
ter, who married John Wolverton, Esq. J. P. of 
the county of Wicklow in 1625. Seven of these 
sons are named in the above order in the re- 
mainders of Phelim mac Pheagh’s grant of lands 
from King James I, dated 28th March, 1604. 
Colla, who was born after that period, is men- 
tioned in Phelim mac Pheagh’s suit in 1628-9, 
when he was a close prisoner in Dublin Castle 
with his five sons. Duald Mac Firbis mentions 
only three of his sons, namely, Hugh, Colla, 
and Brian. Cahir, his seventh son, had a son, 
Hugh, who had a son, Cahir, the last generation 
of this family given in the Leabhar Branach. 

Ill. Brian, the son of Felim. He had a son, 
Shane mac Brian mac Phelim of Ballinacor, who 
was Colonel of the Confederate Catholics in 1641, 
after which period this family of Ballinacor dis- 
appear from history. The accusations against 


1597. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2019 


in the first month of summer in this year, having been treacherously betrayed 
by his relative, 'at the bidding of the Chief Justiciary of Ireland, Sir William 


Russell. 


these sons of Felim, on which their estates were 
confiscated, affords an appalling picture of hu- 
man depravity and perfidy in those murderous 
times; but as thesubstance of them, and the man- 
ner in which the whole trial was conducted, has 
been already given by the late Matthew O’Conor, 
Esq. of Mount Druid, in his History of the Irish 
Catholics, the Editor shall rest content with 
laying before the reader the following extracts 
from Felim’s complaint to the Privy Council, of 
his unjust trial and condemnation at Wicklow 
in 1628, as preserved in a manuscript in the 
Library of Trinity College, Dublin, F. 3. 17: 

‘** Lord Esdmond tried to induce Owen Byrne, 
a prisoner in Dublin Castle, to accuse Bryan 
and Tirlagh (Phelim’s sons), and racked him in 


vain for that purpose. Then Lord Esmond sent 


Cahir mac Hugh Duffe, a neare cousin of said 
Owen, and Morogh mac Hugh mac Owen, bro- 
ther in law to said Owen, to use their influence 
to make him depose against Tirlagh and Phelim. 

‘This Cahir mac Hugh Duffe, and the said 
Morogh, are doeing, theise 29 years at least, 
what they could against Phelim and his sonnes, 
both in helping to take theire landes from them 
and inventing many false matters against them 
to procure their death, as is well known; for 
said Cahir mac Hugh Duffe and the aforesaid 
Morogh, and his son, Morrish, came to the Lord 
Chichester, then Deputy, and informed his 
Lordship that Phelim and Bryan releeved one 
Torlogh O’ Toole, which his Lordship well knew 
was but meere malice. 

‘“‘Garrald mac Ferdoragh being a prisoner for 
some criminal fact, which he acknwledged had 
no means to save his life but by accusing men, 
was procured by William Greme and others, to 
This Garret’s 
father was committed to Wicklow by Phelim’s 


accuse Phelim and his sonnes. 


son in law, John Wolverston, for stealing cows, 
Gerald himself 
was committed for suspicion of felony by Phelim, 


and was executed for that fact. 


but acquitted. 

“This Garret’s brother in law, Shane Bane 
mac Teige mac Hugh, being in rebellion, was 
taken by Hugh mac Phelim, and brought to 
Wicklow by the Lord Chief Justice, where he 
was executed, which said Garret bore in mynde 
to revenge it when he could. 

“Shane O’Toole, Patricke O’ Toole,” [were] 
‘prisoners in the castle of Dublin about 162). 
Shane O’Toole was executed by martial law, 
and at his death left betweene him and God, 
that he was executed for not agreeing with said 
Garret mac Ferdoragh, and his confederates, in 
accusing Brian mac Felim, Tirlagh mac Phelim, 
and Cahir mac Phelim. 

‘“* Patrick O’Toole was pardoned for his accu- 
sations. 

*¢ Art O’Neale and Brian More, son in lawe 
to Art O’Neale, being in company with Donagh 
mac Shane, committing of a robbery, were taken 
by one of Phelim’s sons, and the robbery found 
in their hands, were sent here to his Majestie’s 
castle of Dublin, and seeing no other means to 
save their lives but to accuse others, as they 
were demanded, the said Arte O’Neale and 
Bryan More offered to make an escape at once 
with Dermot O’Toole, and to rob the porter’s 
coffer. 

‘« Shane Duffe mac Teige Moyle and Mortagh 
mac Teige Moyle, several times sollicited to 
accuse Phelim and his sons, and when they did 
not, they were two or three dayes bound, ready 
to be executed by martial lawe. 

‘Lord Esmond had, in his prison at Lime- 
rick”? [near Gorey, county of Wexford], ‘one 
Laughlin More mac Teige, which Laughlin his 


12a 2 


annaca rioshachtda €lReEGNN. 


2020 (1597. 


luptip nua 00 toct 1 nepinn 1 cTcopac mip Tun co napmant 7] co parson 
iomoanb lap 1. Cond bupough, comap a comainm. 
ospide on uptip bai ann pr pé tpi mbliadan so pin 2. Sip witliam Rupyel, 
Ro bfnad lap an oippice vo bi ag Sip lohn nonuip 6 na pmonnpa de .1. Zene- 
palcacc an coccard, 7 po sab fROon an oppicc pin pm a ap. Cuce 1apam 
poccna opfnaib Langtn, 7 mide, 7 oon mo bai umal von banmogain o coman 
cp nuipece 50 vin vealgan tToct Ina Docom (co Yionman lep tionolce an 
picfcmad la vo mi tul) 50 opoicle ata. Ro pplcepad na poccapta pm la 
hhanla cille oana, la sallanb mive, 7 lagstn. Canaice tna an luptip sup an 
lion ap la po ped Fup an margm cceona, 7 1ap poccaim 1 ccfnn a pole vo na 


lap nglacad an clodim 


plogaib vo apccnazap Fo Tip eogain co pangatcap Zan toipm(pec Fan carm- 
pum 50 habainn moip,7 anni vob annam la hUa neil prt pall iomcom(cca 


Lordship knows to be one that hated Felim and 
his sonnes. He was a foster-brother of Shane 
Bane mac Teige, which Hugh mac Phelim 
brought to Wicklow to execution. 

‘‘Phelim mac Pheagh took two of those that 
were concerned in Pont’s murder. @ 

‘¢ The Sheriff that impanelled the grand jury 
which found several bills against Phelim and 
his sonnes, is married to Lord Esmond’s niece, 
and tenant to Sir William Parsons, and the Lord 
Esmond procured this, his nephew, to be made 
Sheriffe of sett purpose to conclude his owne, 
and the,rest of said Phelim’s adversaries, their 
pretended and long-continued unjust hosting, 
and therefore said Sheriff elected Sir James 
Fitz Pierce to be forman of the grand jurie, a 
known open enemy to Phelim and his sons ; 
first, because he sett upon said Phelim at his 
going to Rathcuile, to the late Earl of Ormond; 
secondly, because Phelim was at the killing of 
said Sir James, his father; and thirdly, because 
the said Sir James did, for proofe of his con- 
tinuall malice, prefer a peticion to the Lord 
Grandison, alledging the said Phelim and his 
predecessors to be all bastards for ten or eleven 
degrees. Moreover, said Sir James had no free- 
hold in the county of Wicklow. 


‘‘ Finally, said Brien and Turlogh are most 
miserably kept in close restraint here in his 
Majestie’s Castle of Dublin, without getting 
their dyett from his Majestie, or leave for any 
of theire friends to come to them with their 
owne meanes to releeve them in presence of the 
constable and his son. Their accusers, on the 
contrary, are kept at his Majesties charges, and 
besides, Bryan and Turlogh have irons upon 
them, and the most part of their condemned 
accusers are without irons. 

(Signed), Bryne Byrne. 
TIRLAGH BEARNE. 
‘* Copia vera.” 5 

The Editor has not been able to trace the 
history of this family to a later period, and be- 
lieves that the race of Fiagh mac Hugh O’Byrne, 
chief of Gaval-Rannall, have long since become 
extinct. According to the tradition in the 
country, the late Garrett Byrne, Esq. of Ballyma- 
nus, was not of his descendants, but of a branch 
of the Gaval-Rannall who became spies and in- 
formers to ruin the great O’ Byrnes of Ballinacor, 
a tradition which clearly points to Cahir mac 
Hugh Duffe and his confederates above referred 
to, who were for twenty-nine years inventing 
many false matters against Phelim and his sons. 


1597] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 221 


A new Lord Justice, Lord Borough’, Thomas by name, arrived in Ireland 
in the beginning of the month of June, with much arms and many soldiers: 
After receiving the sword from Sir William Russell, who had been Lord Jus- 
tice for three years before, he deprived Sir John Norris of the office which he 
held from his Sovereign, namely, the generalship of the war, and took that 
office to himself. After this he issued a proclamation to the men of Leinster 
and Meath, and to all those who were obedient to the Queen, from the Meeting 
of the three Waters to Dundalk, to meet him with all their forces, fully mustered, 
at Drogheda, on the twentieth day of the month of July. These orders were 
responded to by the Earl of Kildare, and by the English of Meath and Leinster. 
The Lord Justice came to the same place with as many men as he had been able 


to muster. 


After these forces had met together, they marched to Tyrone, and 


arrived at Abhainn-mhor without opposition or delay ; and, what was seldom 


See note ®, under the year 1585, p. 1840, supra. 
The Ballymanus family, too, are either extinct 
or reduced to poverty and obscurity. 

The Lord Esmond who ruined the illustrious 
family of Ballinacor, was Sir Laurence Esmond, 
the son of William Esmond, Esq., of Little Li- 
merick, near Gorey, in the county of Wexford. 
He married a Miss Ellice Butler, by whom he 
had no issue, and the peerage ceased at his 
death; but it appears that he had a natural son, 
Thomas Esmond, by a Miss O’Flaherty, to whom 
his estates passed by will. This Thomas Es- 
mond, who was educated a Roman Catholic by 
his mother, is the ancestor of the present Sir 
Thomas Esmond of Ballynatrasna, in the county 
ot Wexford, who inherits none of the wicked- 
ness or treachery of the Lord Esmond his proge- 
nitor. 

William Parsons was a very poor man, in 
humble station, who came to Ireland towards 
the close of the reign of Elizabeth. He proved 
avery useful discoverer of forfeited estates in 
the capacity of Surveyor-General. He was ap- 
pointed Lord Justice, with Sir John Borlase, in 
1640, and continued in the Government till 
1643, when he was removed, charged with trea- 


son, and committed to prison, with Sir Adam 
Loftus and others. His descendants became 
extinct in the male line in 1764. The present 
Earl of Ross, so illustrious for his scientific at- 
tainments, descends from his brother, Laurence 
Parsons. 

i Lord Borough.—Thomas Baron Borough, a 
man almost wholly ignorant of the art military, 
was appointed Lord Deputy, and arrived in Dub- 
lin on the 15th of May, and received the sword 
in St. Patrick’s Church on Sunday, the 22nd of 
the same month. He had supreme authority in 
martial as well as civil causes, and immediately 
ordered to his presidency of Munster General 
Norris, who is described by Camden as “ Vir 
sané magnus, & inter maximos nostre gentis 
hoc evo duces celebrandus ; which affront (to- 
gether with the disappointment of the chiet 
government, which he knew he merited, and 
earnestly expected), and the many bafiles Tyrone 
had put upon him, broke his heart.’’—See Cox’s 
Hibernia Anglicana, vol.i. p. 413. P. O’Sullevan 
Beare states that it was believed that Norris had 
sold himself to the devil, who carried him off 
unexpectedly ; and he gravely eonclydes from 
this, that O’Neill had often defeated, not only 


2022 AQNNaGéa RIOshachta ElREGNN. [1597. 


pain co painice an luptip can an aban gan cacap, Zan coipmfpec 50 mba 
von caob anaill or. Ro munad 7 po monclaidfo lap an lupcip an pont 10om- 
com(cca bat ace ua nell pon up na habainn, 7 po toccaib pin pont nua 06 
budfin ipm mbpuac allcanac von abainn cedna. 7 Se po pMe an ucon pin 
an Ua nell tne eolup 7 tne Toncopce tommpoelbarg, mic En, mic Feilim 
pucnoh uf nell ni po lam an lupcip, na aen o1a ploganb ool 6 aén mile coupip 
pm 1 cep eogam, 7 ni mo no liccead puan no padarle, coolad, no cumpanad 
doib acc veabard 7 Dlubpaccad poppa 6 mumncin Ui néill 00 l6 7 dowce. ba 
oipim voaipnfip an po mapbad, 7m po mudaigead vo oaoimb an lupcip, 7 
an plo bfnad veacanb, 7 veovalaib orob. 

Oo deachaid an lupcip in aporle lo pon cnoc ban 1 ccompocnaib von 
campa do mo(main 7 00 moindecam an tine a uptimcell, 7 ba plpp 06 
na Tiopad 1oIp, uaip vo manbad opons mon via ofFoaoimb la hUa neill co 


General Norris, “‘ peritissimum Anglorum im- 
peratorum omni pugnandi apparatu superiorem, 
sed ipsum etiam diabolum, qui illi ex pacto fuisse 
opitulatus creditur vicerit.”—Hist. Cathol. Iber. 
Compend., tom. iii. 1. 3, c. x. 

i An advantage was got.—An English writer 
would say: ‘“ And O’Neill having, contrary to 
his wont, neglected to guard the pass, the Lord 
Justice crossed the river without any difficulty.” 

k Further: literally, “‘ beyond that.” 

' A hill.—P. O’Sullevan Beare calls this hill 
Droum fliuca, which he translates Collis madidus, 
in his Hist. Cathol. Ibern. Compend., tom. iii. 1. 3, 
c. xi. where he gives the following curious ac- 
count of this conflict: 

“Annus ab ortu Domini millesimus quin- 
gentesimus nonagesimus septimus cum verte- 
retur, Thomas Burughi Baro vir animo elatus, 
manu largus, belli preceptis imbutus, comitate 
gratus in Iberniam Prorex missus aduentu 
primo suo, qua erat vrbanitate, & affabilitate, 
aliquot Lageniorum, & aliorum Ibernorum ani- 
Cum Onello, Odonello, 
Per 
quas cum de pacis conditionibus minimé conue- 
nisset, maiorem belli molem in Onellum vertit. 


mos in se conuertit. 
& alijs vnum mensem inducias componit. 


Illi copiosus erat exercitus, qui antea sub Ru- 
sello, & Norrise meruerant, & noué ex Anglia 
missi; quibus cum in Vltoniam proficiscitur. 
Sequuntur Midhienses Angloiberni cum iustis 
copijs duce Barnabale Balisimilede Barone. Quo 
procedente Balarriecham peruenerat Richardus 
Tirellus cum quadringentis peditibus ab Onello 
missus, vt motus, vel in Lagenia augeret, vel in 
Midhia moueret. Is Tirellus Angloibernus erat, 
sed Catholicus, sicut ceteri, & iniurijs Anglo- 
rum prouocatus é carcere ad Onellum fugerat. 
Ei cum tam exiguas vires esse Barnabal com- 
perisset, in illum mittit fillum suum peditibus 
mille stipatum, haud dubius, quin adolescens 
dignum aliquod facinus faceret, quo Proregem 
magno merito sibi deuinciret, Tirellus miles ve- 
teranus prelio expertus Midhienses fundit, & 
fugat, atque multis occisis Barnabalis filium 
captum ad Onellum defert, 4 quo fuit postea 
pretio commutatus. 

“ Burughus Ardmacham, & Portmorem, quas 
Onellus deseruit, occupat. .Progredi frustra 
tentat ab Onello prohibitus, qui duobus castris 
vias occludit: in alteris erant Macmagaunus, & 
fratres Onelli Cormakus, & Artus in Colle ma- 
dido castrametati intra duos iactus bombard 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2023 


the case with O'Neill, an advantage was got’ of his vigilance, having, contrary 
to his wont, neglected to guard the pass, and the Lord Justice crossed the river 
without [receiving] battle or opposition, and landed [safely] at the other side 
of it. He then razed and demolished a watching-fort which O’Neill had on the 
bank of the river, and erected a new fort for himself on the opposite bank of 
the same river. But though this advantage was taken of O'Neill, through the 
guidance and instruction of Turlough, the son of Henry, son of Felim Roe 
O'Neill, neither the Lord Justice nor any of his forces dared to advance the 
distance of one mile further“ into Tyrone ; for they were not allowed rest or 
ease, sleep or quiet, but a succession of skirmishes and firing was kept up on 
them, both by day and night. It would be impossible to calculate or describe 
the number of the Lord Justice’s men who were killed and disabled, and the 
number of horses and [other] spoils that were taken from them, on this occasion. 

On a certain day the Justice went upon a bill' which was near the camp, 
to reconnoitre and survey the country around; but it would have been better 
for him that he had not gone thither, for a great number of his chief men 


ad hostem, in via, que ducit ad Pinnam super- 
bam: in alteris Onellus ipse cum Iaimo Mac- 
donello Glinniew principe tentoria pandit ad 
Fontem Masanum. Prorex itinere prohibitus 
Norrisium munimentum, quod Onellus dirue- 
rat, reedificare ccepit, Onellus opus impedire: 
interdiu, & noctu ab equitibus, & peditibus 
maximé iaculatoribus cominus, & eminus leuia 
prelia committuntur. Onello venit auxilio Odo- 
nellus, cuius equitatus, cum hostis equitibus, & 
Terentio Onello Henrici filio Onelli fratre vte- 
rino, qui Regine partes sequebatur egregié ma- 
num conseruit. Nocte, qua Catholici in regiorum 
castra impetum fecerunt, fama tenet, Prorogem 
fuisse vulneratum, que verané sit, ad me peri- 
culum non recipio. Constat illum ex castris 
reuersum Killdario comiti imperium relinquen- 
tem intra paucos dies é vita discessisse. 
‘“‘Kildarius imperio letus, & glorians, quod 
Prorex efficere non potuit, prestare conatur, 
viterius progredi, Per syluam, & vias occultas 
cum nobilioribus equitibus & magis strenuis 


militibus procedens, postquam itineris maxi- 
mam difficultatem superauit, nuncio allato Ca- 
tholici occurrentes prelium committunt: quo 
sunt occisi sexaginta equites regij, & inter eos 
Turner exercitus regij Tesserarius Maximus, 
Franciscus VVaghan Proregis leuir, Thomas 
VValenus Angli. Comes Killdarius hastarum 
ictibus equo turbatus, rursus in equum imposi- 
tus 4 duobus fratribus Ohikijs Ibernis sue nu- 
tricis filijs malé concussus, & vulneratus fugit, 
& paucis etiam post diebus moritur. Ohikij dum 
herum in equum imponunt, ipsi circumuenti 
interficiuntur. Multi regij fuerunt vulneribus 
affecti: quotquot eo in loco a castris aberant, 
fusi, & fugati in castra compulsi sunt. Cito 
regius exercitus domum redit, postquam inter 
Portmorem, & Pinnam suberbam 4 fine veris per 
menses circiter quatuor cum Catholico dimica- 
uit, & presidio Portmore sub Thoma Villiamse 
Anglo, &Ardmache relicto. Mox quoque Iberni, 
quos Burughus Regine consiliauerat, rebella- 
runt. 


| 


2024 AQNNdZa RIOshaAchTa ElREGNN. [1597. 


na muimncin. Ro bad oibpioe veanbpacaip mna an lupciy, 7 apomaon a pluans 
co pocaide Moin do Carptimb 7 vo oaoimb uaiple cenmotac. Ro manbad 
ann om anaall oo muinncip iapla cille cana, 7 munbud Zope an Campa oon 
lupzip nf pashad app an iomaipfce pm an lion vo épna diob. Oo pala napla 
cille vana (1. henpy mac s(poce the bitin Zona, no prabnapa cecib o10b) 
sun b6 hficcfn 06 cmall tap a ap do parsio a atapda, 7 1ap poctain 06 Fo 
onoic(c ata pucip bap 1pm mbanle pm. Ruccad a copp go cill cana 7 po 
hadnaicfoh co nonoip 7 co naipmiccin 1 notaiplige a pinnpean he. Ro hoino- 
nead a Ofpbpactaip 1. Uillam ina 1onao. 

lan cemochnuccad an punt nui pin Lap an lupcip an bpd abann moipe, 7 
lan ccabaips oa uid a D10t OaoIne, 7] na po léiccead 06 Dol caipip pin ipceach 
ipin Tip do cup biad 7 bapoa ipin mbaile, 7 po call pin cocc cap a arp. 
Oo cod cétup don 1ubap, 7 apparde co hat chat, 7 po pccaoilpioc a pluag 
dia TTIDIbh. 

Qn can tha po ctmall an lupcip sur an ploiglo céona 1 trip edgain, Ro 
cuin pspib(in s0 sobennoin Coiccid connact dia Ponconspa foun ool sur an 
hon pluaigh ap la no biad na cumang 1pm ccfhd Tian do coiccead ulad pon 
Ua noomnaill an ccfin no biad pom 1 zcin eogain. Nin bo hfiplipeac po 
Ppeccnad an poncongpa yin Lap in ngobepnoip, uaip po cup tosgaipm pop 1apla 
cuadomuman oonnchad mac concobaip, 7 pop bapun mnpr ui chun Mupcad 
mac Mupchand, pon 1apla clomne mocaipo wllecc mac Riocaino Sharanais, 
7 Fon a mac Riocapo mac wllicc baptin oie collin. Ro cup blop cosaipm 
3 cionol pop uaplb conncae mage e6,7 Roppa comma co na pocpaice. 
Oo popal pop na mactib mle tocc ma docom so maimpeip na buille an 
cfépamad La picfe vo mi lul v0 ponnad, 7 50 mbiad plin co na bandadandb pop 
a ccd an oo pin. Cangactan poe wile sup in masm pempaicte ip lo 
c(ccna. 6a he lion a ccionoil ian poctain1 ccenn anoile voib oa bnacais 
ap PICIT DO Tnoigtecanb, 7 vere mbnacaca mancplos. Ro apccnacapn aiploe 
50 Slicceac, 7 1apam 50 heimne 50 po sabrac lonspone Lionman lammfnmnac 


™ The brother.—Thiswas Sir Francis Vaughan. for this victory, but that they were called from 
Sir Richard Cox, who passes over this battle prayers to arms upon the appearance of the 
very lightly, says, “that after the Lord Deputy Irish forces, with whom they skirmished suc- 
had taken the fort of Blackwater, and garri- cessfully; yet soas that the Deputy’s brother-in- 
soned it with English, returned thanks to God law (Vaughan) and several others were slain, 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2025 


were slain by O’Neill and his people. Among these were the brother™ of the 
Lord Justice’s wife, and the chief officer of his army, together with a great 
number of captains and other gentlemen besides. Some of the Earl of Kildare’s 
people were also slain there; and had not the camp of the Lord Justice been 
so near at hand, the number that escaped would have survived this engage- 
ment. The Earl of Kildare (Henry, the son of Garret), in consequence either 
of a wound or a fever, was obliged to set out on his return home; but when 
he had gone as far as Drogheda he died in that town. His body was carried 
to Kildare, and interred with great honour and reverence in the burial-place 
of his ancestors. His brother, William, was installed in his place. 

The Lord Justice, after having finished the new fort” on the bank of the 
Abhainn-mhor, and having observed his loss of men, and that he was not per- 
mitted to penetrate further into the country, he placed provisions and warders 
in this fort, and then set out to return back. He went first to Newry, and from 
thence to Dublin, and his army dispersed for their [several] homes. 

At the time that the Lord Justice was engaged in the foregoing expedition, 
he sent a written dispatch to the Governor of Connaught, ordering him to 
proceed, with all the forces he could possibly muster, to the western extremity 
of Ulster, against O'Donnell, while he himself should remain in Tyrone. This 
order was promptly” responded to by the Governor ; for he sent for the Earl of 
Thomond (Donough, the son of Conor), for the Baron of Inchiquin (Murrough, 
the son of Murrough), for the Earl of Clanrickard (Ulick, the son of Rickard 
Saxonagh), and his son, Rickard, Baron of Dunkellin; and also dispatched orders 
to the gentlemen of the counties of Mayo and Roscommon, requiring them to 
collect and muster their forces. He ordered all the chieftains to meet him at 
the monastery of Boyle, on the twenty-fourth day of the month of July, precisely 
when he himself, with all his bands [of soldiers], would be at that place. They 
all [accordingly] came on that day to the aforesaid place. When assembled, 
they amounted to twenty-two standards of foot, and ten standards of cavalry. 
They marched from thence to Sligo, and from thence to the Erne, and pitched 


and particularly two foster-brothers of Henry, lish fort ‘“‘ was only a deep trench or wall of 
Earl of Kildare, for grief whereof the Earl soon earth, to lodge some one hundred soldiers in.” 
after dyed.” —Hibernia Anglicana, vol. i. p. 413. —Vol. i. p. 58. 

2 The new fort.—Moryson says that this Eng- ° Promptly: literally, ‘not negligently.” 


ib 


2026 aNNaza RIOshachcd EIREGNN. 


[1597. 


pop up Samaome pmobslaiy. Ro bat oo mfnmnange an cplors hip anoap 
led co na bai cumans 1 pppeapcanl né6 a ppprotolma 1 ccoiccead ulad wile. 
Oo einsCccap plog an sobepnona 1pm muichdedorl ap a bapac vo dul can 
an aboinn. 6a din 1omcoiméd oO va Noomnall pop Zac nac pop an eine. 
Ceéc cha pucpacap pom baogal pon at momodopand buf puippe 1. ach ctl 
uain, 7 plo chmgproc 50 diocna vapcpoioheach do pargio an ata him. Ro 
sabpac na popcommevaige occa noiubnaccad gan vichell, 7 acc 1omcopnam 
an ata pp amcul ap ceac po peopac. Occ chfha ni po chumamspioc a 
crancopnam pup m lion plog 7 pocaide batan na naghaid 50 pact an sobep- 
non co na plogaib carp co mbaccan oon caeb anal. Ap a aoi cpa vo 
ponao ect adbal on la pin a. Mupchad mac Mupchada mic oiapmaca, mic 
Mupchaoda ut bmain baptin mnp ui chumn. Gat pide allamwms vo na pars- 
olub pop a eoc fconpa, 7 a mMomdomam occa mmofsail pon batad, 7 acca 
mbporpcad capip. Ga plo po chfoarg an chinn(mhain 06 a amup co hinnell- 
oineac la haon vo muincip uf oomnaill oupcon pilép 1 pcaoilead a Gived 
placa 1 nofinc a occpaille co noechald tnemicc ipm ofine anal. Ni po 
culmplo a anacal 50 po foanpccap py a eoch 1 pudomain an tppota so po 
baiofo é po cevdip. ba hect mép eroip Zallaib, 7 saodelaibh an cf copcaip 
annpin, ap capoe a imme, ap uaiple a pola sen bo hocc ap aot nao e1pioe, 
7] 5emad coccbail a cuinp 7 a adnacal co hononac po vlect do Denam, ni plo 
hanad pmiploe lap an plos§ acc poccam san opium 50 maimptin earpea 
pucid. An 31 do mi tl do mraccatcap an ov pin, 7 d1a Sataipn an aor Larte 
reccmaine. Ro sabpac longpont an sac caob von maimmyptip? mus, 7 PTs. 
bacan hipwide on ‘can canzacap cap eipne pia moon lai via Sataipn co 
maoam ora luain. Oa ipin vomnach pm bacap 1pm meampoin cangacap an 
loinsfp po seall ma noid o Fcollim 1 mbaoi a nopoanayp, 7 a ngonnaoa mona 


co na ptopup anctna an dongs a mompulains an ccfin no beitip ipin ccoicemich. 


® Samhaoir: 1. e. the River Erne. 

4 Ath Cul-Uain.—See this ford already men- 
tioned at the years 1247 and 1593. 

' And he fell: literally, ‘he could not be pro- 
tected until he was separated from his horse in 
the depth of the stream,” which would sound 
very strangely in English. 

P. O’Sullevan Beare observes that the Baron 


‘of Inchiquin and O’Conor Sligo vied with each 


other in valour in crossing the ford on this oc- 
casion: 
‘** In ipso vado, vt alias, Oconchur, & Maurus 
saro de virtute certabant, & dum vterque alte- 
rum precedere conatur, Maurum suus equus in 
alveum lapsus discutit, & Maurus armorum poh- 
dere grauis in imum flumen haustus amplius 


1597. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2027 


their extensive camp on the banks of the limpid Samhaoir’. The high spirit 
of this army was such, that they thought that all Ulster would be incapable of 
coping with them in battle. 

On the following morning, by break of day, the Governor's army rose up 
to eross the river; [but] O'Donnell had posted guards upon all the fords of 
the Erne. However, they got an advantage at one difficult ford, namely, Ath- 
Cul-Uain‘, and to this they vigorously and resolutely advanced. The guards 
of the ford proceeded to shoot at them without mercy, and to defend the ford 
against them as well as they were able; but they were not able to defend it 
long against the numerous force and army opposed to them; so that the 
Governor and his army crossed it, and gained the other side. On this day, 
however, a lamentable death took place, namely, [that of] Murrough, the son 
of Murrough, son of Dermot, son of Murrough O’Brien, Baron of Inchiquin, 
as he was on horseback, in the depth of the river, outside the soldiers, saving 
them from drowning, and encouraging them to get across past him. But 
destiny permitted that he was aimed at by one of O’Donnell’s people with a 
ball exactly in the arm-pit, in an opening of his plate armour, so that it passed 
through him, and out at the opposite arm-pit. No assistance could be given 
him; and he fell" from his horse into the depth of the current, in which he 
was immediately drowned. The person who there perished was much lamented 
by the English and Irish, on account of the sreatness of his wealth, and the 
nobility of his blood, though young as to age; and although it would have 
been meet that his body should have been taken up, and honourably interred, 
the army did not stop to do so, but proceeded directly to the monastery of 
Assaroe*, which they reached the 31st of July, the day of the week being 
Saturday. They encamped around the monastery, and also within it, and thus 
remained from the forenoon of Saturday, when they crossed the Erne, until 
Monday morning. On the Sunday on which they were in the monastery the 
ships arrived which were promised to be sent after them from Galway, with 
ordnance and great guns, and other stores for their support, whilst they should 


non extitit. Cliffordus vadum trajectus frustra are still to be seen about a mile to the west of 

repugnantibus paucis ab Odonello dispositis Ballyshannon, and its burial ground is very 

arcem quatuor tormentis oppugnat.”—Fol. 161. extensive, and contains some interesting tomb- 
S Assaroe.—Some of the walls of this abbey stones.—See note ‘, under 1184, p. 64, supra. 


eB 2 


2028 ANNaza RIOSshachTa ElREANN. 


[1597. 


Ro gabrac an lomgfp pm cuan ace mp Saimep 1 nuct eappa pumd, 7 po 
cupplot a poopap ip mip go lion a 1omcomfeca male pip. Oo paccad 
ona an Tonoanap 1 TTip Oia Luain,7 po pwoigfo € po encomain caiplém beol 
ata prs. Ruccpact a plog on maimptip 50 mullac Site Coda an aghaid 
an ounald, 7 1 ccImceall an onoanaip. Ro gabpac ora luain, via maint, 7 
via cévaoin acc olubpaccad an baile vo Caenaib cnomaib, conannmonaib 
celnnelo1, a Zonnaoaib sutanoaib spanoibleacanb an opoanaip 1omtpulm 
adbanl mop hip po puioigpiot pop roncaib an oanad, 50 cclop a ppuamanna 
7 @ pposantonpman 1 ccléimib acon, a PROD, 7 Mm Imcfin uadanb. Ro lapac 
oponsza viomona vo poigmb a laoc po bun an baile co tnealmab cogalca 
mun led, co nhofo mmpfman momoaing(n napnoge ima cconpanb, co ccat- 
bapnaib caémpolupcaib ma cfnoaib co Leibfno Lamofpda vo cnumnpcciactaib 
comlftna cpucd ranoann ma nuipcimceall oa mmofsail pop oiubnaicnb a 
namac. Nin bo conba oobpium on an vagpuabaipt oo bipcpac pon an 
ounaid, 7 ba ppp ooib na Tapcaip an tcupap vo dEacatap Ia Palsio, uaip 
po oaulce ap an ccauplen poppa fnoippelta caep tcaidlig treimntide a Fonn- 
anab popaigte pipoinse, 7 a mupccaéoib moncorcaip, 7 anaile vo cainngib 
efnszanbaib 7 00 tnomclocanb tumste, vo pailsib, oo ponnaib bai pon 
cablib an ounaid Fo encomaip a noubpaicte, co nan bo o1on no oains(n vo 
lucc na cosla na cumoaigte baccan ponna 50 po mudaisfo ononsa ofpmana 
oibplde, 7 co po peciotaislo anaill baccan blogonca co nap anpact pe a 
nainleach ni bad pips, 7 00 bentpac a nopomanna pni a narmoib co naermead 
poppa sup an ccampa. 6acan luce an otnaid acca noiubnaccad ma noeadh- 
ad co po manbad cinntec an eccinntec o1ob. 


* Inis-Saimher, now called in Irish Imp Sam- 
aoin, and sometimes Fish Island, from a fish- 
house which was built on it by the late Dr. 
Sheil of Ballyshannon. It is situated imme- 
diately under the great cataract at Ballyshan- 
non. 

“ The ordnance—P. O’Sullevan Beare states 
that they planted four cannon against the castle 
of Ballyshannon, which was then defended by 
Hugh Craphurd [Crawford], a Scotchman, with 
eighty soldiers, of whom some were Spaniards 


and the rest Irish. They left three of these 


cannon behind.—/izst. Cathol. Iber., tom 3, lib. 5, 
c. viii. fol. 160, 161. 

“ The castle of Ballyshannon.—The site of this 
castle is pointed out in a field on the east side 
of the town of Ballyshannon, called the Castle 
Park, but the walls are level with the ground 
and scarcely traceable. 

* Mullach-Sithe-Aedha : i. e. the hill or sum- 
mit of Aedh’s tumulus, so called from Aedh 
Ruadh mac Badhairn, king of Ireland, who was 
drowned in the River Erne or Samhaoir, A. M. 
3603, according to O’Flaherty’s Chronology, 


1597] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2029 


remain in this strange territory. This fleet put in at Inis-Saimer‘, close to Assaroe, 
and landed their stores on the island, leaving a sufficient number to guard them. 
On Monday the ordnance" were landed and planted against the castle of Bally- 
shannon”. The troops were then removed from the monastery to Mullach-Sithe- 
Aedha*, opposite the fortress, and about the ordnance. On Monday, Tuesday, 
and Wednesday, they continued to fire on the castle’ with heavy balls, emitted 
with loud report and flashing flames from the loud-sounding, red, shot-vomiting 
guns of that heavy and immense ordnance which they had planted opposite 
the fortress, so that their reports and loud thundering in the regions of the air 
were heard far and distant from them. They sent large parties of their choicest 
soldiers to the base of the castle with wall-razing engines, and with thick and 
strong iron armour about their bodies, and bright-shining helmets on their 
heads, and with a bright testudo of round, broad, hard iron shields around 
them, to protect them from the shots of their enemies. The resolute attack 
they made upon the fortress, however, was of no avail to them; and it had 
been better for them that they had not come upon this journey against it; for 
from the castle were poured down upon them showers of brilliant fire from 
well-planted, straight [aimed] guns, and from costly muskets, and some rough- 
headed rocks and massive solid stones, and beams and blocks of timber, which 
were [kept] on the battlements of the fortress, in readiness to be hurled down 
{when occasion required]; so that the coverings of the razing party were of 
no shelter or protection to them, and great numbers of them were destroyed, 
and others who were severely wounded became so exhausted that they delayed 
not to be further slaughtered, and, turning their backs to their enemies, they 
were routed to the camp. The people of the fortress kept up a constant fire 
on them, and killed an unascertained number of them. 


and buried at this place.—See note", under the 
year 1194, p. 99, supra. This hill is now called 
Mullaghnashee, and the parish church of Bally- 
shannon stands upon it. According to the tra- 
dition at Ballyshannon, an ancient earthen fort, 
and the mound of Aedh Ruadh, or Red Hugh, 
were destroyed in 1798, to form a modern Eng- 
lish star-fort which now crowns the summit of 
Mullaghnashee. 


Y They continued to fire on the castle—The ori- 
ginal could not bear to be literally translated 
into English. The closest that could be under- 
stood is the following: ‘‘ They proceeded on 
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, shooting at 
the bally with heavy, loud-sounding, fiery balls 
from the loud-roaring, shot-vomiting guns of 
that heavy and immensely great ordnance which 


they planted opposite the fortress.” The word 


2030 GNNaZa RIOsShachTa EIRECNN. [1597. 


Oo bitpac opons 00 mapcplois Ui vomnanl) pars iompuaict: pon manc- 
ploig na ngall, 7 nip ca 1 ppopatmlc no 1 ccmmne mm po sonad (coppa cen- 
mota Ua concobain Sligig connchad mac catanl og po Zalcta e1pldeE CoN Cun 
yin, uaip bai pide 7 © concobain puad Clod mac tommpdealbaig puaid 7 Tepoice 
na Long co lion a pocpaicte 1 ppanpad an Zobepnona an can pin. 

O vomnaill ona baipide 1 ccfince plois, 7 mm uachad pocawe an Satapn 
cancice an Gobepnoin Fup an ccpomoaimm pin von cip. Ro bacap a daoine 
| a pocpaictce acc tleclaim 7 acc tionol ap Zac apo na vocom, Fo macta- 
cay a& nupmon pra modmfoon oia Luam. Canaic om Maguioin God mac con 
conmnact mic conconnact 7 0 Ruaipe Gman occ, mac dpiam, mic Opicain 
ballary co na ctoiondl ina docom, 7 ap poccain vo na monctib pm 1 ccfnn a 
poile, nip 66 pucamnfe padal po liccpioc von Zobennoip co na plogaib, uaip 
po baa oeabad, 7 o1ubpaccad, 1omaipecc 7 1ombualav, 7 1ompuaccad uata 
fon an ccampa sac laof pm pé na cpi la po bacan pom ag buancart(m an 
bale. No cuipoip plog uf vomnaill clompa an Campa connaccoangs ma ¢fine- 
mfoon, 7 a lap ina WAtimel co n&@ leiccoir ingelcnad oa nfchaib n6 dia 
noopniip can colba an campa amach 7 ni mo po lficepoc pep, no anban oa 
paigid anonn. Ro ban tna an sebepnoin co na plog 1 ccfnnta 4 in 1lomcumpa 
moip dEPIdeE, UCI Femaod poad po bad lamn leo ni bor ma ccumang aén at 
coicctnn pon an Eimne vo paigid 6 caoluipece co hat pfnas. Nin b6 plan 
lap na macib a mfnma (sZenbo Molapda a pocpaicte) an a celecmanl 1 
nfoapbaosal amlaid pm aga nammoib. An can imoppo vo b(nc an gsobepnoin, 
na haplada, 7 na monte anctina oa nuio an Zuappacc po mop ippabacap 
po sabpac ag cpio a ccomaiple o cup odche via cédvaomn 50 vonbpolup na 
maione Ia Dapdain 1. an 15 OOugupc. Comd pain ofipid leo po ofo1d 1pm 
moicveavoil chmmuccad an a ccfpcashoad on magi 1 mbaccan i Sich 


Clooa sup an lic aimmin, agsaipb, puapppocthaig, fpuoomain op up eapra 


caop, or caep, means a mass of iron, a fire- 
brand, a thunderbolt, but is here applied to a 
cannon ball. It will be observed that Opoanaip 
is in the genitive case singular, governed by 
sonnadaib, from which it is clear that they 
took ordnance to be a generic term. 

* Cael- Visge, i. e. narrow water, now Cael-na- 


h-Eirne, where the Lower River Erne escapes 


from the lake. 

* Ath-Seanaigh, i.e. Seanach’s Ford. This was 
the name of a ford on the River Erne at the 
town of Ballyshannon, which has taken its name 
from it. : 

» Rocky ford, \(ic.—The word leic is the ob- 
lique form of leac, a flag-stone, or flat surface, 
such as exists in many places at the bottom of 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2031 


A party of O’Donnell’s cavalry made a routing attack upon the English 
cavalry ; and there is no record or remembrance of the numbers that were 
[mortally] wounded between them ; but, among the rest, O’Conor Sligo (Do- 
nough, the son of Cathal Oge) was severely wounded, for he and O’Conor Roe 
(Hugh, son of Turlough Roe) and Theobald-na-Long, with all their forces, were 
along with the Lord Justice at this time. 

O’Donnell, however, had been in want of forces, and had only a small num- 
ber on the Saturday on which the Lord Justice came into the country with 
this powerful force; but his people and forces were assembling and flocking to 
him from every direction, so that the most of them had reached him before the 
noon of Monday. On this occasion Maguire (Hugh, the son of Cuconnaught, son 
of Cuconnaught) and O’Rourke (Brian Oge, the son of Brian, son of Brian Bal- 
lagh) came to join him, with their forces; and after these chiefs had assembled 
together, they allowed the Lord Justice and his army neither ease nor rest, for 
they carried on skirmishing and firing, conflict, assault, and onslaught, on the 
camp, every day during the three days that they continued battering the castle. 
O’Donnell’s army frequently drove those who were on the outskirts of the 
Connaught camp into the very centre of it, and those who were in the centre 
to the outskirts; and they did not permit their horses or other cattle to go 
forth outside the boundary camp to graze, nor did they permit hay or corn 
[to be carried] in to them. The Governor and his army were thus reduced to 
great distress and extremities; for, though they should wish to depart, they 
could not approach any common ford on the Erne from Cael-Uisge* to Ath- 
Seanaigh*. The chiefs, though numerous were their forces, were much dispi- 
rited on finding themselves placed in such peril by their enemies. When, 
therefore, the Governor, the Earls, and the chiefs in general, had perceived the 
great danger in which they were, they held a consultation from the beginning 
of night on Tuesday, to the morning twilight of Wednesday, the 15th of 
August; and the resolution they finally came to at the day-break was, to ad- 
vance forward at once from the place where they were at Sith-Aedha to the 
rough, turbulent, cold-streamed, rocky ford’ over the brink of Assaroe, called 


the River Erne. In the Life of Hugh Roe an plige n-againb n-ainmeinic yin, 7 po bao 
O’Donnell the reading is as follows : do Epeipl 7 00 tpennfpe hi ppuz na pfnabann 


“Oo benzpac iapom a n-uézbpumne fon (amarl no ba bép os), 7 oainfcangmide na opuim 
4 


2032 ANNGZa RIOfShachta ElIREGNN. (1597. 


puaid dianld cinm cappan na ccunad, 50 po cingsple Fan capuccad san pon- 
cleiptect vo pluash Ui somnall ina nonongaib, 7 ma noiopmanb sup an 
cconaip nancitmd namminic pin. Ro bai vo tpfip an cppota 7 ofinipte 
opuinge oon tplosh 7 a nfchpmd iap ngabcul a mbid poppa, 50 noeachad 
hon dipmme va mnaib va ppfpaib, oa naép anbpann andppacca, oa nfcharb, 
oa ccaiplib, 7 va sac nfpnail bai leo ancfna la pput (pra pumd pian 
Ro paccaibpot a nopoanap, 7 a ccongaib bid 7 vise an cumar 
conallac oon chun pin. Ap a af cna vo ofcacan aims, 7 uaiple an cyploigh, 
7 an no ba comnant o1ob cap eipne ran ngabard 7 1an nguapacc mop. Ro 
bacan bapoa an bale acca noiubpaccad amail ap deine connangacan, 7 po 


co muip. 


sabpat acca mapmonacc go hun na habann an dens bapaiste a mbioobad, 7 
pecél do poccain 50 hua noomnaill co na plog. Oc cualaid o porimenll posup 
an oubpoacte acpacht co na plog po cetcoip, Tiagaic na ccpealmaib ctnooa 
50 TImneapnac, 7} po cimnispioc sup an aban amail ap ofine po peopac. 
lan nglanad vo Plog an gobepnona or up na habann vo cowpioc 1 mmnell, 7 
1 nopouccad. Ro cuinpioc a mna, a ngiollannad, 7 a naép ofainm, a pEin 
Zonta, 7 na mbai leo vo carplib capaipce (conpay muip. Ro cunpiot a 
nanpard, 7 a naép uppclais: ma noid, 7 von caob anall a lat pm cip an 
ba ofpb leo po geboaip a ccospaim o na plogaib baccapn ma manmonachc. 
Locan muincin uf oomnaill ina Lfnmam can an aban Zan oftcioll, 7 m po 
anpac a nfpmop py a néogad nac pyr a pponbnuca an a tinmnepnanse leo 
cTappaccain an cploig locap pon élud uata. Ro sabpac aga ctimcellad 4 
ay caiZenad tThooa pnia co mbaccapn ag cait(m 7 ag compuabaine a cele 
6 Epne co magh cceone hi ccoinpne opoma chab. Plhtan slép pleachao 
ann an can pm gs0 mbo hiongsnat a méd, co nan cumampyiot na plois avin 


leice ouibplermne map conan CoITcIngy Do 
tpomplog, 7 oan d’enenetne 7 00 avlaige na 
ngall o’(pbaid aipbeanca bid Zup po baidiz 
ile ora ppfpaib, o1a mnaib, oia neacarb, 3 via 
cceaiplib, 50 pucc cp{tan an cppota 1 pudomain 
earpa puaid tact.” 

‘They afterwards gave their breasts to the 
rough, unfrequented passage; but from the 
strength and vehemence of the stream (as was 
usual with it), from the difficulty of the black 
and slippery surface of the flag, as the common 


passage of the great host, and moreover from 
the feebleness of the English, from the want of 
their proper ration of food, many of their men, 
women, steeds, and horses, were drowned and 
carried by the impetuosity of the stream into 
the gulph of Assaroe.” 

© Casan-na-gCuradh, 1.e. the path of the 
heroes, translated Semita Heroum by P. O’Sul- 
levan Beare: 

‘“‘ Regij maiores Catholicorum vires timentes, 
ab Odonello acrius indies pugnis quassi, & de- 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2033 


Casan-na-gCuradh’‘, and they advanced to that [to them] unknown and seldom- 
crossed trajectus, in troops and squadrons, without being noticed or heard by 
O'Donnell. In consequence of the strength of the current, and the debility of 
some of the army and the horses, from having been deprived of food, a count- 
less number of their women, and men of their inferior, unwarlike people, of 
their steeds and horses, and of other things they had with them, were swept 
out westwards into the sea by the current of Assaroe. They left their ord- 
nance and their vessels of meat and drink in the power of the Kinel-Connell 
on this occasion. The chiefs and gentlemen of the army, however, and such 
of them as were strong, crossed the Erne after great danger and peril. The 
warders of the castle continued firing on them as rapidly as they were able, 
and pursued them to the brink of the river, in order to exterminate their 
enemies; and intelligence [of their movements] reached O'Donnell and his 
army. When O’Donnell heard the report of the firing, he immediately rose 
up with his forces, and, having quickly accoutred themselves in their fighting 
habiliments, they advanced to the river as speedily as they could. When the 
Governor’s army had cleared the opposite bank of the river they went into 
order and battle array. They placed their women, their calones, their unarmed 
people, their wounded men, and such of their horses of burden as they had, 
between them and the sea. They placed their warriors and fighting men be- 
hind them, and on the other side towards the country, for they were certain 
of receiving an attack by those forces who had pursued them. O’Donnell’s 
people went in pursuit of them across the river without delay; and they were 
so eager to wreak their vengeance on the army that fled from them that they 
did not wait to put on their armour or outer garments. They began to sur- 
round them and sharpen the conflict against them, and both parties continued 
shooting and attacking each other from the Erne to Magh-gCedne in Carbury- 
Drumeliff*. At this time there fell a shower of rain in such torrents that the 


fessi, obsidione soluta, tribus tormentis relictis, 
quartoque vix in nauim, qua fuit vectum, im- 
posito, summo mane flumen per quod venerant, 
traijcientes, in vadum cui nomen est Semita 
Heroum, sese tam incomposité precipitant vt 
nonnulli obruantur. Fugientes sequitur Odon- 


ellus interimens nonnullos. Flumine & ferro 


eo die regij trecenti perierunt.”—Fol. 161. 
The name is still remembered, and the ford 
pointed out, immediately above the great cata- 
ract of Assaroe. 
4 Magh-gCedne, §¢.—This should be: ‘* From 
the Erne through Magh-gCedne, and until they 
arrived in Carbury of Drumcliff” 


12¢ 


2034 aNNadza RIOSshachTa EIREGNN. (1597. 


nac anall a naipm oiomluad, no oimint, Fo no pluchad a bpdcoive puoap, 
7 slepa a nglan gonnad. Occ ba moa po la pop mucin Uf oomnall na 
ppoppa piptana Inpin, map pop plos an gobepnona ap po paccarbprot a 
ppopbpuca amenl pemebencmap. Nip b6 pamland cpa von luce nanle bavap 
elolgte 1aopulde op clnn a neppad o1a nectaup. 

Oo Gow an Zobepnoin co na plogaib so Sligec in aohans ym, ap na mapach 
50 mamypein na binlle, 7] an tnear la 50 cuait ata lace. Ro pecaolpioc 
mate connacc dia cob 7 oa ceTs1b, 7 an sobennoin Fo banle acta lua. 

Roptan pubang pormfnmnang Zaoroil coiceid ulad 1ap poad an lupcip a cin 
edsain Zan umla, San accion, 7 an Zobepnona a cip conaall m aén mi amant 
po pecmobaman. 

lan ppaccbail cipe heogam oon lupcip amail po pempmopiomap, 7 147 
ppaccbaal bid, 7 banoa 1pm bpopt nua pm vo Toccanb pe pln ap bpa abann 
moipe 06 dechaid 50 hat chat. Oala Uf nell co na muincip ni anad pide co 
Lice vo l6 7 vowdche, gan bit vo Sper ace céccappaccain baoscnl sabala, no 
sona pon an bpont pm, no fon an mbanoa baccap ann. In anole larte po 
lonnpars plum an benle hipin, 7 po mapbad ofichnebup an ficic via Daomb, 7 
ni po cumaing ni von baile. O po proip an lupcip a banoa vo bAt ag a 
mfpcecbumdpead amlard pin, 7 a mbfit i ccfincce Lom po tionoil plog Lanmon 
vo toct dO Con bid 7 Zac nadailece ancfna ipin mbaile. Ap ccocc oon lupcip 
co na plog co hanomacha po gluaippive co mancplogs an cpluais ma wiptim- 
cell ipm cconaip ccorccim f ja na pursZonb 7 pa na conscib ap ong Fo 
ppuicchbead opnons eiccin do muintin Uf néill 1 nfoanbaogal. An can pamicc 
1ccompocnaib abann moine ap ann vo pala mogal mancplois, 7 ppuiclésao 
paisoiuimide do muincip ui nell oo. Ro plipao 1omaipecc amnayp 7 1ompua- 
ccad eapccaipofmail fconpa. Ro mapbad oaome 7 po paccbad eric on lupcip 
pin ngleo cnoiod pin. O pangacap a parson do pais an luptip vo coro 


© The apparatus of their fine guns, Slepa a 
nglan gonnad.—These were match-locks. 

Thirty of his men were slain—From the no- 
tices of this fort given in the Life of Hugh Roe 
O’Donnell, it would appear that this fort was 
one of very considerable strength. P. O’Sullevan 
Beare gives the following account of O’Neill’s 
attempt at taking it in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. 


Compend., tom. 3, lib. 4, c. 111. : 

“O’Nellus quandoquidem frustra conatus est 
Ardmache presidium commeatu intercludere, 
Portmorem saltem munimentum cibi inopia in 
suam potestatem redigere molitur. Quod obsi- 
denti Odonellus, qui venit auxilio, persuasit, vt 
expugnare tentaret. LEius altitudinem coniec- 


tura dimensi, scalas, que quinos homines ampli- 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2035 


forces on either side could not use or wield their arms, so drenched with wet 
were their powder-pouches and the apparatus of their fine guns‘. These showers 
of rain did more injury to O’Donnell’s people than to the Governor's army; for 
they [the former] had left their outer garments behind, as we have said before; 
but not so the others, they wore coverings over their battle dresses. 

The Governor proceeded with his forces to Sligo that night; from thence 
on the next day to the abbey of Boyle, and on the third day to the district of 
Athleague. The chiefs of Connaught, then dispersed from their territories and 
houses, and the Governor went to Athlone. 

The Irish of the province of Ulster were joyful and in high spirits after the 
Lord Justice had returned from Tyrone without receiving submission or 
respect, and the Governor [of Connaught] from Tirconnell, in the same month, 
as we have just mentioned. 

When the Lord Justice had left Tyrone, as we have before stated, after 
having placed provisions and warders in the new fort, which he himself had 
erected on the bank of the River Abhainn-Mhor, he went to Dublin. As for 
O'Neill and his people, he rested neither day nor night, but watched every 
opportunity of taking this fort by stratagem or assault, or wreaking his ven- 
geance on the garrison. On a certain day he attacked the fort; but thirty of 
his men were slain‘, and he effected nothing against the fort. When the Lord 
Justice received intelligence that his warders were harassed in this manner, and 
that they were in want of provisions, he mustered a numerous army to place 
provisions and all other necessaries in the fort. When the Lord Justice, with 
his army, had arrived at Armagh, he went with the cavalry of the army about 
him along the public road, some distance before his foot-soldiers and companies, 
with the expectation of meeting some of O’Neill’s people in an unprotected 
position. When he came near the Abhainn-Mor he fell in with a troop of horse 
and a body of infantry of O’Neill’s people. A fierce conflict and spiteful engage- 
ment ensued between them, [and] many men and horses were lost by the Lord 
Justice in that sharp battle. When the foot soldiers had come up with the 
Lord Justice, he advanced to the fort, and some say that he was never well 


tudine capiebant, faciunt, perfectasque muni-  tinant, & appropinquantes bombardicis pilulis 
mento incipiunt admouere. Eos propugnatores impugnant, ab iis vicissim impugnati. Arci scale 
primum crebris tormentorum ictibusarcere fes- applicantur. Cwterum propugnatores qui didi- 


LA Cre 


2036 aNNaza RIOshachtda €lREGNN. [1597. 


von punc,7 acbfnac anole nap b6 plan pom on lo pm alle. Ro paccanbpioc 
bad, 7 bapoa 1pin mbanle an na manac.. Ro cmallpac coct tap anaip, 7 mM 
deacazap cap Apomaca m avhang pin. : 
lomcaipplos a& muinTip (no a Taps 7 a aep Spada) an lupcip Zan prop 
oupmon a plois an la pin. Ro bat cartim,7 comoveabaid an Campa an lupcip 


Ro bad 1 ccanpaz, no m anach po 


6 Ua nell an avhang yin via po manbad apo maon an ctpluais 7 pocaide ele 
cenmocapom. Ro apcenatan appem co huban cmntpasa. Puan an lupcip 
bap 1pm mbanle pin po bitin na ngon vo pavad pain ace tocc a hApomaca 
sup an bpont nua. Tuccad comfcc clodim an igh von cponypilep, 7 00 
lupzip bemnpr an igh 1. Sip Robfpt sapomen so cocc vo luptip nua o Saroib. 

O vomnanll ona ba vols laappde an sobepnoin 7 na hhaplada vo tepndd 
amonl do épnacap, 7 ap a af ni po ionnparg cletan nae oiob anole 50 0100 
posmaip. 6a pooa la hUa noomnall baccan soll connacc san ammup 
poppa, 7 Fopp an luct po emg ma ccombais, 7 do pome a muinceapur pmp- 
plum pectmam. 6a oibpide 6 concoboin puad Clod mac compdealbans 
puaoh, bai pum aga pecpuoad cionnay no cpeacpad a cmioc. ba dodains 
oopomh 6n moypin, an ba hinmtl campho an cionad 1 mbaoi, 7 ba poccup 06 
an Tiondd ma ccuippead a immli 7 a maoine ancfna an 1omsabanl a tioobad 
Ro seall o Ruane vopom nac liccpead 
6 vomnall Fan plop dia paso Zan pabaod vo con curcce. Ro tionoil O vom- 
nall a Plog, 7 0e cod 1 cconnactab Fo po capip pn Bln oallam a manodfy, 


muna tlopca Zan pacuccad pain. 


sabaip longpone hipmoe. lan prop pecél 00 co mbai an capatpad pin ecin 
Ua puainc 7 6 concobaip, ba pi cealcc vo pad mm ua puaine, a tecta do Con 
dla Pargsid Dia TOCUIpEdo Zuy an lLonspont 1 mboi pum. Ro geall Ua puane 
[ceacc] cuccae an a banach, 7 ni po paol Fo ppurcelo Ua vomnanll an Long pone 
50 cTIopad pom ma docom Nip bo hf pm vo nome Ua vomnaill, acc ian 
ccon a tecta 50 hUa puaine po paccanb a lonsponc ran moon lai, 7 po icc 
oan Sliccech buddy, 7 ni po camp co pame go compppliab. Oo gni 1ompun- 
peac bce am pin co no tocaitpiot a muinecip vf via Lomncib, 7 co no Licepioc - 


cerant, scalas in se edificari, fossam, que muni- 
mentum cireumdabat, excauando profundiorem 
effecerant. Ob quod scale pleraeequé ad cacu- 
men arcis non pertingebant. Ita qui ad summos 
scalarum gradus peruenerant, altius ascendere 


non valentes, deficientibus scalis, cum propug- 


natoribus frustra prelantur. Que verdé scale 
ad arcis summitatem pertinebant, tam pauce 
fuerunt, vt facilé primi ascensores occisi sint, 
antequam a commilitonibus fuerint adiuti. Cen- 
tum viginti Catholici interierunt, &c.”—Fol.149. 


& The Chancellor.—He was Adam Loftus, 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2037 


from that day forth. On the next day they left provisions and warders in the 
fort, and then prepared to return back, but went no further than Armagh that 
night. It was in a carriage or in a litter that his people (or his faithful friends 
and servants of trust) carried the Lord Justice on that day, without the know- 
ledge of the greater part of his army. O’Neill kept up a constant fire and attack 
upon the Lord Justice’s camp during the night, by which the chief leader of 
the army and several others besides were slain. From thence they proceeded 
to Newry, and he died of the wounds which he had received between Armagh 
and the new fort. The keeping of the sword of state was then intrusted to the 
Chancellor? and the [Chief] Justice of the King’s [Queen’s] Bench, Sir Robert 
Gardiner, until a new Lord Justice should come from England. 

O'Donnell was greatly chagrined that the Governor and the Earls should 
have escaped as they did. There was, however, no attack" from either side 
until the end of Autumn. O'Donnell thought it too long that he had left un- 
attacked the English of Connaught and those Irish who had risen in alliance 
with them, and who had previously made friendship with himself. Among 
these was O’Conor Roe (Hugh, the son of Turlough Roe); and he [O’Donnell| 
was meditating how he could plunder his territory. This was very difficult 
for him to do; because the position he occupied was secure and intricate, and 
he had near him a fastness into which he could send his cattle and other pos- 
sessions, beyond the reach of his enemies, unless they should come upon him 
unawares; [and] O’Rourke had promised him that he would not permit O’Don- 
nell to march towards him without sending him notice. O’Donnell assembled 
his forces, and proceeding into Connaught, halted south-west of Gleann-Dallain’, 
where he pitched his camp. When he received intelligence that a friendship 
subsisted between O’Rourke and O’Conor, he deceived O’Rourke by sending 
messengers to him to invite him, to his camp where he was. O’Rourke pro- 
mised to go to him on the following day; for he thought that O’Donnell would 
not leave the camp until he should arrive there; but O'Donnell did not act so; 
for, after he had sent his messengers to O’Rourke, he left the camp at noon, 
and, proceeding southwards across the Sligo, never stopped until he arrived 
at the Curlieu Mountain. Here he made a short stay, while his troops were 


Archbishop of Dublin. them attack the other till the end of Autumn.” 
» No attack: literally, ‘‘ Nowbeit neither of ' Gleann-Dallain, now Glencar, near Sligo. 


2038 ANNAZGA RIOShaAchTa EIRECNN. [1597. 


a peip, 7 ona nip bo hal larpp ool can pliab budofp la pollpr an ten roi. 
lan ccoct untopag na hoiwhce via paigid looan cap an pliab budofly, 7 cap 
ball 50 pangacan cma mag luipee an vagoa, 7 ca Mumchinn machaipe 
comnact pia maoam. Ro liccpiot a pccfimelca uata 1 nuptopac lai po 
diampanb 7 po itpebaib na cpice ma nuiptimcell co na po pacceabpot miol 
mnnli o ach SupM co badgna,7 po cplchloipccead leo ma mbaoi (conpa pide. 
lompandic 1apam ina pppiting co na mbotainzib,7 co névalaib roma Led. ba 
hadnan la hUa puaine an cip vo Cneachad Zan aimuccad 06, nip bo luga ba 
méla lap an ngobennoip Sip conepp chipopt cpeachlopecad an cine bat po a 
mamup, 7 po a cumaccarb. 

Sloiccead la Maguidin God, mac conconnacht, mic concomacz, 7 la 
conbmac mac pipoonca, mic cuinn bacarg uf néill (an tannaing pil pRipsanl) 
50 mul(nn clpn na mode 50 po cplchpat an cip ma coimcell, 7 po lin 
remopad ted an MuilCno clpp phn, co nap paccenbpioc atmaoin von, no 
oaips(c, ouma, na O1apann, dveved na o(ppadaib allmupda, na oaoin ni buo 
elon Diomcap no do Tiomain 1pm mbanle san a tabaine leo, 7 acc coct voib 
can & nap vo Cuippioc an bonle tne doIsIp Connnuald Ofpcclapnac, 7 TIagZaic 
1anam plan ora coisibh. 

Oilen buicilep mngfn iapla upmuman «1. Pianup puad, mac Semaiyp, mic 
emainn, mic Ripofino bf an oapa hapla vo hoiponead an cucomumain 41. 
oonnchad, mac concobain mic toinpdealbars ui bmiam vécc. 

Muincfpcac ullcac mac Slain vécc 1 nopurm na Loipcte to pao lanyp an 
nomao bliadain ochtmogat a aoip. 

Sin lohn nonuip bai na senenal ap coccad na banpiogan pM PPpanse, 7 
1nepmn vo dol von mumaimn 1ap mbuam a oippici de lar an lupcip nua po 
bai proe bt pranpad a ofpbpactan Sin tomar 
nopuip bat na ppeproenp uadapom iin mumain pm pé va bliadan vécc 
pome pin. Ro sab salan Sip ohn go po écc m oibne 1 pposman na bliadna 


cTaimicc 1 nepinn Fo deEOTD. 


i Magh-Luirg-an-Daghda, i.e. the plain of the River Uair, near Elphin.—See it already men- 


tracts of Daghda, who was king of the Tuatha 
De Dananns, anglice Moylurg, now the plains of 
oe in the county of Roscommon, 

* Upper part—Muineéimn «1. uaézap, O’Clery 
in Leabhar Gabhala, p. 3. 


' Ath-Slisean, now Beal Atha-Slisean, on the 


tioned at the years 1288, 1309, 1342, 1595. 
™ Baghna, now Slieve Baune, a well-known 
mountain in the east of the county Roscommon. 
» Second Earl of Thomond, literally, ‘‘ the 
second Earl who was inaugurated over Tho- 
mond,” is not correct phraseology, according to 


1597. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2039 


taking some refreshments and resting themselves, because he did not at all 
wish to pass southwards over the mountain by dayhght. When the beginning 
of night came on them they proceeded southwards over the mountain and 
across the River Boyle; and before morning they had passed through Magh- 
Luirg-an-Daghda’, and the upper part“ of Machaire-Chonnacht. Early in the 
day they sent marauding parties into the wilds and recesses of the country in 
every direction; and these left not a single head of cattle from Ath-Slisean' to 
Baghna™, and they plundered and burned all that lay between these limits. 
They then returned back with their herds of kine and many other spoils. 
O'Rourke was ashamed that the country should have been plundered without 
_ his knowledge; and the Governor, Sir Conyers Clifford, was not less grieved 
that a country, which was under his rule and jurisdiction, should have been 
[thus]. plundered and burned. 

An army was led by Maguire (Hugh, the son of Cuconnaught, son of 
Cuconnaught), and Cormac, the son of Ferdorcha, son of Con Bacagh O’Neill, 
at the instance of the O’Farrells, to Mullingar, in Meath, and they preyed the 
country around them, and totally pillaged Mullingar itself, in which they did 
not leave in the town any property of gold, silver, copper, iron armour, or 
foreign wares, or any other thing that could be carried or driven from the 
town, which they did not take away with them. Upon their return back they 
set the town in a dark, red blaze and conflagration; and they afterwards 
returned safe to their homes. 

Ellen Butler, the daughter of the Earl of Ormond (Pierce Roe, the son of 
James, son of Edmond, son of Richard), and wife of the second Earl of 
Thomond" (Donough, the son of Conor, son of Turlough O’Brien), died. 

Murtough Ultach [Donlevy], the son of John, died at Druim-na-loiste’, on 
the 10th of February, after [having passed] the eighty-ninth year of his age. 

Sir John Norris, who had been the General of the Queen’s army in France 
and Ireland, was deprived of his office by the new Lord Justice, who had last 
arrived in Ireland, and went to Munster, where he remained with his brother, 
Sir Thomas Norris, who had been previously President under him of Munster 
for the period of twelve years. John was seized with a disease and died sud- 


the English law of succession. land in the parish of Inver, barony of Banagh, 
° Druim-na-loiste, now Drumnalust, a town- and county of Donegal. 


2040 ANNdZa RIOshachca EIReEANN. 


[1597. 


ro. 7 ba he Sip tomar pob ohne an a pomaomb. Un Sin comap pm vo 
snougad na hoippici céona pin bat cacce phn porme pin a. bit na ppeiproenc 
ian néce a O(pbpatan; 

€mann, mac willice na ccfno, mic Riocaipod, mic uitlicc cnuie cuas o banle 
Inhgi vécc nm Sampnad na blicodna po. 

Qin oubalcac mac ctuatail ui concobain vecc. 

Com, ] vlapmaictc oa mac an oubalcas pm, 7 mac mec diapmaca 
morse luince «1. Maolpuanay, mac bain, mic Rua, mic ta1dzZ 00 dol pa 
baile Mhec oauro 1. slinnpeci 50 po sabpac sabala. Ace pillead ooib co na 
ccpelc on mbcnle puce mac meic vauid oppa 1 lab na Sucae 50 palimead 
foppa, mapbtapn lap conn o concobain m aen lam mancars ap luga pob 
ole 1 cconnaccaib, 7 an Maolpuanmd pm mac mec diapmaca, 7 opons mop 
do daomb uayple cenmotac. Oo taéo mac Mheic vauo oia cish ian 
mbuaid ccorccain ; 

Mac william vo tocc DIA TiN Fo pamain na bliadna po 1. Tepoitc mac 
uaceip clocaish, 7 a bATh achaid 1 noqingmscib a ourchce ocamofoin a eap- 
ccanac. Na humaill vo cneachad lap an can pin, a Ofpbpacan Tomar 
vo mapnbad 1 cclomn mwmpip na mbmig don cup cedna. 

SCan 6cc mac Riocaind mic Slam an ct{pmainn vo mapbad ap 1onnpaisio 
odce La cud do Cloinn noomnaill an olén na nenuigfo an pronnloc cf{hae. 

lan ppaccbanl baptin innpr us chuinn 1 ccip concnll amail a oubpaman, 
capla peapann ina peilb an can pin, 71 pelb a pimmpean pime an bna na 
Sionna von taoib call, Pont cnoypr a comamm. On can ac cualacan bup- 
caish bnuaicch na Sionna,y clann uillhiam aép cp mang) bap an bantin, appead 
po chinnpiot a husgovappap pencanpce a pimnpean toipmfpce do cop an por- 


P Died suddenly.—P. O’Sullevan Beare tells a 
strange story about Sir John Norris and the 
Devil, which would do credit to the writer of 
the Life of Dr. Faustus.—See it already referred 
to at p. 2021, supra. 

4 Edmond of Baile- Hilighi, i.e. Edmond Burke 
of Balleely, in the barony of Loughrea, and 
county of Galway. 

" Died.—Charles O’Conor adds that he died 
at Breaccluin, now Bracklon, near Strokestown, 
in the county of Roscommon. 


* Mac David.—He was the head of a sept of 
the Burkes who were seated at Glinske, near 
the River Suck, in the east of the county of 
Galway. 

° The Owles, i.e. the baronies of Murresk 
and Burrishoole, in the west of the county of 
Mayo. 

" Clann-Muiris-na-mBrigh, i. e. Clanmaurice 
of Brees, now the barony of Clanmorris, in the 
county of Mayo. The ruins of the Castle of 
Brees, from which this territory received the 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2041 


1597] 


denly’ in the autumn of this year; and Sir Thomas was the heir to his pro- 
perty. Sir Thomas continued in the same office after the death of his brother. 

Edmond (the son of Ulick-na-gCeann, son of Richard, son of Ulick of 
Cnoe-Tuagh), of Baile-Hilighi*, died in the summer of this year. 

Dubhaltach, the son of Tuathal O’Conor, died’. 

Con and Dermot, the two sons of this Dubhaltach, and the son of Mac 
Dermot of Moylurg (Mulrony, the son of Brian, was son of Rory, son of 
Teige), made an irruption into Glinske, the castle of Mac David*, and took 
preys. On their return from the castle with their booty, the son of Mac 
David came up with them at a sinuous winding of the Suck, and defeated 
them, and slew Con O’Conor, by no means one of the least expert horsemen 
in Connaught, Mulrony Mac Dermot, already named, and many other gentle- 
men. The son of Mac David then returned home in triumph. 

Mac William (Theobald, the son of Walter Kittagh) returned to his terri- 
tory at Allhallowtide this year, and remained in the fastnesses of his country 
in despite of his enemies. During this time he plundered the Owles'. His 
brother, Thomas, was slain in Clann-Muiris-na-mBrigh", on the same occasion. 

John Oge, the son of Rickard, son of John of the Termon, was slain in a 
nocturnal assault by a party of the Clann-Donnell, on an island of Annies” in 
Finnloch-Ceara*. 

At the time when the Baron of Inchiquin was lost in Tirconnell, as we 
have stated, he had in his possession, as his ancestors had before him, lands on 
the farther brink of the Shannon, called Port-croisi?. When the Burkes of the 
Shannon side, the Clann-William of Aes-tri-Maighe’, had heard of the death of 
the Baron, they resolved, on the authority of an old charter of their ancestors, 


distinguished adjunct of na-mBrigh, are still 
to be seen in the parish of Mayo in this barony. 

“ Annies, in the parish of Robeen, barony 
of Kilmaine, county of Mayo.—See Genealogies, 
Tribes, and Customs of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 490. 

* Finnloch- Ceara, now Lough Carra, near Bal- 
linrobe, in the county of Mayo.—See Genealogies, 
§c., of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 491. 

¥ Port Croisi, now Portcrush, a townland on 
the south side of the Shannon, in the parish of 
Castleconnell, and county of Limerick. See 


note 4, under the year 1506, p. 1287, supra. 

2 Aes-tri Maighe: i.e. the people of the three 
plains, now the barony of Clanwilliam, in the 
north-east of the county of Limerick. Accord- 
ing to O’Heerin’s topographical poem, this 
territory had belonged to the Irish family of 
O’Conaing. They were dispossessed, shortly 
after the English Invasion, by the Clann- William 
Burke, who fixed their chief residence at Cais- 
lean-Ui-Chonaing, i. e. O’Conaing’s Castle, now 
corruptly anglicised Castleconnell. 


LD 


2042 GNNGZa RIOshachTa ElRECNnN. [1597. 


Sniomanb mumncine an baniin,7 a mata (.1. maipspecc mgfn comaup ciopocc ) 
im peffonn pm. Oo covoap opong vo cenél plpmaie (.1. ofta1s an bani) 
1 ccionn Mhaipspéige 00 congnam, 7 do culoluccad pia. Oo cumd ona 
Maipgpes, 7 an luce pin dionnpargid a mfitle 7 a mumncine co pont cporyt. 
O Ro proippiot na bupcaigh pempaicce an ni pm 1. Tomap, mac cepéitc, 
mic urlliam, mic emainn, 7 will(cc mac william, me emamn po tionoilpoc an 
lion ap ha po pevpat 7 po 1onnpaigpioc Maipgpece 7 muinncip an bap. 
Peacan pecainn(p cpoda (coppa 7 sep bo huachad vo mumnzip an bani po 
sabpac 50 cndda aga mmofsanl buofin. Ro mapbad vagoaoine fconpa an 
sach caeb. Ro paccbad vo lich bupcach wllece mac Uilliam bune, mic 
Emainn, 7 cpap no cltpap 00 dasdaommb ele. Concaip ona blop von caeb 
anonll God o hoccam, an caén mac oume oipecta ap luga pob ole mart, 4 
inme bai 1 cconntae an clap, 7 oagoume ele 1. Mupchad, mac vonnchard, 
mic mupchad pucid, mic bmain,7 mac an cpapigh .1. tomar mac Cortona. 

Capcm cimal, Capt nungenc, caémanars, Siol cconcobann pailsis Sfol 
mopnda, | sabal pagnaill vo bit, acc venam coccaid, posla,7 vibApse mome 
ilaagsmb, 7 1 mbuicilencoib 6 pel Mune Fo noovlaice mop na bhadna po,7 ap 
ermilc a pecmobad an po loitpioc, 7 im po millpioc ip na cimb pm ppp an 


né pm. 
oecemben. 


Ro manbad leo ona oa banna Purine laos an peccmad la vo 


Hobennoin caippse ppsupa 7 cpt banna pargorp amaille pny oe map- 


* Their mother.—Murrough O’Brien, fourth 
Baron of Inchiquin, who was drowned in the 
River Erne in 1597, was married to Margaret, 
the daughter of Sir Thomas Cusack, Lord Chan- 
cellor of Ireland, and had by her Dermot, fifth 
Baron of Inchiquin, and other children. The 
baron’s own mother was Mable, eldest daughter 
of Christopher Nugent, Baron of Delvin. 

» Kinel-Fearmaic.— This was originally the 
tribe name of the O’Deas, but it was at this 
period applied to a territory co-extensive with 
the present barony of Inchiquin, in the county 
of Clare. 

° Reapers—The word meitel, which makes 
meizle in the genitive singular, is still used in 
the south-east of Munster to denote ‘ a party 


of reapers,” which is unquestionably the mean- 
ing of the word in the text, for the baron was 
drowned in July, and this rencounter between 
the Burkes of Castleconnell and his wife Marga- 
ret took place soon after. The word mezel is 
explained in Cormac’s Glossary thus: 

“Mezel, quast mecal, ab eo quod est meto.”’ 

1 Gavall-Rannall.—This was the tribe name 
of the O’Byrnes of Ranelagh, in the present 
county of Wicklow, of whom Felim, the son of 
Fiagh O’Byrne, was chief at this period. 

° To Christmas: literally ‘‘ from the festival of 
Mary to the Big Christmas of this year.” 

f Port-Leia.—This is still the Irish name of the 
town of Maryborough, in the Queen’s County. 

8 The Governor of Carrickfergus.—He was Sir 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2043 


to prevent the Baron’s family and their mother’ (i.e. Margaret, the daughter of 
Thomas Cusack) from working on those lands. A party of the people of 
Kinel-Fearmaic’, the Baron’s territory, went to aid and assist Margaret, and 
she set out with them to her reapers and people to Port-croisi. When the 
aforesaid Burkes, namely, Thomas, the son of Theobald, son of William, son of 
Edmond, and Ulick, the son of William, son of Edmond, had learned this, they 
assembled as large a number as they were able, and attacked Margaret and 
the Baron’s people. A fierce battle was fought between them; and though 
the Baron’s people were few in number, they proceeded valiantly to defend 
themselves. Several gentlemen were slain between them on both sides. On 
the side of the Burkes fell Ulick, the son of William, son of Edmond Burke, 
and three or four other gentlemen. On the other side also there fell Hugh 
O’Hogan, by no means the least distinguished son of a chieftain, for goodness 
and wealth, in the county of Clare, with another gentleman, namely, Murrough, 
the son of Donough, the son of Murrough Roe, son of Brian [O’Brien], and 
the son of Cruise, namely, Thomas, the son of Christopher. 

Captain Tyrrell, Captain Nugent, the Kavanaghs, the O’Conors Faly, the 
O’Mores, and the Gavall-Ranall*, were making great war, plunder, and insur- 
rection in Leinster, and in the country of the Butlers, from the festival of the 
Virgin Mary to the Christmas* this year; and it would be tedious to write of 
all they plundered and destroyed in these territories during this period. On 
the 7th day of December they slew two bands of soldiers that were stationed 
in Port-Leix". 3 

About Allhallowtide this year the Governor of Carrickfergus’ and three 


John Chichester, the brother of Sir Arthur, the 
founder of the Donegal family. P. O’Sullevan 
Beare gives the following account of this ren- 
counter, in his Hist. Cathol. Ibern. §c., tom 3, 
lib. 4, c. ii. fol. 149. ; 

** Hyeme sequente Ioannes Chichester An- 
glus eques Auratus, qui Rupem Fargusiam arcem 
firmo presidio tenebat, cum peditibus quingentis, 
& equitum turma predatum egreditur. Cui fit 
obuius ad Alfracham tumulum, & vadum Iaimus 
Macdonellus Glinniz princeps peditibus quadrin- 
gentis, & equitibus sexaginta stipatus. Bombar- 


darij bombardarios aggrediuntur: a Catholicis 
regij propulsantur. Iohannes cum equitatu veni- 
ens auxilio bombardarios suos restituit in pug- 
nam, & Catholicos recedere cogit. Iaimus quoque 
equitatum in pugnam ducens bombardarijs suis 
confirmatis in Iohannem proruit, & tribus haste 
ictibus percussus, lorica tamen defenditur. Io- 
hannes occisus equo labat, cuilus etiam equita- 
tus, & peditatus terga vertit. Sequitur Iaimus 
per tria circiter millia vsque ad arcem, per quod 
interuallum, regijs, vt quisque a Catholicis cursu 
superabatur, occisis, vix cladis nuncij effuge- 


bp: 2 


2044 aNNdta RIOCsShachTa EIRECNN. [1597. 


bad la Sémup mac Somaiple bude mec ovomnanll mM cclomn Cloda bude po 
Shamhain na bliadna po. 

Clann cpiagh a. Mupchad baclamac mac munchaid barlb, mic masnuypa 
méc pithig co na ofpbpatap Ruaiom, 7 Emann, mac mupchad bacang, mic 
€Emainn mic magnupa mec pitigh vo bapuccad la sallaib a lop a ccoceaid, 7 
a noibfincce. 

lap néce an luptip 1. Comar lono bupough 1pm bap vo bitin a son, 7 1Ap 
ccabaint Comméoa clodim an 1g 1nEpmn von cpompilep, 7 00 Sip Robfpo 
sapomen lupcip binnp an ms amanl ovo pmodtmap, ba hé neach oia po hop- 
paiccead Zenenalacc coccad, 7 plotcana na hE€penn oiapla upmuman 4. 
comay, mac Semup, mic Piapwip puaid, comd aipe pm vo Zabad oppad ecip 
Nip bo cian ian pm so noeachad an 
senepal 1. an capla upmuman pin, 7 ianla cuadmuman .1. vomchad mac 


aniapla pm 7 mate coiccid ula. 


concobaip 1 ccoiccead ulad1 mi vecembep Zan pia noovlaic, 7 po baccan pin, 
O néill, 7 O vomnaill pm pé copa noice mm aén magn 7 iomluad pioda 
ecip na hanladaib pin a hucc na beanmosan pp saoidelanb Late cunn,7 pob 
é cmochnuccad a noala, pit 00 denam ecin salloib 7 Zaoiwelanb pa mod na 
manlad pin 50 belcame an ccino. Cecca 7 pecmbenna na ngaoiwel pém- 
paitce, plop na nainc(ecal 7 na ccomsell an a ngeboaip pit voib phn, 7 oa 
ccompann coccmd in Zach cpm 1 mbatcap do cop vo pargio na bammogna 
50 Saroib la Mapla cuadmuman, 7 sIbe pccela do Tiucpad anoip 1 mbelcaine 
imipc a bup oa pip. 

O concobain pliccig vonnchad mac catal dicc, vo dol1 Saxorb ( blec 
ja noolaic na bliadna po. 


runt. Barnabal Baro cum Midhiensibus copijs 
Angloibernis, & aliquot Anglis cohortibus Au- 
-yiliam deuastans 4 Macmagauno Aurilie prin- 
cipe funditur, & fugatur.” 

Lodge, however, says that Mac Donnell had 
laid an ambuscade for Chichester. 

® Murrough Baclamhach: i.e. Murrough or 
Morgan of the Lame Hand. 

' The Lord Borough.—Myr. Moore, in his His- 
tory of Ireland, vol. iv. p. 108, has the following 
remark on the chief Governor: 

“The only circumstance at all memorable, 


that connects itself with this Lord’s name is the 
doubt that exists as to the manner of spelling 
it ; some writing Burke, while Camden makes 
it Borough, and the owner of the name himself 
wrote Bourgh.” 

Camden calls him ‘‘ Thomas Baro Borough, vir 
acer, et animi plenus, sed nullis fere castrorum 
rudimentis.”"——Ann. Reg. Elis., A. D. 1597. 

* And therefore.—This should be: ‘ and the re- 
sult of this appointment of Ormond was, that a 
cessation [ ‘ Cessationem armorum vocant Hiber- 
nici,’—Camd. | of two months took place between 


1597.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2045 


companies of soldiers were slain in Clannaboy by James, the son of Sorley Boy 
Mac Donnell. 

The Mac Sheehys, namely, Murrough Baclamhach’, the son of Murrough 
Balbh, son of Manus Mac Sheehy, with his brother, Rory, and Edmond, the 
son of Murrough Bacagh, son of Edmond, son of Manus Mac Sheehy, were 
executed by the English for their war and insurrection. 

After the Lord Justice, Thomas Lord Borough’, had died of the effects of his 
wounds at Newry, and the keeping of the regal sword had been given to the 
Lord Chancellor and to Sir Robert Gardiner, Justice of the King’s [Queen’s] 
Bench, as we have stated, the person who was appointed to the generalship of 
war and peace in Ireland was the Earl of Ormond (‘Thomas, the son of James, 
son of Pierce Roe), and therefore‘ an armistice was concluded between this 
Earl and the chiefs of the province of Ulster. Not long after this [namely], 
in the month of December, and shortly before Christmas, this Earl of Ormond 
and the Earl of Thomond (Donough, the son of Conor), went into the province 
of Ulster, where they and O’Neill and O’Donnell passed three nights together 
at one place; and a treaty concerning a peace was carried on by those Earls, on 
behalf of the Queen, with the Irish of Leath-Chuinn; and the issue of their 
meeting was, that a peace was made between the English and the Irish, on the 
oath of these Earls, until the May following. The proposals and writings of 
the Irish aforesaid, and an account of the articles and conditions on which they 
would accept of peace for themselves and their confederates in the war, in 
every place where they were seated, were dispatched to the Queen to England 
by the Earl of Thomond'; and whatever news™ should arrive from England in 
May should be acted upon here. 

O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge) went to England a short 
time before the Christmas of this year. 


him and the chiets of Ulster.”—See Carte’s Or- 
mond, Introd., p. 59. Fynes Moryson says that 
this conference took place at Dundalk, on the 
22nd of December, 1597.—See folio edition, 
p- 22; Dublin edition of 1735, vol. i. pp. 51, 
52, 53; and Cox, vol. 1. p. 414. 

' By the Earl of Thomond.—This may be an 
error of the transcriber for “la hiapia upmu- 


man,” i,e. by the Earl of Ormond. 

m News, Scela.— This is a bad word, and 
the Four Masters could have found technical 
words in abundance in their own language to 
express this idea more distinctly. The word 
Fpeagnad would be better, if they did not wish 
to introduce the technicalties of the old Irish 
laws. An English writer would say: ‘‘ And both 


(1598. 


2046 ANNAta Rrogha chor EIREGNN. 


Cn bapun inpe ui cum tap a ccangaman, Ro sumead,7 po baidead ag toct 
oon Zob(pnoin, 7 vo na hhaplaovhaib pemnaice co na plogaib can éipne, Ro 
coccbad a conp la conbmac ua ccléimg Manac vo mancharb Mampcnec 
(pa puaid, 7 po hadnaicead an conp co nondin amaal po ba cecca lap 1pm 
mamepzip. Ro eins fpaonca 7 mpeapamn eiccip bnaitpib ot1n na ngall 7 
na manag oeplde, 7 po purgillpic na bnaitpe sun 66 ma moumpoip Féin po 
dleact an conp vo adnacal, an ba 1 mamepcin S. Pnompeip ina cip badém 
no hadnaict) pnnpip an bandin pm pé fooa map an can pwn. Ro baccan na 
manais acca popttad aca bavdéin co noeacrac na bpaitpi 7 na mans vo 
laconp uf vomnarll, 7 na oeip: eppcop baccan 1pm cip Rémann o sallcubain 
eppcop doipe, 7 mall o baogill eppeop Ratabot sup po bnithagspoc na 
maite pin an banin Mupchad, mac munchard, uf bam oo adnacal 1 Mao- 
nepzip $. Ppomperp 1 noun na ngall. Oo pdénad amlard pin, an po coccbad an 
conp 1ccfn ncute 1ap na adnacal 1 mamptip fppa Rua Zup po adnaicplc 
na bnaitpe aca bavéin € co nondip 7 Fo naipmiccin amcaul po ba ofon. 

O concobain vonn Clooh mac dianmacca mic caipppe bao ilcam as 
Ua noomnaill pr pé pooa vo lésad (an 4 00 vecemben) a sfimel la hua 
noomnaill ian ccaboaupc a oispene 06, 7 po naom apach 7 pacha pain bud 
ofin im pip uf vomnaill vo Dénam ta bite po planaib, 7 po mionnaib vé 4 
na heccailp, 7 de pace ppp bnaighoe 06 pm comall «1. a dap mac bu- 
ofin, Mac owpechta uf bfipn, céo mac us Ciinlive, 7 orohpe ui plomn ca. 


QO1S CRIOST, 1598. 


Cloip Cmopc, mile, cince céo, nocact, a hoche. 


Cn cab caoch 1. Ulam, mac oauid, mic Emamn, mic uillice a bane oa 
no sap Fin Mac wmlliam iap néce an Mhfic ulliam bai na TisZeapna poime 
a. Ripoeno mac oluenaip, mic Slain. Nip be pommec puaippium an samm 


parties agreed that such decision as should be 
sent from England should be adhered to in Ire- 
land.” 

" Already spoken.—See p. 2027, supra. 

° Redmond O’ Gallagher, jc.—These were the 
toman Catholic bishops of these dioceses. George 


Mountgomery held the sees of Derry and Raphoe, 
in conjunction with that of Clogher, by letters 
patent, dated the 13th of June, 1595, but it 
would appear that he never exercised any epis- 
copal jurisdiction in these northern dioceses, in 
which the Reformation had at this time made so 


1598. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2047 


As for the Baron of Inchiquin, of whom we have already spoken® as having 
been wounded and drowned when the Governor and the aforesaid Earls were 
crossing the Erne with their forces, his body was taken up by Cormac O’Clery, 
one of the monks of the monastery of Assaroe, and the body was buried by 
him, with due honour, in the monastery. In consequence of this a dispute and 
contention arose between the friars of Donegal and the monks of Assaroe; 
the friars maintaining that the body should be of right buried in their own 
monastery, because the ancestors of the Baron had been for a long period be- 
fore that time buried in the Franciscan monastery in his own country, and the 
monks insisting that it should remain with themselves; so that the friars and 
the monks went before O'Donnell, and the two Bishops who were then in the 
country, namely, Redmond O’Gallagher’, Bishop of Derry, and Niall O’Boyle, 
Bishop of Raphoe, and these chiefs, decided upon having the Baron, Murrough, 
the son of Murrough O’Brien, buried in the monastery of St. Francis at Donegal. 
This was accordingly done, for the body was taken up at the end of three 
months after its interment in the monastery of Assaroe, and the friars reburied 
it in their own monastery? with reverence and honour, as was meet. 

O’Conor Don (Hugh, the son of Dermot, son of Carbry), who had been for 
a long time imprisoned by O’Donnell, was set at liberty by him on the 4th of 
December, after he [O’Conor] had given him his full demand; and he solemnly 
bound himself to be for ever obedient to O’Donnell, by guarantees and oaths 
of God and the Church ; and he also delivered up to him, as hostages for the 
fulfilment of this, namely, his own two sons, the heir of O’Beirne, the eldest 
son of O’Hanly, and the heir of O’Flynn, &c. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1598. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-eight. 
The Blind Abbot (i.e. William, the son of David, son of Edmond, son of 


Ulick Burke), who had styled himself Mac William after the death of the last 
lord, namely, Richard, the son of Oliver, son of John, did not happily enjoy his 


little progress. See Harris's edition of Wares themselves,” which would not be well under- 
Bishops, p. 275. stood in English. It is strange that the Cister- 
P In their own monastery: literally, “with cian monks of Assaroe, and the Franciscans of 


2048 ANNata RIOfFhaAchTA EIREANN. [1598. 


cisfna pm uain po hionnapbad € ap a atapoa la Sip Ripoeno bingam so 
mbai ina lonnanptach 6 tip vo tip 50 plo écc hi cclomn culem hi mi pep- 
cemben, 7 po haonaicfoh € hi ccumnche ippdoim aonacail pil aova. Up e 
Mac wlham ber ann an pin tepoitt mac uaceip ciotais, mic Slain, mic 
Onluepaip via po Zap 6 Domnall Mac wlham amail po pccpiobamanp pe- 


mann. 


O catamn Ruamodpm, mac magnupa, mic vonnchaid, mic Slain, mic abne 


vecc an clfépamad la vecc vo mi apm, a mac vomnall ballac oomonead 


Ina 1Ondo. 


Riocano, mac Slain, mic tomap, mic Riocaino oice a banc 6 done mic 


laccna vece i mi Cluguyc. 


Siuban cam msm iapla ofpmuman a. Semup, mac San, mic tommy 
opoicit ata véce 1 NZHimpead na bhaona po, rap ccontim mop mbliadan 1 


mbaintpebtacap iap noit a ofinbpime 7 na nofisplp noiongmala lap po 


h(pnaidmead f o1caoh moraoh. 


Mac oonnchaid cine horlellae 1. Muipnsfp cacce mac cTaldce an cpubaip 


do mapbad 1 mbpeipne us puaine 1 ccimcell puaoain cpfche,7 Wac vonncharo 


DO Fam vo concoban 6ce mac maoileclamn 6 baale an otin. 


Occan, mac Sfan, mic [Maoleaclainn Ui] oceain 6 and cpome vecc m 


eappac na bliadna po. 


Donegal, should have thus contended for the 
body of a Protestant baron. 

5,Sil-Aodha: ‘i. e. semen, progenies seu, genus 
Aidi, seu Hugonis.” This was one of the tribe 
names of the Mac Namaras of Thomond, who 
were otherwise called Ui-Caisin and Clann- 
Coileain.— See note ¥, under the year 1592, 
p: 1910, supra. 

" Dotre-mic-Lachtna: i.e. Roboretum filii Lacht- 
nai, now Derrymaclaughny, a townland contain- 
ing the ruins of a castle, situated a short distance 
to the north-east of the hill of Cnoc-tuagh, or 
Knockdoe, in the barony of Clare, and county of 
Galway.—See map to Tribes, ge. of Hy-Many, 
on which the situation of this castle is shewn. 

° Baile-an-duin, now Ballindoon, near Balli- 
nafad, in the barony of Tirerrill, and county of 


Sligo. See it already mentioned at the years1352 
and 1468. The family of Mac Donough, who are 
an offset of the Mac Dermots of Moylurg, re- 
tained some property in the county of Sligo till 
very recently. In 1688, Terence Mac Donough, 
Esq., of Creevagh, was M.P. for the town of 
Sligo; he died in 1713.—See Memoir of O’ Conor, 
p. 141. 
was admitted to the Irish bar after the viola- 
tion of the Conditions of Limerick. This Ter- 
ence, who is traditionally called in the country, 
“‘ the great Counsellor Mac Donough,” was the 


He was the only Catholic counsel that 


lawyer who saved to Donough Liath O’Conor, 
of Belanagare, a small tract of property from 
A bill of discovery had been filed 
against this Donough by Mr. French, of French 
Park, under the Statute 1 Anne, chap. 32, but 


confiscation. 


1598. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2049 


title of lord, for he was expelled from his patrimony by Sir Richard Bingham ; 
after which he went about wandering as an exile from territory to territory, 
until he died in Clann-Cuilein [in Thomond], in the month of September ; and 
he was buried in the abbey of Quin, in the burial-place of the Sil-Aedha’. The 
Mac William who was lord at that time was Theobald (the son of Walter Kit- 
tagh, son of John, son of Oliver), whom O’Donnell had nominated Mac William, 


as we have written before. 


O'Kane (Rory, the son of Manus, son of Donough, son of John, son of Aibhne) 
died on the fourteenth day of the month of April; and his son, Donnell Ballagh, 


was installed in his place. 


Rickard, the son of John, son of Thomas, son of Rickard Oge Burke, from 
Doire-mic-Lachtna‘, died in the month of August. 

Joan Cam, the daughter of the Earl of Desmond, namely, of James, the son 
of John, son of Thomas of Drogheda, died in the winter of this year, having 
spent many years in [a state of ] widowhood, after the destruction of her tribe, 
and of the worthy men to whom she had been successively espoused. 

Mac Donough of Tirerrill (Maurice Caech, the son of Teige-an-Triubhis ) 
was slain in Breifny-O’Rourke, as he was carrying off a prey from thence ; upon 
which Conor Oge, son of Melaghlin, from Baile-an-duin*, was appointed the 


Mac Donough. 


Ogan‘, the son of John, son of [Melaghlin O’h-]Ogain of Ard-Croine, died 


in the spring of this year. 


Mac Donough managed the reply so ably, and 
being supported by the interests of Lord Kings- 
land and Lord Taaffe, finally succeeded in re- 
storing Donough O’Conor to about seven hun- 
dred acres of land, which descended to his son, 
Charles O’Conor, of Belanagare, the historian. 
The family of Mac Donough have now scarcely 
any property remaining, and the race have lat- 
terly fallen into obscurity. 

It willbe seen, from reference to the state- 
ment under the year 1468 (ante, p. 1053), that 
the then Lord of Tirerrill was also Lord of 
Baile-an-duin. 

* Ogan, son of John.—This passage is left 
imperfect by the transcriber, who omitted the 


words in brackets, which are supplied from 
Duald Mac Firbis. The O’Hogans were seated 
at Ardcrony, four miles to the north of the 
town of Nenagh, in the county of Tipperary. 
The Ogan mentioned in the text had four 
brothers: Conor, of Ardcrony; John, Prior of 
Lorha; Gillapatrick, Erenagh of Lorha; and 
William. Their line of pedigree is given by 
Duald Mac Firbis as follows, p. 403 :—Ogan, 
son of John, son of Melaghlin, son of John, 
son of Thomas, son of Siacus, son of Conor, 
Bishop of Killaloe, son of Teige, son of Do- 
nough, son of Donnell, son of Dermot, son of 
Rory, &c. A considerable portion of O’Hogan’s 
castle is still to be seen at Ardcrony. 


- 12 5 


2050 QNNQZa RIOSshachta Eireann. (1598. 


Muipefpcac cam mac concobain, mic matzamna, mic ToMaIP o Cnoc an 
lacha 1 ctpioca céd Conco barpeind aint{paig1 vece hi mi manta. 

b5aotsalac, mac Cloda, mic baotgalans, mic muincfptaig méc plannchava 
on Cnoc Fionn hi cconntae an clap vecc hi mf appl. Pp eipide co pulbaine 
inopce laid, 1 nZaordilcc, 7 1 mbénla. 

Oianmanc, mac Eman, mic Ruawdm i deavhaid o tulars ul Deaoharo vo 
mapbad la oib(iccacans conncae an claip a mi Tul. 

lanla cuadmuman do dol 1 Saroib1 coop mip lanuanp. Cecta q pecmibenn 
na ngaodel an cha, 7 Riocano, mac uillicc, mic Riocampo Sharanars mic 
uillicc na ccfnn bantin ote cullin do dol beop In Saxoib 1pm eanpach vo 
ponnpnaoh. 

lan noénam na piooa pemebentman 6 noolaic mon 50 belcaime ecip 
saoidelaib lete cuinn 7 an senenal iapla unmuman, Ro fopailpioc saoroil 
an tuaipceemnt pon a mbaof vo dibfpccacanbh wlonsmb 7 ain mide (.1. caoma- 
nag, Siol cconcobain, Siol monda, Zabal pasnaill, Cuatalais, Cipialangh, 7 
Uinnpionnars ) pecun 50 icc via pposanl, 7 o1a noibfince. 
Innpin pop congspa a naipeach. 


Oo ponpat pom 
Ro coms an Genenal lapla upmuman ooib 
lomancigio lag(n, mide, 7 optip muman, 7 a mbiad 7 a noveos do tocaitlm 
50 ctiopad pgéla piooa no coccaid cuca po.belcame a Saroib. Ro baccan 
yom tna lap an ccomaipleccad pin ace caiptel 7 tataise gach cine ina 
ccimcell 6 cill mannan 1 moccan Lars{n Z0 Sitip 7 0 Loch sapman 50 Sionainn. 
Nip bo pooaing do na ciib pin pulang a noanbplch an aipfec pin. 

Semuy (1. veapbnatain iapla upmuman) mac eduaino, mic Semary, 
mic Prapoap puad buicilep, 7 Mac még Prapwyp Sippram corncae ciop- 
pac apann (50 noaomb uaiyple 1omda a maille pm) vo dol po caipce 


" Cnoc-an-lacha: i.e. hill of the lough or lake, and a member of the Parliament of 1585. . Ac- 


now Knockalough, a townland containing the 

ruins of a castle in the parish of Kilmihil, ba- 

rony of Clonderalaw, and county of Clare. 
*Cnoc-finn: i.e. the Whitefair Hill, now Knock- 


fin, in the barony of Corcomroe, and county of 


Clare. According to the Description of the 
County of Clare, preserved in T. C. D., E. 2. 14, 
the castles of Knockefyne and Tuomolyn be- 
longed to Conogher Maglainehy. The Boethius 


MacClancy above mentioned was sheriff of Clare, 


cording to the tradition in the country, he mur- 
dered some shipwrecked Spaniards in 1588. 

W Tully O’ Dea: i. e. O’Dea’s hill, now Tully, 
near Dysart-O’ Dea, in the barony of Inchiquin, 
About the year 1584, 
when the Description of the County of Clare, 
preserved in the Library of Trin. Coll., Dublin, 
E. 2. 14, was written, the only places marked 
as belonging to the O’Deas are, ‘“ Beallnalyke” 


and county of Clare. 


[near Ruane], and Moghowny, belonging to Ma- 


1598.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2051 


Murtough Cam, the son of Conor, son of Mahon, son of Thomas [Mac Mahon] 
of Cnoc-an-lacha", in the territory of East Corca-Baiscinn, died in the month of 
March. 

Boethius, the son of Hugh, son of Boethius, son of Murtough Mac Clancy, 
from Cnoc-Finn’, in the county of Clare, died in the month of April. He was 
a man fluent in the Latin, Irish, and English languages. 

Dermot, the son of Edmond, son of Rory O’Dea of Tully-O’Dee", was killed 
in the month of July by the insurgents of the county of Clare. 

The Earl of Thomond went to England in the beginning of the month of 
January. The proposals and letters of the Irish in general were also sent to 
England; and Rickard, the son of Ulick, son of Rickard Saxonagh, son of 
Ulick-na-gCeann, Baron of Dunkellin, also went to England in the spring. 

After the concluding of the peace which we have already mentioned, from 
Christmas to May, between the Irish of Leath-Chuinn and the General, the Earl 
of Ormond, the Irish of the North issued orders to all the insurgents of Leinster 
and Meath, namely, the Kavanaghs, O’Conors, O’Mores, the Gaval-Rannall*, the 
Tooles, Tyrrells, and Nugents, to desist for a short time from their acts of 
plunder and rebellion ; and they did so, at the bidding of their chiefs. The 
General, the Earl of Ormond, permitted them to frequent Leinster, Meath, and 
the east of Munster, and to eat and drink [with the inhabitants], until news 
should come from England, in May, respecting peace or war. By this instruc- 
tion they continued traversing and frequenting every territory around them, 
from Cill-Mantain’, in the lower part of Leinster, to the Suir; and from Loch- 
Garman’ to the Shannon. It was not easy for [the inhabitants of] these terri- 
tories to bear their inordinate demands during this period. 

James (i. e. the brother of the Earl of Ormond), the son of Edward, son of 
James, son of Pierce Roe Butler, and the son of Mac Pierce, sheriff of the 
county of Tipperary’’, and many other gentlemen, proceeded precisely at Easter 


howne O’Dea, and Desert, belonging to Donell 
Moel O’ Dea.” 
* Gaval-Ranall, i. e. the O’ Byrnes of Ranelagh, 
in the south-west of the now county of Wicklow. 
¥ Cill-Mantain, i. e. the town of Wicklow.— 
See note *, under the year 1454, p. 991, supra. 
z Loch Garman, 1. e. the town of Wexford. 


* Of Tipperary, Cioppac a4nann.—This name 
signifies the well of Ara, the name of an ancient 
territory. This well, which gave name to the 
town of Tipperary, is now closed up. It was 
situated near the north bank of the River Ara, 
at the rear of Mr. O’Leary’s house, the front of 
which is in the main street of Tipperary. 


12 


2052 aNNaza RIOghachtad elReaNn. [1598. 


do ponnpad ap ionnpaisio ap bnian prabac 6 mépoda ouine varal don ploam 
saoielais bai acc venam na capec 1 nub conpin 7 po bad vo Lucc na hionn- 
paigte a domaoin 7 a vobaptan uain po paccbad opong moép dia noaomb 
uaiple, dIa noipect, 7 dia palgoiummib, 7 po Zabad ann Sémurp mac eduaino 
buicileip, 7 00 pao bnian prabac € o1apla upmuman po cnn peccmuine ap 
pm ap ous na piotcana a oubnamap, 7 an na ofpbad nac vo clo an sene- 
pala (1. an 1apla) Tuccad an 1omnpaigio pin. 

Ua pucipe bman 6cc, mac bmiam, mic bniam ballars, mic eogain, ba peap- 
ceac poe pu hUa noomnaill Aod puad mac Coda mic masnupa po vag 
oinccne Ui concobaip puaid taimmp amail po pecpobamap pemamn, 7 ancll 
ele nip b6 prodach etip é, 7 a ofpbpatanp buofin 1. cadzZ oO puaine mac bmam 
mic bniaim balloag 1m compomn a cepice 7 a Fefpounn py a pole. Conad 
aipe pin po epncdm Ua puaipe a con 7 a Capaccpad ppp an ngobepnoin Sin 
conepy clipont. Nip bo paths Ua vomnaill vo cloipcect an pecedil pin, vain 
baoan canoe puancarg oia cenel o cfin main, 7 ba bnatain 06 eipprum budfin, 
7 nip bo tain tarp ammurp pain no mopnad a cpice amanl cac ele 1 cconnac- 
cab, 7 ba ofpb lair Somad Eiccin 06 a hiomnpnad-muna cciopad 1 ccombad 
na n5aoidel oomdiy), vain mp bo ~prooac pom FIP nac aén no bad 1 cclit 
gall. N6 biod pec ann aga foapgurde co hinclite 1m pod ma piting,7 pecc 
ele ag bars 7 acc baccan monad a tine muna cciopad pon cculaib. Ro bai 
Ua puaine ace coiptect pip an ccectaipect ym 6 untorac eapnars co bel- 
caine ap ccind, 7 00 Cold an can pin co hag luain, 7 do pao a bnansve oon 
sobepnoin, 7 00 beptpac a moive 4 a ng5eallam 1m comall oia poile, 7 Fén bd 
ccnp an cinseallad nip bo cian po comantlead. 

Tainice pnfccna a Sarorb an pecpiblnnarb f nell, i oomnarll, 7 na ngaowel 
bavap 1 naén pann pm4, 7 ni po Faom an bammogam na an comaiple na nite 
fo 1apppac do ctabaine vob, 7 o na po paomad cuccpat na Zaofoil a ceaon- 


* Befell the assailants, i. e. the disasters which 
they had intended for Brian Reagh O’More fell 
upon themselves. 

» League of friendship.—This friendship was 
of very short duration indeed, and Clifford met 
his death soon after in attempting to force the 
pass of the Curlieus, which was defended by 
O’Rourke and O’Donnell. 


° He was not at peace.—Hugh Roe O’Donnell’s 
intense hatred to the English seems to have 
principally arisen from his having been so long 
detained in prison without any ostensible reason, 
for the English writers themselves acknowledge 
that he was captured treacherously, and loaded 
with irons after his recommittal, though there 
were strong reasons for believing that the Vice- 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2053 


on an incursion against Brian Reagh O’More, a gentleman of the Irish party, 
who was passing Easter in Ikerrin ; but disaster and misfortune befell the 
assailants’, for many of their gentlemen, of their followers, and of their soldiers, 
were slain; and James, the son of Edward Butler, was taken prisoner, but 
Brian Reagh delivered him up, in a week afterwards, to the Earl of Ormond, on 
account of the peace we have mentioned, and after it had been ascertained that 
it was not by the permission of the General (1. e. the Earl) this attack had been 
made. 

O’Rourke (Brian Oge, the son of Brian, son of Brian Ballagh, son of Owen) 
was angry with O’Donnell (Hugh Roe, the son of Hugh, son of Manus), because 
of his having plundered O’Conor Roe against his wish, as we have written 
before ; and, moreover, he was not at all on terms of peace with his own bro- 
ther, i.e. Teige O'Rourke, the son of Brian, son of Brian Ballagh, [in conse- 
quence of a disagreement] about the partition of their territory and land. 
Wherefore, O'Rourke confederated and formed a league of friendship’ with the 
Governor, Sir Conyers Clifford. O'Donnell was not pleased at hearing this 
news, for the O’Rourkes had from a remote period been the friends of his tribe, 
and he [the present O'Rourke] was his own kinsman, and he did not wish to 
make an incursion against him, or plunder his territory, as he would treat all 
others in Connaught; but he felt certain that he must needs plunder him unless 
he should return to the confederacy of the Irish, for he [O’Donnel!] was not at 
peace® with any one who was under the tutelage of the English. For a certain 
time he privately solicited him to return, and at another time he menaced and 
threatened to plunder his territory unless he should come back. O’Rourke 
continued to listen to these messages from the beginning of spring to the May 
following, at which time he went to Athlone, and delivered up his hostages to 
the Governor ; and they made [mutual] vows and promises to be faithful to each 
other; but though the engagement was sincere [at the time], it was not long kept. 

An answer arrived from England to the letters of O'Neill, O'Donnell, and 
the other Irish chiefs who were in alliance with them. The Queen and the 
Council did not consent to grant them the conditions they demanded ; and, 


roy was privy to his escape. This, and the loss disqualified him from being a great statesman 
of his two great toes, raised his open hatred to like Tyrone, though, according to Cucugry 
the English name to a pitch of sublimity which O’Clery, ‘a Cesar in command.” 


2054 GNNAZa RIOFhacheTa EIREAGNNW. (1598. 


compac ap coccad, a cefnnpa an cCnnampce,7 a prt an (paonca co po blcharo- 
pot beésnip a pingom vom) a ccup pampard na bliadna po. 

lan noveiliuccad pe poile oon sobennoin 7 OU pucupc po pit] po carpome 
po belcame 1 mbaile aca luain,] ot conncipe ua puaine nap b6 prodac Foil, 
5 saoiwil pm pole, 7 nap bo tpeip: vo sallaib oloap vo Zaoidelaab oon cup 
ym po mecclang poe mopead a cipe OUa oomnaill comd fo vo pome toct 
po a TosaIpM, 7 an po acaigs Ppp 0o Venam an comaiple a mumncine, uct 
nob upa les an sobepnoip 00 bit po a ccomain ina oviogalcap Ui domnanll 
ina noecohaid via nanoaoip hi ccléit an gobennona. 

lan nawdm a capaccpad von chup pm oUa pune pup Ua noomnaill oo 
cow Ua puaine co na pocpaicce an tappaing ui Pipsail barn (1. Ropp, mac 
umilliam, mic vomnanll) 1pm mide, 7 po cpeachad leo an Muil(no cpp, 7 on 
Muilfnn clpp so baale mon loca piimdige. 

Sloiccead ele la hUa puaine ip im ccé10 mi Ofposmanp, 7 ni po aimip so 
pamice bealach an cimialons, 7 co bealac cille bmsoe 1 Ripa’ culach. Oo 
poe cp(cha 7 mapnbtai mbealac an cipmalais, 7 po pill can a app dia Tip 
san Zui san Zabhaoh. 

lan nool na ploda pempaice pon ccul caimce Remann a bunc mac Sfam 
na Sfmap mic Riocaipo Sharanas, me willce na ccfnn co nopuing oa bnait- 
pb é6cca monlle pp 00 céd vaommb 1 ccfnn Ui neill oa Eccaomne ppp sun b6 
hi pn(ccna ofpbpatan a atap paip a. lapla clomne procaipo willfce a bunc, 
oa mbfit an Remann pin pfio an latfcc aon pallainge o1a outcap, no dia 
atapoa o pputaip 50 habainn oa loilsech na ciubpad an oipfec pin pin vo 


4 Ballymore-Lough Sewdy.—See note ’, under 
the year 1450, p. 970, supra. 

© Tyrrell’s-Pass, a neat little town near the 
hill of Croghan, in the barony of Fertullagh, in 
the south of the county of Westmeath. 

€ Pass of Kilbride, a well-known place near 
Tyrrell’s-Pass. 

8 Sruthair, now Shrule, a village on the 
boundary of the barony of Clare, in the county 
of Galway, and the barony of Kilmaine, in the 
county of Mayo. A stream anciently called 
Sruthair, flowing by this village, was the north- 
west boundary of Clanrickard. 


b Abhainn-da-Loilgheach, i.e. the River of the 
two Milch Cows, now Owendalulagh, a moun- 
tain stream which rises in the townland of Derry- 
brien, and parish of Killeenadeema, in the moun- 
tain of Shabh Echtghe, now Slieve Aughty, 
to the south of the town of Loughrea, in the 
county of Galway, and which, flowing westwards, 
falls into Lough Cutra, near the town of Gort. 
This formed a portion of the southern boundary 
of Clanrickard.—See map to Tribes and Customs 
of Hy-Many, on which the position of this 
stream is marked. The name of this stream is 
accounted for by a legend in the Dinnsenchus, 


1598. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2055 


because they did not, the Irish exchanged their peace for war, their quietness 
for turmoil, and their tranquillity for dissention ; so that they rekindled the 
ancient flame of hatred in the beginning of the summer of this year. 

After the Governor and O’Rourke had parted from each other in peace and 
friendship, in May, at the town of Athlone, and when O’Rourke saw that the 
English and Irish were not at peace with each other, and that the English were 
not at this time more powerful than the Irish, he was afraid that O'Donnell 
would plunder his territory ; and therefore he came at the [first] summons of 
O'Donnell, and did whatever he requested him. This he [O’Rourke] did by 
advice of his people, for they felt it safer to have the Governor in opposition, 
than to be pursued by O’Donnell’s vengeance for remaining under the protec- 
tion of the Governor. 

O’Rourke, after having confirmed his friendship with O’Donnell on this 
occasion, proceeded with his forces, at the instance of O'Farrell Bane (i. e. Ross, 
the son of William, son of Donnell), into Meath ; and they plundered Mullin- 
gar, and [the country] from Mullingar to Ballymore-Lough Sewdy’*. 

Another hosting was made by O’Rourke in the first month of autumn; and 
he did not halt until he arrived at Tyrrell’s-Pass*, and the Pass of Kilbride’ in 
Fertullagh. He seized a prey, and slew some persons at Tyrrell’s-Pass, and 
(then) returned home to his country without wound or danger. 

After the peace before mentioned had been set aside, Redmond Burke, the 
son of John of the Shamrocks, son of James, son of Rickard Saxonagh, son of 
Ulick-na-gCeann, with a party of his young kinsmen, [all] of the first distinc- 
tion, came to O'Neill to complain to him of the answer he had received from 
his father’s brother, namely, the Earl of Clanrickard, Ulick Burke: that “if 
Redmond would be satisfied with one mantle’s breadth of his inheritance or 
patrimony, from Sruthair® to Abhainn-da-Loilgheach’, he” [the Earl] “would 


which states that Shabh Echtghe, the mountain 


according to the law entitled, Slabhradh fuithir 
in which it rises, derived its name from Echtghe 


fosadh, and he gave up the mountain to her. 


Uathach, the daughter of Ursothach, son of 
Tinde, one of the Tuatha De Danann colony. 
She married Fergus Lusca mac Ruidi, who held 
this mountain in right of his office of cup-bearer 
to the King of Olnegmacht. He had no stock, 
but she had, and she came to him with her cows, 


On this occasion, according to the legend, two 
cows were brought hither, of remarkable lacti- 
ferousness and equally fruitful; but, on their 
removal hither, it turned out that one of them, 
which was placed to graze on the north side of 
the mountain, did not yield one-third as much 


ANNataG RIOshachta ElREGNN. (1598. 


2056 


Gomald Coccmd n6 pioda 06. Ro sab 6 néll an coppaoice pin Rémainn, 7 
po seall a cobain dia cTriopad de 7] TUce UaCTapantact 06 ap nuIMIp apoE 
vo cévab paishoiuipide 7 po clog 060 Zac aén ball ofipinn aga mbit buamn 
no bevh le Sarancoib oapsam 7 oadbalpcemop. lan ppaccbarl uf néill oo 
Remann a bupc 7 dia bnaitpib do Cuaccan 1 ccommbaid gZaofvel laig(n co 
mbaccan na ppapnad pe hfo an tpampand pin. 

Sé céd parsoitip do toct o Shaxoib oon taoib bud ofp ofipinn do curod- 
uccad 1 nacchaid eapccanac an ppionnpa. lan tcoce voib so von nganboon 
apread po chinnpioc vol hi cetnn an senenala 1. lapla unmuman, 7 ag 5abanl 
voib tne Licimel lagi vo pala opong vo saowdelaib an cfnncain pin oorb. 
Pechaip iomainfce (coppa co po manbad oficneban 7 celtpe céte d10b ipin 
maigin pin. 

Sltuaiccead la hianla upmuman vo dol ilamgip a mi lan. Rob € lion a 
ploish chtpe banna picle via ccoip, 7 0a Céd mancac. Oo pone an tiapla 
comnade 1m tat néna apn cnoc ano bat1 mmel an cine. Ro haipnhdead 
oon lanla m aohaig pin na baoi acc uachad via haep 1omcomm(cca 1pm Tip. 
Ro ponconsaip an a banac an mac a ofpbnatan 1. Sémup mac Eouapo mic 
Semuip buicilén dol so pe, no a peact vo banvadaib amaulle prip cap beilsib 
ipceac ipin cfnn ba nfpa v6 don cin oup an pRpuIgbead ect, n6 ait{p pe a 
dénam, 7 Zep bd oolig la S€mup ool an cunup pin a muca na marone oa 
vomnals DO CoD ann an Fonconspa an lapla. Cn céd bealac 1 noeachad 
ap amlond puain € ap na cfpccad,7 ap na tpling(npad,7 bman prabac 6 ménda, 
50 ccév Fo Lit pasoitip rap crocc via 1omcopnam ip lo céona. ba hang- 
wTive aouatmap an caipbenad tcucc bmian co na pocnaite vo Shemup 7 via 
paisoainib, 7 no biod plmpo 47 ina nveaohad Za toacmains, 7 5a cTIMCeal- 
lad, 5a ccplsZoav, sa cTcaob ammuy, 50 po paccbad cuinp cpectnarste cnlp- 
collca pe hfo natgaipice pfchnom an bealaig Lapp. Ro manbad ecc mon 
ann pm 1. S€mup mac eduaipd mic Semaip, mic Pranay, pip a aera ap an 


This 


milk as the one placed on the south side. 
river forms the boundary between the fertile 
and barren regions of Sliabh Echtghe, alluded 
to in this legend. 

' Hearkened to, literally, received this com- 
plaint. 

) Sta hundred soldiers.—The Editor has not 


been able to find any account of this conflict in 
any other authority. Peter Lombard, in his 
work, De Regno Hiberniee Commentarius, pub- 
lished in 1632, p. 406, records that, in the year 
1598, Sir Samuel Bagnal was dispatched from 
England with two thousand foot and one hun- 
dred horse, and that he landed with these forces 


1598. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2057 


not give him so much, as a reward for war or peace.” O'Neill hearkened to’ 
this complaint of Redmond, and promised to assist him, ifin his power; and, 
he gave him the command of some hundreds of soldiers, with permission to WS 
plunder and devastate any part of Ireland which had any connexion or alliance 
with the English. When Redmond Burke and his kinsmen left O'Neill, they 
went into the confederation of the Irish of Leinster, and remained with them 
during this summer. 

Six hundred soldiers! arrived from England in the south of Ireland, to assist 
in opposing the enemies of the Sovereign. On their arrival at Dungarvan", they 
resolved to proceed [directly] to join the General, i.e. the Earl of Ormond ; 
and as they passed along the borders of Leinster, a party of the Irish of that 
district met them ; and a battle was fought between them, in which four hun- 
dred and ten of the soldiers were slain. 

A hosting was made by the Earl of Ormond in the month of June, to pro- 
ceed into Leix. His forces amounted to twenty-four companies of foot, and 
two hundred horse. In the evening he encamped on a high hill on the borders 
of the territory. The Earl was informed that night that there were only a few 
to guard the territory, [and] on the morning following he ordered his brother's 
son, i.e. James, the son of Edward, son of James Butler, to go with six or seven 
companies through the passes into the nearest part! of the territory, to see whe- 
ther he could perform any exploit or achievement ; and although James was 
loth to go on that expedition early on Sunday morning, yet he set out at the 
command of the Earl. The first road he went by he found it cut down and 
deeply furrowed, Brian Reagh O’More having come with one hundred and 
fifty soldiers to defend it on the same day. Fierce and terrific was the salute 
which Brian and his forces here gave James and his soldiers. They were 
attacked in the front and in the rear, hemmed in and surrounded, speared and 
shot ; so that in a short time bodies were left [stretched] mangled and pierced 
along the pass. A lamentable death occurred here, namely, James, the son of 
Edward, son of Pierce, son of Pierce, a man of whom greater expectations had 


at Wexford, whence he marched for Dublin, the county of Waterford.—See note °, under the 

but was attacked by the Irish Catholics, who year 1574, p. 1676, supra. 

slew great numbers of them. ' Nearest part, literally, ‘“‘the nearest head 
* Dungarvan, a sea-port town in the south of of the territory.” 


12 F 


2058 AQNNALA RIOSHACHTA EIREGNN. (1598. 


mo DO1§ Daoine da paibe bed vo buicilenchoib an can pin, 7 an méd na po 
mudaighead via muinntip 1pin mang pm do deocatap tap a nop ma peceo- 
langanb peracbmipce do pars an 1apla 7 an Campa. Ro sonad bnian mabac 
ua mopoa phpin 7 nip bo cian 1ap pin Fo ppuai bap vo sab cnd na n5on v0 
pavad pain von chun pm. 6a tpin lo pin pon 1 noiaid na ctnooa pempaite 
cainicc Ucntne mac Rudpaise ice uf monda,7 Remann mac Sfam na pfman, 
7 Capen cimal, 7 po sabpac ponrlonspopt 1 nuncomain campa an rapla. 
Ria mfoon laot via Luan an na manac an tan vo paoilead an cTianla do dol 
iptech pin tip ba h(S vo nome poad tan a ap co cill comms 7 a@ parson 
DO Con Ma nZanapunaibh. 

Qn pont nua pin ipa pecela po pecmobamapn nemain, baipioe aga 1om- 
comméo le linn tpioda 7 coccaid acc munzip na bainmogna. Un can tna 
na po plodaigpioce soill, 7 Fano pm pole 1 nuptopac pampands, Ro cup 
Ua néill 1omcoméd pon an mbaile 50 mbaccan an banoa 1 crfince bid 1pm 
mi ofiof{nac von tpampad. lap nool vo na pecelanb pin co hach chat, ba hi 


™ Brian Reagh O’ More.—P. O’Sullevan Beare 
calls him ‘ Bernardus Fuscus O’Morra.”—See 
Hist. Cathol. Iber., tom. 3, lib. 3, c. x. He gives 
the following account of the resistance made 
against the Earl of Ormond by the O’Mores 
and adherents in tom. 3, lib. 4, c. iv. : 

“ Vtrumque periculum, & Lageniensis motus, 
& Portmor arx commeatus inopia laborans pre- 
ter cetera Elizabetham Anglie Reginam ange- 
bat, que seduld suis, vt vtrique damno eant 
obuiam, & Lageniorum tumultum pacent, & 
Portmori munimento subsidium ferant, imperat. 
Ad id ex Anglia tyrones mittuntur: presidiarij 
euocantur: Ibernorum prouincialium delectus 
habetur: equitum, & peditum omnis generis 
millia circiter octo coguntur. Ex ijs, qui vel 
senio confecti, vel xtate immaturi preliando 
minus idonei videantur, dimittuntur. Angli 
tyrones nuper acciti in presidijs collocantur. 
Ex cxterorum numero Iberni, & Angli pedites 
quater mille, & quingenti, & equites quingenti 
robore, reique militaris peritia electi ad opitu- 
Jandum Portmori destinantur, Ex auxiliaribus 


Ibernis, paucisque militibus legionarijs Ibernis, 
& Anglis millia duo, quorum erant equites pauci, 
ad Lagenienses motus supprimendos Vrmonio 
Comiti attribuuntur. Quibus haud dubitabat 
Vrmonius, quin subigeret Lisiam, & omnes La- 
Lisiam, in qua plus esse 
Ber- 
nardus Omorra, qui pedites tantum trecentos 
habebat, in summis rerum angustijs Vrmonium 


geniz motus pacaret. 
negocij videbatur, primum aggreditur. 


auso prohibere minimé cunctatur, itinerum an- 
gustias obsidens. In illum Vrmonius mittit 
pedites mille Ibernos, & Anglos Duce Iaimo 
Buttlero nepote suo ex fratre Eduardo. Ber- 
nardus loci natura fretus preliari non dubitat. 
Taimus copijs in duas partes diuisis illum adit. 
Vnde Bernardus commoditatem loci deserere 
coactus, cum altera parte, in qua laimus erat, 
in plano missilibus, maxime bombardicis pilulis 
dimicat, & pilulem iactu vulneratus magis animo 
accensus, quam fractus, suos cohortatus acrius 
pugnat. Iaimus duplici plumbea glande triec- 
tus vir religione Catholicus, & genere clarus 
pro Hereticis prelians miserrimé periuit. Quo 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2059 


been formed than of any other of his age of the Butlers living at that time. 
And such of his people as had not been cut off at that place returned as broken- 
shielded fugitives to the Earl and the camp. Brian Reagh O’More™ himself was 
wounded ; and it was not long after” till he died of the virulence of the wounds 
which he received on this occasion. On this very day, after the battle aforesaid, 
Owny, the son of Rury Oge O’More ; Redmond, the son of J ohn of the Sham- 
rocks [Burke]; and Captain Tyrrell, came and pitched their camp opposite the 
Earl’s camp. Before the noon of the next day, Monday, when it was thought 
that the Earl would march into the territory, he returned to Kilkenny, and sent 
his soldiers into their garrisons. 

The New Fort, of which we have before written an account, was defended 
during the time of peace and war by the Queen’s people ; but when the English 
and Irish did not make peace [as had been expected] in the beginning of sum- 
mer, O'Neill laid siege to the fort, so that the warders were in want of provi- 


sions in the last month of summer. After this news arrived in Dublin, the 


interfecto ceteriterga vertunt. Et alteraquoque 
coplarum pars auxilio veniens funditur. Fugi- 
entes Bernardus secutus stragem multorum 
edidit, maioremque fecisset, nisi Vrmonius, sub- 
ueniens pauidos recepisset : qui re infecta a Lisia 
discessit. Bernardus intra quatriduum vulnere 
moritur. Cuius obitu tota Lagenia non magno 
negocio fuisset forsitan pacanda, nisi Huonis 
Omorre peroportunus aduentos conspiratos con- 
firmasset. Quo tempore Huon ab Onello pete- 
bat auxilium, apud illum erat, Raymundus 
Burkus Lietrime Baro possessionibus orbus. 
Quemadmodum enim superius demonstrauimus, 
Iohannes Burkus Lietrime Baro ab Vlligo fratre 
suo Anglorum permissu fuerat occisus Ray- 
mundo filio impubere relicto, & Baronatus ad- 
ministratio Regine abiudicata eo nomine, quod 
Anglorum instituto penes reges solet esse tutela 
nobilium ztate minorum. Baronatus autem ad- 
ministrationem Regina dono dedit Phintoni An- 
glo Ibernie consilij secretario, 4 quo illam pe- 
cunia emit Vlligus Clanricharde comes Ray- 
mundi patruus, & ita in possessionem missus 


Raymundo, qui iam per etatem tutela exierat, 
Baronatum restituere differebat. Raymundus 
intenta lite illum Anglorum, & Regine iudicio 
superauit. Czterum, quia sub hoc tempus bel- 
lum exardebat, priusquam Raymundus fuit 
possessione potitus, omiserunt Angli sententiam 
suam executioni mandare, ne Comitis virl po- 
tentis iram tam periculoso tempore lacesserent. 
Idcirco Raymundus Onelli opem implorabat ad 
paternam hereditatem recuperandam. Onellus 
Tirone defendende intentus, quia differebat 
auxilium, spem tantum prebens, Raymundus 
vna cum Huone in Lageniam proficiscitur, ac 
etiam Dermytius Oconchur vir nobilis ex Con- 
nachta, quos omnes Connachti, qui finibus pulsi 
apud Onellum agebant, sequuntur. Richardus 
etiam ‘Tirellus, cuius mentionem fecimus, ab 
Huone conducitur, quibus cum Huon in Lisiam 
venit eodem die, quo Bernardus cum hostibus 
pugnauit, sed nec pugnam integram, nec Vrmo- 
nium a Lisia discedentem potuit assequi.” 

" It was not long after—An English writer 
would say: ‘‘he died soon after of his wounds.” 


12 9 2 


wr COs 


QNNQdZa RIOSshachtd elReEaNN. 


2060 [1598. 


aiple po cinnpiot an comaiple an po ba oiple, 7 ap mo po ofpbad 1pm ccoccad 
vo paisoiuimb na bainpiogna 1 nepinn hi ccompocnaib Ata chat, 7 bale ata 
tuam vo Zionol 50 haoin 1onavh, 7 14p na poccain co haon baile po cleclamad 
eipcib ceithne mile pargorain o1a ccoip 7 pe Céd Mancac, 7 po cuipead 1ao- 
ploe le Lon sup an bpont nua. Ro cupead led pride an no ba lon les vo brid, 
vo DIF DO Maptaigect, do Luaide, do puoap, 7 oa Fac naidilcc an Cina. 
Loccan 1anam co opoich(cc ata, apprde 50 Tpag baile, 7 oon 1uban, 7 50 
h€pomaca, appt m Apomaca mn avhag pin. Sip hanpy besingz mapupeal 
an lubain ap é ba senepal oorb. 

lan prop oUa neill an cpocpaitce adbal mon pin vo bfit ace tionol oa 
paso Ro cup a tecta do tocuipead Us vomnaill, 7 o1a cungid pain cect 
via Pomdin an an anppoplann ectpann baccap ag cocc dia tip. Oo cow 
om O vomnaill po céooin co LGn cionol a Laocpade etip tTnoisteac, 7 map- 
cac, ] Dpons Mop do Céiccead Connacc amaille pmipp do Cobaip a corccele 
fon an fFRoiplion po oalpac cuicce. Tangacan blop sZaoidil coiccid ulao 
ule 1p In Tpocnaicte ceona 50 mbactan mellma pon cionn na ngall mapra 
pangacan 50 hApomaca. Ro coclad leo ona vomainoiocca ctalman fon cionn 
na ngall ponp an cconain ccoischinn in po bad ooigh leo a poctain o1a pausio. 

Imtupa na ngallian mbhit avhais m Anomaca po Gpslccap a mocha vo 
lo an na banac, 7 appead po chinnpioce a mbiad, a ndeoc, a mna, 7 a mon- 
vaoine, a ccapaill, a ccanaipoe a ngiollannaid, a noaopccanpluas opaccbail 
ipm mbanle pm Anoamaca. Ro pocconnpiot oa Zac aén bai mploma aca 
eTIp Mapicac 7 TnoipZteac vol m Fac apm no Fupcalpead an mapupccal 7 
cuinsfoa an cploig ap chha poppa apccnam 1 naghad a namac. Oo cotcap 
1anam 1nmnell 7 1 nopouccad amail ap ofc po PFéopac. Ro chmmspiot 
lanam the nd oipse Zaca poo bar p(mpa ma ccumneib Tuga coiptimla, 7 
ma nooinfoab oluite vopccaoilce Zo pangacap sup an ccnoc of cionn bert 
an ata bude. lap poccain 0616 mpulde ate conncaccan Ua neitl, 7 Ua vom- 


° Beging.—This should be Bagnall. 

? Marshal of Newry, recte, Marshal of Ulster. 

4 Squadrons: literally, ‘“‘in dense and impe- 
netrable derrys or oak woods,” which is not a 
very correct figure to apply to an army on 
their march. 

' Béal-an-atha-buidhe, i. e. Mouth of the Yellow 


Ford. The site of this battle is shewn on an old 
“Map of the Country lying between Lough Erne 
and Dundalk,” preserved in the State Papers Of- 
fice, London, as on the banks of the River Callen, 
to the north-east of the city of Armagh. The 
place is called Ballymackilloune, and the follow- 
ing words are written across the spot: ‘‘ Here 


1598.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2061 


Council resolved to assemble together the most loyal and best tried in war of 
the Queen’s soldiers in Ireland, [who were those] in the neighbourhood of 
Dublin and Athlone; and when these [soldiers] were assembled together, four 
thousand foot and six hundred horse were selected from among them, and 
these were sent to convey provisions to the New Fort. A sufficient supply of 
meat and drink, beef, lead, powder, and all other necessaries, were sent with 
them. They marched to Drogheda, from thence to Dundalk, from thence to 
Newry, and from thence to Armagh, where they remained at night. 
Beging®, Marshal of Newry”, was their General. 

When O'Neill ha# received intelligence that this great army was approach- 
ing him, he sent his messengers to O’Donnell, requesting of him to come to his 
assistance against this overwhelming force of foreigners who were coming to 
his country. O’Donnell proceeded immediately, with all his warriors, both 
infantry and cavalry, and a strong body of forces from Connaught, to assist his 
ally against those who were marching upon him. The Irish of all the province 


Sir Henry 


of Ulster also joined the same army, so that they were all prepared to meet the 
English before they arrived at Armagh. They then dug deep trenches against 
the English in the common road, by which they thought they [the English] 
would come to them. 

As for the English, after remaining a night at Armagh, they rose next 
mornjng early ; and the resolution they adopted was, to leave their victuals, 
drink, their women and young persons, their horses, baggage, servants, and 
rabble, in that town of Armagh. Orders were then given that every one able 
to bear arms, both horse and foot, should proceed wherever the Marshal and 
other officers of the army should order them to march against their enemies. 
They then formed into order and array, as well as they were able, and proceeded 
straightforward through each rood before them, in close and solid bodies, and 
in compact, impenetrable squadrons’, till they came to the hill which overlooks 
the ford of Beal-an-atha-bhuidhe’. After arriving there they perceived O'Neill 


Sir H. Bagnall, Marshal of Newry, was slaine.” 
The name Béal-an-atha-buidhe, anglice, Bellana- 
boy, is now applied to a small marsh or cut out 
bog, situated in the townland of Cabrach, about 
one mile and three-quarters to the north of the 
city of Armagh. A short distance to the north 


of this bog stands a white-thorn bush, locally 
called the ‘‘ Great Man’s Thorn,”’ which is said 
to have been planted near the grave of Marshal 
Bagnall. Captain Tucker, R. E., who surveyed 
this part of Ireland for the Ordnance Survey, 
has marked the site of this battle on the Ordnance 


2062 


AQNNaAtd RIOshachTa EIREGNN. 


(1598. 


naill, Ur eachoac ulad 7 ainsialla, cotp15 4 cnheill, lartsaile 7 sarpecr 


an tuaipceipt amaille pia ma naén bnom aighcishe pon a ccionn ian na 


map by two swords in saltier, and the date 1598. 
—See the Ordnance map, Armagh, sheet 12. 

Accounts of this battle have been given by 
Camden, Fynes Moryson, Philip O’Sullevan 
Beare, and Peter Lombard, and from them by 
Mageoghegan, Taaffe, O’Conor, and a host of 
modern writers of no authority. Philip O’Sul- 
levan Beare gives by far the most circumstan- 
tial account of it, and the Editor is tempted, 
on account of the extreme rarity of his work, 
to give the whole of it in this place: 

“In Lagenia dum hee aguntur, Henricus 
Bagnal Anglus eques Auratus Ibernie castra- 
metator, & Vitonie prefectus in oppidum Ju- 
rem in Vitoniz finibus situm, & valido Here- 
ticorum presidio munitum non longius 4 Port- 
more munimento millibus passuum vndeviginti 
maiorem regium exercitum ad opitulandum 
Portmori ducens peruenit. Inde tertijs castris 
substitit in vrbe Ardmacha. Erat Bagnal mil- 
litaris artis peritus, & quod rard in imperatore 
inuenies, consilio simul, & animi magnitudine 
prestans, in rebus secundis cautus; in aduersis 
animosus, in victos, & dedititios minus contu- 
melosus Anglis plerisque: qui nunquam con- 
uitijs parcunt. Itaque gentis sue Ducum au- 
deo paucos illi conferre, anteponere pauciores. 
Erat Onello non solum publica causa Religio- 
nis, & Regine, sed etiam priuatis inimicitijs 
infensissimus. Ducebat quatuor millia, & quin- 
gentos pedites sub signis quadraginta, & toti- 
dem cohortium ducibus, optionibus, signiferis, 
& tesserarijs, & equites quingentos sub signis 
octo, quorum magister erat Monteguus Anglus. 
In vniuerso numero paulo plures Iberni, quam 
Angli stipendium faciebant, veterani omnes, 
Angli superstites eorum, qui vel duce Iohanne 
Norrise in Gallia belligerauerant, vel 4 presidijs 
Belgicis fuerant acciti, vel ab huius belli prin- 
cipio rei militaris regulas in Ibernia percepe- 


rant: Iberni quoque qui sub bellice discipline 
preceptis contenti in legionibus Regine stipen- 
dium merentes sue virtutis documenta sepeé 
prebuerant. Erant ibi nonnulli iuuenes [berni 
genere clari, presertim Melmorrus Orelli prin- 
cipis filius ab raram stature elegantiam, & mi- 
ram faciel venustatem cognomento Pulcher, & 
Christophorus Sanlaurentius Baronis Hote fi- 
Ibi nullus §yro, nullus militiz rudis. 
Omnes omni genere armorum instructissimi : 
pedites, & equites cataphractarij : Bombardarij 
alij grauibus, alij leuibus sclopis ad pugnam 


lius. 


parati, gladio, & pugione accincti, galeis capita 
munientibus. Totus exercitus plumeis apicibus, 
sericis baltheis, ceeterisque militaribus insigni- 
bus fulgebat. Ainea machinamento rotis vehe- 
bantur, trahentibus equis. Sulphurei pulueris, 
globorum ferreorum, atque plumbeorum vis 
magna suppetebat. Caballi, bouesque biscocti 
panis, false carnis, casei, butyri, seruitiz sat & 
exercitui in vinctum, & arci Portmori in com- 
meatum portabant. Impedimenta muliones co- 
mitabantur, lixarum, pabulatoremque numerus 
magnus sequebatur. 

‘* Distabat 4 Bagnale Portmor arx tribus milli- 
bus passuum Ibernicis ab Onello obsessa, & inedia 
laborans. Qui cum de Bagnalis aduentu intel- 
lexisset, contra illum castra mota mille passibus 
vitra munimentum, & intra duo millia passuum 
ad Armacham collocat, relictis paucis, qui Port- 
moris propugnatores eruptionibus prohibeant. 
Ko die Catholici recensuerant peditum quatuor 
millia, & quingentos, & equites circiter sexcen- 
tos. Interfuit Odonellus, qui Connachtos duce 
Maculliamo Burko stipendiatos circiter mille, 
& Tirconnellos suos, vtrosque ad numerum duo- 
Ceteri Onellum, eius 
fratres, & consanguineos, & magnates cum eo 


Ac plane 


rum millium duxit. 


veteri iure coniunctos sequebantur. 
e6 conuenerat omnis feré Vltonie nobilis iu- 


1598.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2063 


and O'Donnell, the Ui Eathach Uladh, and the Oirghialla, having, together 
with the chieftains, warriors, heroes, and champions of the North, drawn up one 


uentus, atgue multi Connachti iuuenes ortu 
minime obscuri. Erant tamen armis longe in- 
feriores, namque tum equitatus, tum peditatus 
erat leuis armature preter paucos bombarda- 
rios grauium scloporum. Ob id Onellus de hos- 
tis apparatu preliandi, militis robore, ducis 
animo deliberato certior factus, dubium erat, 
quin vir cantus locum desereret, uisi Farfasius 
Oclerius Ibernicorum vatum interpres confir- 
masset Diui Vitani vaticinio fuisse predictum 
eo in loco Hereticum fuisse profligandum, & 


presensionem Ibernico metro prolatam in libro | 


diuinationum sancti ostendisset. Qua confirma- 
tus Onellus ad pugnam suos hac oratione cohor- 
tatur. 

‘Quod a Deo optimo maximo (viri Christian- 
issimi, atque fortissimi) summis precibus sepe 
petiuimus, atque contendimus, id, & amplius 
etiam hodie divino quodam munere sumus asse- 
cuti. Vt pares aliquando cum Protestantibus 
dimicaremus, Deum, atque ccelites, semper exo- 
ramus. Huc orationes nostras, huc vota inten- 
dimus. Iam verd non modo pares, sed etiam 
plures numero sumus. Igitur qui pauciores ag- 
mina Heretica fudistis, eisdem plures obstabi- 
tis. Ego quidem non in exanimi cataphracta, 
non in tormentorum inani sonitu, sed in viuis, 
& intrepidis animis constituo victoriam. Me- 
mentote, quoties nobiliores duces, maiores co- 
pias, & ipsum etiam Bagnalem minus parati, & 
instructi superaueritis. Angli nec animo, nec 
virtute, nec preliandi constantia fuerunt vn- 
quam cum Ibernis conferendi. Qui ver6é Iberni 
contra vos dimicaturi sunt, Catholice fidei op- 
pugnatez, sui sceleris, atque schysmatis con- 
scientia consternabuntur: eadem Catholica fide 
vobis vires augente hic Christianam religionem, 
patriam, liberos,vxores defendendum. Hic Bagnal 
Hereticorum omnium acerrimus vester hostis, 


qui in bona vestra impetum facit, qui vestrum 


sanguinem sitit, qui meum honorem oppugnat, 
debito supplicio afficiendus. Hic viciscendum 
dedecus illud, quod, ego apud Tumulum AlI- 
bum accepi a Bagnale parte castrorum eiec- 
tus. Hic mors commilitonum vestrorum, quos 
in Portmoris oppugnatione amisimus, vindi- 
canda, & arx ipsa, quam diu obsidetis, dum eam 
commeatu intercluditis, expugnanda. Hic ob- 
tinenda victoria, quam vobis Dominus Diui V1- 
tani predictione pollicetur. Ergo Deo, celico- 
lisque iuutibus rem feliciter gerite. Contra 
Bagnal ita suos alloquitur. 

“s Portitudine vestra,commilitones invictissimi, 
fretus, vos mihi socios elegi, rudes, atque igna- 
ros in presidijs constituens, & feces omnium, 
homines imbecillos Vrmonio Comiti relinquens, 
quorum ignauia zequo illum rem fede gesturum 
putaui, ac mihi promisi gloriosam victoriam | 
opera vestra reportandam. Id namque vestre 
magnanimitatis, atque virtutis periculum sem- 
per feci, vt non possim non concipere hodierne 
victorie spem indubitatam, atque certissimam. 
Neque credo, quin fatali quadam felicitate tot 
casus aduersos, tot discrimina, incolumes etia- 
seritis, vt hodie fausté vincendo totam vitam 
decoretis, commilitonumque vestrorum a rebel- 
libus, atque perfidis aduersa fortuna Norrisis, 
& Burughi peremptorem mortem vlciscamini. 
Quid? Audebunt ne insani corpore nudo cum 
armatis, cum viris coporis, & animi robore pres- 
tantissimis congredi. Demens ego sim, si con- 
spectum vestrum sustinuerint, & nisi hodie to- 
tam Vitoniam sub iugum mittatis, totamque 
Iberniam Regine subigatis, ipsique ingente 
preda potiamini. Mementote vestre virtutis, 
qui me duce Ardmache opem tulistis, Onello 
non minima parte castrorum ad Tumulum Al- 
bum exuto. Ad vesperum, qui mihi Onell, vel 
Odonelli caput dono dederit, huic mille auri li- 


bras polliceor, & singulis recipio pro meritis 


AQNNAZa RIOSHhachTa EIREGNN. 


(1598. 


puldluccad, 7 1ayi na pamucchad pop na h{naigib enoalca an po bad oH les 


1adpom GO poctamn TIA Parsio. 


gratias quam accumulatissimas, & 4 Regina, & 
a me esse referendas. Eamus, properemus, ne 
victoriam nostram differamus. 

**Concione absoluta Bagnal ante solis exor- 
tum Ardmacha castra mouet decimo quinto cir- 
citer die, quam Comes Vrmonius fuit a Bernardo 
Omorra repulsus. Hastati in agmina tria erant 
digesti, que preibant & sequebantur equitun, 
& fulminatorum ale. Sereno, & grato die vex- 
illis explicatis, tubarum clangore, tibiarum con- 
centu, tympanorum militarium sonitu homines, 
& equi ad pugnam accensi per letam planiciem 
nemine prohibente procedunt. Mox excipiebat 
iter angustius iuniperis, sed humilibus, atque 
rarissimis consitum. Hoc Bagnal ingressus hora 
circiter septima a quingentis imberbibus adoles- 
centibus, bombardarijs velitibusab Onello missus 
densissima globulorum grandine per totum ar- 
boretum continuata obruitur. Velites poné iu- 
niperos stantes, & inter arbores cursitantes 
equites ; atque pedites €minus iactu sternunt, 
& e6 tutius, quod & equites regij propter iuni- 
peros esse non poterant, vel suis adiumento, vel 
Catholicis impedimento, & preoccupantibus ve- 
litibus locus erat equior, quam venientibus 
regijs. Ab his augustijs magna difficultate 
Bagnal denique copias expediuit non parum 
vexatas acri velitatione, & tristes ob impuné 
receptum damnum a velitibus, qui puerile, atque 
Lata 
planicies vsque ad Catholicorum castra succe- 


ridiculum hominum genus videbantur. 


debat. In hanc egresso Bagnale regius equitatus 
in Catholicos velites quam celerrimo gradu cur- 
rit. Cterum per primam planiciei partem in 
ipso maximé itinere, sed & circum illud Onellus 
crebras foueas, atque fossas excauauit stratis 
super virgulis, & fweno sparso dissimulatas. In 
quas cataphractarij equites incauti cadunt, ca- 
suque crebro equorum simul, & assessorum 
erura franguntur, qui, vt a socijs leuarentur, 


haud absque contentione Catholici velites sinunt. 
Strata gemmate regius exercitus non nihil ani- 
mo fractus equitibus, atque peditibus aliquot 
desideratis, & sauciatis in minus impeditum 
planum peruenit. Hic Onelli velitibus defessis 
vegetes, & integri succedunt, 2 Bagnale quoque 
velites, & grauis armature bombardarij mittun- 
tur €minus vtrinque acerrimé dimicatur. Regij 
quoque equites cataphractarij in certamen pro- 
deunt. His occurrunt Catholici equites feren- 
tarij, vel leuis armature. Cataphractarij cata- 
phractarum munimine tutiores locum obtine- 
bant. Ferentarij dexteritate, & velocitate pre- 
stantes, & iterum, atque iterum circumactis 
equis In pugnam redeuntes vulnera plura infe- 
runt, loco tamen cedentes. Cataphractarij hastis 
sex circiter cubita longis dextero femini innixis 
cominus pugnant. Ferentarij armati hastis lon- 
gioribus, quas medias manu tenentes super dex- 
terum humerum gerunt, rard nisi ex commodo 
feriunt, interim tela ligneo hastili quatuor fere 
cubitorum ferrea cuspide infixa iaculantes. Ita 
Bagnal procedens sepe ab Onelli leui armatura 
subsistere coactus, sepé etiam eandem repellens 
haud procul a Catholicorum castris substitit 
hora diei fere vndecima. Hic planicies illa du- 
plici uligine hinc, inde coarctabatur, et inter 
utramque wliginem humile, et tenue vallum alti- 
tudine quatuor pedum, profundiorem vero fossam 
interius per quartam milliarii partem Onellus 
duxit, magis, ut esset hosti impedimento, quam 
sibi adiumento. Inter medium vallum, & regium 
exercitum exsiliebant turbidi coloris latices ex 
Unde forsan locus multis 
dicitur vadum pallidum (Beal atha but, os vadi 
pallidi) & si aliis placeat vadum Sancti Buiani 


uliginibus coeuntes. 


vocari. Pro vallo, et utroque exercitu equitum, 
& fulminatorum pugna vehementius instauratur. 
In estu pugne scloperarius Anglus, qui nitra- 
tum puluerem inter pugnandum consumpsit, 


1598.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2065 


terrible mass before them, placed and arranged on the particular passages where 
they thought the others would march on them. 


sulphur sumpturus in Lagenam in qua erat, 
forte iniecit manum, qua bombardicum funem 
ignitum tenebat. Iniecto igne accensa Lagena, 
et duz proxime nitri plene nonnullos com- 
bustos in ezrem tollunt. Interim Bagnal con- 
tra Catholicorum vallum, et agmina disponit 
nea machinamenta, quorum unum sulphure, et 
Globis onustum, dum exploditur, vehementia 
pulueris in varia frusta diruptum interficit cir- 
cumstantes nonnullos. Ceteris Bagnal vallum 
discutit, et hastatorum Catholicorumagmina tor- 
mentis nuda verberat, eorum equitibus, et bom- 
bardarijs, qui pro vallo continenter certant, 
minimé obstantibus: aliquot partes valli solo 
equat, et ab eo arcet agmina: in quorum locum 
irrumpunt duo prima regia agmina, alterum 
adversus Onellum, alterum aduersus Odonel- 
jum leuum cornu tenentum, et aliquot agmi- 
num ordines vallum transgrediuntur, in quorum 
subsidium agmen ultimum Bagnal ducit. Eodem 
tempore equitatum et bombardarios Catholico- 
rum intra vallum pulsos regius equitatus, et 
bombardarii sequuntur, et equo jam loco utrique 
strenué preliantur, et utrique mixti viri viros 
amplexi equis detrahunt. Hic hastati Catholici, 
qui tormentorum ictibus 4 vallo fuerunt remoti, 
videntes tormenta non esse iam hosti usui, sese 
in agmina regia conuertunt nondum tamen ma- 
num conserunt. Kodem temporis momento 
Bagnal qui munitus erat cataphracta, et casside 
ex calybe factis grauis sclopi iactum sustinenti- 
bus ratus se iam vicisse, ut liberius letam prelij 
faciem videret et facilius respiraret, armature 
gravis pondere fatigatus, cassidis conspicilium 
aperit, et tollit, nec prius demisit, et clausit, 
quam iacuit humi exanimis plumbea glande 
fronte confossus. Cuius morte tertium, agmen in 
quo erat, magna trepidatis inuasit. Agmina duo 
ad que ducis extincti nuncius nondum fuit per- 


latus, rem fortiter gerunt. Catholici quoque 


nihil segniter prelium committunt. Odonellus 
bombardariorum virtute sese tuetur. Onelli ag- 
men magis periclitari videtur. In hoc ancipiti 
rerum statu Onellus, qui iuxta suum agmen 


equo insidebat cum equitibus quadraginta, et 


-totidem Bombardarijs, bombardarios, jubet, ut 


Obedientes 
imperio bombardarij non parum molestant, et 


regium agmen glandibus carpant. 


ordines cogunt laxare agmen fulminatorum ope 
nudum. Perculsis Onellus addit terrorem cum 
quadraginta equitibus in medium agmen laxatis 
habenis irrumpendo. Onellum sequens suum 
hastatorum agmen clamore sublato regium in 


Id 
conspicati 1) quoque qui cum Odonello certant, 


fugam vertit hora feré prima pomeridiana. 


agmine turbato terga vertunt. Monteguus etiam 
cum equitatu pedem refert. Bombardariorum 
ale sese fuge mandant. Onellus, Odonellus, et 
Macguier, qui preerat equitatui, fugientium ter- 
gis herent. Fossa, vallumque regiis erat magis 
impedimento tunc fugientibus, quam antea ag- 
gredientibus, qui cadentes alij super alios fos- 
sam implent, & iacentes ungulis equorum pedi- 
tumque pedibus obteruntur. Ultimum agmen, 
in quo Bagnal erat, duce mortuo mestum et 
trepidum turbatis aliis auxilio non erat. Tamen 
Melmorrus Orellus cognomento Pulcher trepidos 
iubet adesse animo et secum hosti resistere, spe- 
ciosius esse interfici preliantes, et ultos, quam 
fugientes impuné occidi, et adhuc fieri posse, ut 
hostis impetum sustineant, ipsumque repellant. 
Pulchri cohortatione nonnulli confirmati, max- 
imé iuvenes Iberni cum eo consanguinitate con- 
iuncti redintegrant prelium. Quibus pugnan- 
tibus Pulcher sese in omnes partes vertit, ut 
magis laborantibus, et periclitantibus opem ferat. 
Ceterum illi pauci, qui cum eo manserunt, & 
a regijs deserti et 4 Catholicis circumuenti multis 
vulneribus affecti cadunt et Pulcher ipse solus 
relictus pugnans fortissimé sternitur. Et omnes 


Jie! 


2066 


AQNNaza RIOSshachtad elREGNN. 


(1598. 


Cn can 00 bfptpact amis an cuaipceeipt dia nufd an Suapact po mon po 
baf pon cind oo1b, Ro sabpac pon spfpacclaofohead a mumncipe 1m calma 


regij effusa fuga salutem pedibus quexrentes per 
planiciem, qua venerant, et arboretum, inde 
Ardmacham usque dissipati, et palantes occi- 
duntur. In Ardmache templa sese receperunt 
equites, & circiter mille, & quingenti pedites. 
Perierunt prelio regiorum plus duo millia, & 
quingenti, et inter eos Bagnal exercitus impe- 
rator, cohortium duces viginti tres, multi op- 
tiones, signiferi, et tesserarii. Capta sunt signa 
militaria triginta quatuor omnia militaria tym- 
pana, tormenta bellica, magna vis armorum, et 
totus commeatus. Neque victoribus quidem 
pugna fuit incruenta, et si enim minus ducenti 
fuerunt desiderati, tamen plus sexcenti fuerunt 
vulnerati. In Ardmache templa, que regiorum 
presidio tenebantur, qui sese abdiderunt, a vic- 
toribus obsidentur. Monteguus cum equitatu 
noctu tenebrarum auxilio fugit. Eum sine or- 
dine, et effusa fuga fugientem ex Onelli castris 
secutus Terentius Ohanlonus cum parte equi- 
tatus impedimenta, et equos ducentos capit, duces 
tres interficit : Romlius etiam Anglus dux cum 
die sequente iuxta iter Tabacci herbe fumum 


fistula sorberet, deprehensus occiditur. Pedites» 


ex pacto inermes dimittuntur, Ardmacha, & 
Portmore Onello traditis.”—Hist. Cathol. Iber. 
Compend., fol. 150-155. 

Camden, who knew the names and movements 
of the English party better than O’Sullevan, gives 
the following brief but valuable account of this 
battle in his Annal. Reg. Eliz., A. D. 1598: 

** Toto hoc anno rebellio Hibernica admodum 
exarsit. Tir-Oenius enim, etsi veniam, quam 
simulate imploraverat ab Ormundio Locum- 
tenente, sub magno Sigillo Hibernie impetra- 
verat, ex improviso munimentum ad Blach- 
water obsidione incinxit. Ad eam solvendam 
Locum-tenens exercitus Generalis (nullus enim 
adhue Prorex substitutus) selectissimas sub- 
misit turmas scilicet xiii vexillationes sub Hen- 


rico Bagnallo Marescallo, acerbissimo Tir-Oenii 
adversario. Die xiv. Augusti a castris prope 
Armacham triplici acie moverunt: primam 
duxerunt Marescallus & Percius; mediam Cos- 
bius, & Thomas Maria Wingfeldius ; postremam 
Cuinus & Billingus. Equitum turmis prefue- 
runt Calisthenes Brookus, Carolus Montacutus, 
& Flemingus. Vix mille passus confecerant, 
nimio plus inter se disparati per colles leviter 
surgentes, inter uliginosam hine planiciem, inde 
sylvas, cum in primam aciem Tir-Oenius, acri- 
oribus odii in Marescallum stimulis excitatus, 
omnibus viribus involaret: statimque eo inter 
confertissimos hostes occiso, primam illam aciem 
a ceteris longius subsequentibus & ex objectu 
collis ne conspectam, dum ordines laxarat, mul- 
titudine facile oppressit: eodemque momento 
pulvis tormentarius fortuito in media acie igne 
concepto multos sustulit, & plures mutilavit; 
Cosbiusque, qui missus ut prime aciei recolli- 
geret, magna clade affectus. Montacutus tamen 
non sine magno periculo reduxit ; Wingfeldus 
cum postrema acie, pulvere tormentario defi- 
ciente, Armacham rediit. Ita Tir-Oenius perju- 
cundum de adversario triumphum, & de Anglis 
Nec sane, ex 
quo in Hibernia pedem firmarunt, major clades 


victoriam insignem, reportavit. 


accepta, Xill strenuis ordinum ductoribus desi- 
deratis ; & mille quingentis e gregarlis, qui feeda 
fuga dissipati, totis campis palantes cesi victi- 
que. Superstites non suam ignaviam, sed du- 
cum imperitiam, quod jam in morem cessit pro- 
brose culparunt. Nec sine’ culpa videbantur, 
qui adeo disparati preter militarem disciplinam 
incesserunt contra barbaros, qui semper in unum 
conferti impetu magis quam consilio pugnant. 

“Paulo post munimenti ad Blackwater sub- 
sequuta est deditio, cum presidiarii, fide & armis 
ad extremam famem retentis, spem omnem subsi- 
dii evanuisse viderent. 


1598.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2067 


When the chiefs of the North observed the very great danger that now 
threatened them, they began to harangue and incite their people to acts of 


‘* Hc victoria rebellibus gloriosa, & imprimis 
usui; hinc enim arma & commeatum nacti & 
Tir-Oenius per Hiberniam magna fama, tanquam 
libertatis auctor, ubique celebratus, ferocia & 
superbia supra modum intumuit.” 

Fynes Moryson, in his History of Ireland, edi- 
tion of 1735, vol. i. p. 58,59, also confesses that 
the English received a great overthrow on this 
The following are his words : 

‘** Because the English fort of Blackwater was 


occasion. 


a great Eye-sore to him” [Tyrone], “lying on 
the chief passage into his country, he assembled 
all his forces and assaulted the same ; but Cap- 
tain Thomas Williams, with his company under 
him, so valiantly repelled the great multitudes of 
the assailants, with slaughter of many, and the 
most hardy attempting to scale the Fort (which 
was only a deep trench or wall of earth to lodge 
some one” [recte, three] ‘‘ hundred soldiers), as 
they utterly discouraged from assailing it, re- 
solved to besiege it afar off, and knowing they 
wanted victualls, presumed to get it by famine. 

‘“* This Captain, and his few Warders, did with 
no less courage suffer hunger, and having eaten 
the few horses they had, lived upon herbs grow- 
ing in the ditches and walls, suffering all Ex- 
tremities till the Lord Lieutenant, in the month 
of August, sent Sir Henry Bagnol Marshal of 
Ireland, with the most choice companies of foot 
and horse troops of the English Army, to vic- 
tual this fort, and to raise the Rebels siege. 
When the English entered the pace and thick 
woods beyond Armagh, on the east side, Ty- 
rone (with all the Rebels Forces assembled to 
him) pricked forward with rage of Envy and 
settled Rancour against the Marshal, assailed 
the English, and, turning his full force against 
the Marshal’s person, had the success to kill 
him, valiantly fighting among the thickest of the 
Rebels. Whereupon the English being dismayed 


with his death, the Rebels obtained a great vic- 
tory against them. I term it great, since the 
English from their first arrival in that kingdom 
never had received so great an overthrow as 
this, commonly called, the defeat of Blackwater ; 
thirteen valiant Captains and fifteen hundred 
common soldiers, (whereof many were of the old 
companies which had served in Britanny under 
General Norris) were slain in the field. The 
yielding of the fort of Blackwater followed this 
Disaster, when the assaulted Guard saw no 
Hope of Relief; but especially upon Messages 
sent to Captain Williams from our broken Forces 
retired to Armagh, professing that all their 
safety depended upon his yielding the Fort 
into the Hands of Tyrone, without which Dan- 
ger Captain Williams professed that no Want or 
Misery should have induced him thereunto. 

“Shortly after Sir Richard Bingham, late 
Governor of Connaught, and unworthily dis- 
graced, was sent over to succeed Sir Henry 
Bagnol in the Mastership of that kingdom. 

‘* By this victory the Rebels got plenty of 
Arms and Victuals; Tyrone was among the 
Irish celebrated as the Deliverer of his Country 
from Thraldom, and the combined Traitors on 
all sides were puffed up with intolerable pride. 
All Ulster was in Arms; all Connaught revolted, 
and the Rebels of Leinster swarmed in the Eng- 
lish Pale, while the English lay in their Garri- 
sons, so far from assailing the Rebels, as they 
rather lived in continual fear to be surprised by 
them.” 

It is difficult to believe that Moryson’s ac- 
count of the fort, called Portmore, or Portnua, 
by the Irish, is correct. Cucogry O’Clery, in his 
Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, states that it was 
a strong earthen fort, having “ fighting towers,” 
with windows and loop-holes to fire through, and 
that the English garrisoned it with three hun- 


Lee? 


2068 


anNNaza RIOshachta eiREaNn. 


(1598. 


vo dénam. 7 acbeptpac ppd munbud led copccan an la pin na biad a nact- 


mao oa éip, act a manbad, 7 a muduccad Zan corccill 7 no bénta anal 


dred select warriors to check the Kinel-Owen. 
This writer gives a much better account of this 
battle than that abstracted by the Four Masters. 
He says that very few of the Irish were dressed 
in armour like the English, in comparison with 
whom they were “naked ;” but that they had 
a sufficient quantity of spears and broad lances 
with strong handles of ash; of straight, keen- 
edged swords, and thin polished battle-axes ; 
but devoid of the flesca and ecclanna, which 
distinguished the axes of the English. They 
had also javelins, bows and arrows, and guns 
with match-locks.—O’ Reilly’s copy, p. 53. 

The most curious part of Cucogry O’Clery’s 
account of this battle is the speech of O’Neill 
to the Irish, and the prophecy read to them by 
Fearfeasa O’Clery. As the speech of O’Neill, 
given by P. O’Sullevan Beare, was composed by 
O’Sullivan himself, in imitation of Sallust, Livy, 
and Tacitus, the Editor is tempted to lay before 
the reader the very words of Cucogry O’Clery, 
which are evidently more authentic than those 
of O’Sullevan Beare : 

“Ro gab O Neill7 O Oomnaill ag snépace 
laowead na ngalgac ] ay mMaoldeam na mi- 
lead, ] as cloncops na zepéinpeap, | apeao 
acbeanzpaz ppiu : 

“QQ deagmuinzip, ap pao, na huaimnige(p 
rib, y na gabard spain map na gallaib ap 
allmupoaée a ninnill, 7 ap ionggZnaizchiu a 
n-€17tIZ 7 & napm, 7 la conpamnbeice a ttpom- 
pa, a ezabup 7 a ccaipmeanza cata, j apa 
n-iomac lionmaipeace péipm ap ap oeapb 
oeimin comad popna bur poen ipin lo baga pa 
aniu. Op veaza linn on, ap azdizip: pon pion 
] acaz an luce ole pon soi, ogaban ccuim- 
puch 1 ceainemib, 7 ogaban noic(noad do 
Zaice ban n-atanda noilip ponaib. Mca ona 
lanpaoileaézain inn co n-eizipglerpi an la pa 
aniu eizip pip 7 501 feb acbepz Monann mac 


Maein an pfhapure aipdeane: ‘ni ppic, ni 
puisbic(p bpeic(m bup pimu cactpae,’ ama 
az clop lino 6 Gp ppileadaib, 7 00 po 1oncoip- 
ccplut oun 6 céin map. Cpaill ann ona 
ap upa daoib ban n-atanda péipin do Copnam 
Fm! hampine eaczaipcemeoil oloap atanoa 
neich oile vo tiongaine 1ap na ban zctopann 
ap bup ezip nolip pil in bap pelb 6 pé 3500 
bliadan o’aoip domam sup an laizipiu anium, 

*(Acbeanzpaz na huapail 7 na haimg con 
bo pion vo na flaizib an fuigeallpac. Ro 
Zab speim ooibpium an otipsnépace oo ponpaz 
fop na veigpeanaib, uain paccacan m(nmanna 
na milead 7 aicceanta na n-annnad xo po 
Vion bpuz 7 bmg 4 ailsfp imbeanza apm Co- 
naill, Gogain, aipgiallang 7 Ui Eazac Ulad ta 
h-aitearga a pplach, | a ppiop codnacy po tin- 
seallpac oo1b na ciubnazaip cpoig Fon ceila 
] no podvemoaip a n-aidead Fon aon lazain pia 
piu po bad paon popna. 

“Pa oile ona ima po eimig aicceanza na 
n-65. Oz coadazap dvoib co no ciopchan na- 
oim Seanchdn pad O€ co cziubapta caz in ou 
rn pon gallon’ Ouiblinne ta h-Oed O néill 5 
lap an ccdigead ap cfna, uaip po tingeall co 
culucPpacaip Ina Toinizin 7 cenel Conaill pain- 
peas. 

“Ro cneizpfe na cupaid na h-epepad an 
Fud naom soa. Cp é po poillg do1b cécup 
pemz(pcanca an naoim apoili pili oipdeine vo 
fammuineip ui somnaill vo pala ina papad 
pop an pluaigead ppi h-aineag cule 66. Feap- 
reapa O Cléims a comamm. Ro 1oméomaipe 
Ro 
haypnéideao 06. Oz bean pom sup po zaip- 


poe cia h-amm baoi pop an margm pm. 


ngip naoim beapchan ppaomead pop sZallaib 
an ou pin nia Oed Ua Nell amuil az pubpo- 
mon, 7 sup bo meabain lap pm pé pooa an 
cainceanoal vo nome an pip naom, 7 po sab 
oce Zpépacz j occ laoiwead na laocpaide amail 


1598.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2069 


valour, saying that unless the victory was their’s on that day, no prospect re- 
mained for them after it but that of being [some] killed and slaughtered without 


po ba ou via inzpamanl, co noebaip inpo. 
“( ccat an Cita bude 
Cy lap cuizpe na vanain 
lap noiziugao Cllmuineac 
610 pao pin 6 Thonag.” 

**Q’Neill and O'Donnell proceeded to incite 
and harangue the heroes, and to exhort the sol- 
diers, and to instruct the mighty men, and they 
said : 

‘“«* Brave people,’ said they, ‘ be not dismayed 
or frightened at the English on account of the 
foreign appearance of their array, and thestrange- 
ness of their armour and arms, the sound of their 
trumpets, and tabours, and warlike instruments, 
or of their great numbers, for it is absolutely 
certain that they shall be defeated in the battle 
of this day. Of this we are, indeed, convinced, 
for ye are on the side of truth, and they are on 
the lie, fettermg you in prisons, and beheading 
you, in order to rob you of your patrimonies. 
We have, indeed, a high expectation that this 
very day will distinguish between truth, as 
Morann, the son of Maen, said in the celebrated 
proverb: There has not been found, there never will 
be found, a more veritable judge than a battle-field,’ 
[ This is not unlike the notion about the wager 
of battle among the English], ‘as we have heard 
from our poets, who have instructed us from a 
remote period. Moreover, it is easier for you’ 
[now] ‘to defend your own patrimony against 
a race of strangers, than to seek another’s pa- 
trimony, after being expulsed from your own 
native country, which has been in your posses- 
sion from the year of the World three thousand 
five hundred, to this very day.’ 

‘* The gentleman and the chieftains said that 
what the princes had uttered was true. The spi- 
rited exhortation of the chiefs made the desired 
impression, for the minds of the heroes, and the 
courage of the common soldiers, were raised; 


and the Kinel-Connell, Kinel-Owen, Airghialla, 
and Ui-Eathach-Uladh were filled with fury, 
vigour, and a desire of plying their arms, by 
the harangues of their princes and true leaders, 
and they promised to them that they would not 
yield a foot, and that they would suffer death 
on that field sooner than be defeated. 

‘“« There was another cause also for the exalta- 
tion of the minds of the youthful soldiers, It 
was told to them that St. Bearchan, the prophet 
of God, had prophesied that a battle would be 
fought at that place against the Galls of Duibh- 
linn” [Dublin] ‘“‘ by an Oedh O’Neill” [ Hugh, 
descendant of Niall] ‘“‘and by the province in 
general ; for he had promised that they” [the 
inhabitants of the province of Ulster] ‘‘ would 
come to his relief, and the Kinel-Connell in par- 
ticular. The heroes believed that the prophet 
of God would not tell a lie. 
had first exhibited this prophecy was a certain 
famous poet of the faithful people of O’ Donnell, 
who accompanied him” [O’Donnell] ‘on this 
His 
name was Fearfeasa O’Clery. He asked what 
was the name of that place, and, being told it, 
he said that St. Bearchan had predicted a defeat 
of foreigners at that place by an Oedh Ua Neill” 
[ Aidus, nepos Nigelli], ‘‘as we have said; and 
that he had, for a long time, a recollection of 
the prophecy which the true saint had deli- 
vered; and he proceeded to harangue the he- 
roes, as was proper for one like him, and he 
said” [reciting the words of St. Bearchan ]: 


The person who 


expedition, to excite and encourage him. 


“Tn the battle of the Yellow ford, 
By him the Danars” [barbarians] “ shall be 
slain ; 
After cutting off the foreigners 
The men from Tory shall rejoice.” 


The Editor has been much puzzled what to 


2070 


QNNaza RIOSshachtcAa elRECANN. 


(1598. 


ob hi ccancpaib,7 hi ceumypigcib peib 00 pavdta saoioil 50 minic fect plam, 
7 an vo epnafpfoh ap m ccatsleo pin, no hatcuippide 7 no hionnanppaide 
hi ccmocanb ciana comangcib. Ocbeptpac pit blop sun bo huya voib cor- 
nam a natapoa ppipp m cinppine neaccanceneoil pin oloap ouchars neich 


ele vo sabanl ap ercem 1ap na monnapbad pom ap a ccip noilip budfin. 


Ro 


sab spfiim cpa an speappact laofdead pin vo beptpac na maite pon a muinn- 
tip, 7 po seallpac na hocca gZomvip eallma orulang a nowfoa papi no 
fodemodaip an pop oman leo rom vo z(ccmail oorbh. 


make of this prophecy, that is, whether it was 
a pure extempore invention of O’Clery’s to ex- 
cite the common soldiers, by convincing them 
of the certainty of victory, or an application of 
an older prophecy to the present occasion ; but 
he has been for some years convinced, from the 
word Danair introduced in the second line, that 
the quatrain above given was taken by O’Clery 
from a prophecy relating to the period of the 
Danes in Ireland, and that O’Clery ingeniously 
transferred it (as the Cromwellians did quota- 
tions from the Old Testament in the next cen- 
tury) to the present occasion. A similar pro- 
phecy was circulated on the Protestant side, by 
the Earl of Thomond, before the battle of Kin- 
sale, the details of which were so strikingly ful- 
filled, that the incredulous Sir George Carew, 
Governor of Munster, or his secretary, felt it his 
duty to put it on record in the following words: 

** Although no min is lesse credulous than 
myselfe is of idle Prophesies, the most whereof 
are coyned after things are done; yet I make 
bold to relate this which succeeds, for a long 
time before the thing I speak of was brought to 
light, myself was an eye witness when it was 
reported; in concealing it I should wrong the 
trueth, which makes me bold to remember it: 
Many times I did heare the Earl of Thomond 
tell the Lord President, that in an old Booke 
of Irish prophesies which hee had seene, it was 
reported, that towards the latter dayes there 
should be a battell fought betweene the Eng- 


lish and the Irish, in a place which the Booke 
nameth, neere unto Kinsale. The Earle of 
Thomond comming out of England, and landing 
first at Castlehaven, and after at Kinsale, as 
aforesaid: in the time of the siege, myself and 
divers others heard him again report the Pro- 
phesie to the President, and named the place 
where (according to the Prophesie) the field 
should be fought. The day whereupon the vic- 
torie was obtained, the Lord President and the 
Earle rode out to see the dead bodies of the 
vanquished, and the President asked some that 
were there present by what name that ground 
was called; they, not knowing to what end he 
did demand it, told him the true name thereof, 
which was the same which the Earle so often 
before had reported to the President. I be- 
seech the reader to believe mee, for I deliver 
nothing but trueth: but, as one Swallow makes 
no Summer, so shall not this one true Prophe- 
sie increase my credulitie in old Predictions of 
that kinde.”—Pacata Hibernia, book i. ¢. 21. 
For some account of other prophecies of this 
nature, see note ', under the year 1583, pp. 1796, 
1797, supra. 

Dr. Leland asserts, without any authority 
whatever, that ‘“‘the superstitious Irish were 
driven, even to phrenzy, by their priests, who 
assured them, from old prophecies, that this 
day would prove fatal to heresy.”—Book iv. 
chap. 4. But it is quite clear, from the words 
of Cucogry O’Clery, that this prophecy was 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2071 


mercy, and others cast into prisons and wrapped in chains, as the Irish had 
been often before, and that such as should escape from that battle would be 
expelled and banished into distant foreign countries: and they told them, 
moreover, that it was easier for them to defend their patrimony against this 
foreign people [now] than to take the patrimony of others by force’, after having 
been expelled from their own native country. This exciting exhortation of 
the chiefs made [the desired] impression upon their people ; and the soldiers 
declared that they were ready to suffer death sooner than submit to what they 


feared would happen‘ to them. 


not read by a priest; nor was it ascribed to 
St. Ultan, as O’Sullevan Beare asserts, but to 
St. Bearchan of Cloonsast, in Fidh-gaibhle [Fi- 
gile], in Offaly. 

In an Irish poem by Duffy O’Duigenan, writ- 
ten this year, on the History of the O’Neills, and 
preserved in Trinity College, Dublin, H. 1, 14, 
fol. 140, it is stated that this battle was fought 
on the festival of St. Bartholomew, and that se- 
venteen hundred English soldiers, and twenty- 
three captains, were slain, among whom was a 
knight of great distinction, and the Marshal of 
Ireland, and the son of O’Reilly, who had joined 
the English. 

Cox, who passes over this victory as lightly 
as possible, grumbles that the Irish got so much 
reputation by it, that the “* English could act 
only on the defensive part, and not that itself 
without continual fear and danger.”—Vol. i. 
p- 415. By foreign nations Tyrone was hailed 
as the deliverer of Ireland, and he received from 
the Pope (through the hands of the Spanish 
envoys, Martin de la Cerva, and Matthzo Oviedo, 
the Pope’s Archbishop of Dublin) a number of 
indulgences, and, still more precious, “a crown 
of pheenix feathers !”,—See Camden’s Annal. Reg. 
Eliz., A. D. 1599, p. 744, and Moryson’s History 
of Ireland, edition of 1735, vol. i, p. 102. And 
it may be remarked that, from this time to the 
defeat at Kinsale, O’ Neill was as much monarch 
of all Ireland, and more universally talked of 


throughout Europe, than any of his ancestors 
since the time of Niall of the Nine Hostages. 

8 To take the patrimony of others by force.—This 
alludes to the custom among the Irish, since the 
English invasion, of settling by force in other 
territories, after having been driven from their 
own by the English. Thus Mac Carthy More 
had settled in Kerry after being expelled by the 
English from the plains of Cashel; the O’Dono- 
vans and O’Sullevans acquired new settlements 
in the country of the O’Driscolls, after their 
expulsion from the plains of Limerick and Clon- 
mel; the O’Flahertys settled in the mountains 
of Connamara, after being expelled by the Burkes 
from Magh Seola, on the east side of Lough Cor- 
rib; the O’Byrnes and O’Tooles acquired new 
settlements in the mountains of the present 
county of Wicklow, after being expelled from 
the plains of Moy-Liffey and Moy-Alvy by 
Meyler Fitz-Henry and the Baron Walter de 
Reddlesford, &c., &c. It is curious to observe 
that the Irish chieftains, in their speeches, did 
not think of reminding their followers that it 
might be probable that, on losing this battle, 
they might be reduced to utter helplessness, in- 
capable of acquiring any new settlements. 

t Would happen: i.e. the soldiers declared that 
they would rather be slain in this battle than 
survive it, in case the English were the victors, 
under whose iron hand they dreaded to become 
enslaved. 


2072 GQNNaZa RIOshachcta EIREGNN. [1598. 


Oala an Mhapupcecal co na sallenb ian ppaiccpm na ngaorweal pon a 
ccionn mi po tcaapbfinpioc nach naippde nuipeccla roip, act po cfimmsyprot co 
comnapt pop a ccfptacchad co po lingpot capp an cceona Lean claip lan 
nvomain vo pala pop a ccionn, 7 topcpaccan anaill o1ob mnte pioe acc 
Tocca taipp) ob. Ro doiptpiot 1apam an plog Zaoiwelac Fo oiogaip oapac- 
cach, 7 50 hammin agganb ina ccfnd, 7 po Zaippiot p(mpa 7 ma noeavhand, 
5 va saé Lit o10b. Rob ficcfn via tropac anmain pe hhomsum 4 aimpium 
pe hombualad,7 cotuccad pe contfm co po tanaiglo a ctiug, co po huipb(p- 
naz a nuapail, | co po tnaotad a ctpfom. Occ cfna appead a cumaip po 
mapbad an senepal 1. Mapupccal an mbaip, 7 amanl naé gnat catlatain vo 
copnam lap an luce pnp a@ nfoappcecaptan a ccuingid cata, 7 a ccfno coy- 
cada 7 comaiple po pnaomead pop muintin an senepala po ofod the nfpt 
iomgona, 7 1ombualca oanp na potollaib calman 7 capp an Lfeanclaip lan 
noomam tapp a ccudcacap. Ro bap acca naiplec 7 acca natcuma, aga 
ccumac, 7 asa ccnamsfinao 50 Lhomeac lamcapad lap an lucc baccan 
ina L&mmain. 

ba hann pm do deonad dia, 7 00 cfoms an commbde daén do pargzoiuipib 
na bainpfosna 50 po cath 1 mbavi vo pudan ina uptimcell la honmuine a 
lamas, 7 00 COD Fup an mbanlle ptoarp ba commnfpa 06 do meplionad a 
mioptp 7 a pdocdéide co po pcemn omitle 6 a maipve 1pm bptoap bai ipin 
mbaimlle 50 po blopccuptanp pide m aipde ipin aép foapbuap 7 sac barmille 
po ba coimnfpa 06 v1Md a nocd, blop an sonna mop vo pala aca. Ro tocc- 
bad ona on mud ccéona anaipve opong Mop do na oaoimb bacap in uiptimcell 
an puvaip hipm. Ro bat ona an culaig ma nuiptimceall ma haén meatt 
vobanda vopca ouib crac co cfnn achaid vo l6 ian pm. On vo Epnacan vo 
mumcin na bainpiogna san manbad Fan muduccay, Fan 005, Fan O1anoideaod 
po tmallpac can a nap co hanomaca. Nin bo hiomcomaincec po bap ma 
lima Za ctcpaotad, Za tcimceallad, Fa nawead, Za naiplech, na nofipb 
na tcpanaib, na ppiccib, na ccpioccaib, 50 pangacan cap na mana ipceach 
in Anomacha. 


“ Close lines, literally, “‘so that their thick 
was thinned.” 


the passive into the active voice. 
w The Lord.—The word coimbde occurs very 


* They were being slaughtered.—It is almost im- 
possible to translate this sentence into English, 
without transposing the words, and changing 


frequently in the Leabhar Breac, and other an- 
cient manuscripts, in the sense of “the Lord,” 
and is always applied to Christ, in a religious 


1598. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2073 


As for the Marshal and his English [forces], when they saw the Irish await- 
ing them, they did not shew any symptom whatever of fear, but advanced 
vigorously forwards, until they sallied across the first broad [and] deep trench 
that lay in their way; and some of them were killed in crossing it. The Irish 
army then poured upon them vehemently and boldly, furiously and impetuously, 
shouting in the rear and in the van, and on either side of them. The van was 
obliged to await the onset, bide the brunt of the conflict, and withstand the 
firing, so that their close lines* were thinned, their gentlemen gapped, and their 
heroes subdued. But, to sum up in brief, the General, i.e. the Marshal of Newry, 
was slain; and as an army, deprived of its leader and adviser, does not usually 
maintain the battle-field, the General’s people were finally routed, by dint of 
conflict and fighting, across the earthen pits,and broad, deep trenches, over which 
they had [previously] passed. ‘They were being slaughtered”, mangled, muti- 
lated, and cut to pieces by those who pursued them bravely and vigorously. 

At this time God allowed, and the Lord” permitted, that one of the Queen’s 
soldiers, who had exhausted all the powder he had about him, by the great 
number of shots* he had discharged, should go to the nearest barrel of powder 
to quickly replenish his measure and his pouch; and [when he began to fill it] 
a spark fell from his match into the powder in the barrel, which exploded aloft 
overhead into the air, as did every barrel nearest, and also a great gun which 
they had with them. A great number of the men who were around the powder 
were blown up in like manner. The surrounding hilly ground was enveloped 
in a dense, black, gloomy mass of smoke for a considerable part of the day after- 
wards. That part of the Queen’s army which escaped from being slaughtered 
[by the Irish], or burned or destroyed [by the explosion], went back to Armagh, 
and were eagerly pursued’ [by the Irish, who] continued to subdue, surround, 
slay, and slaughter them, by pairs, threes, scores, and thirties, until they passed 
inside the walls of Armagh. 


sense, not to the Holy Trinity, as O’Brien and 
O’Reilly have most erroneously asserted. It is 
also applied to a temporal lord. 

* By the great number of shots : literally, “from 
the multiplicity of his shooting.” 

¥ Fagerly pursued.—It is stated in the Life of 


Hugh Roe O’Donnell, that the recruits and ca- 


lones of the Irish army returned to strip the 
slain, and to behead those who lay severely 
wounded on the field : 

“Impaipe a nglaplaiz, 7 a ngiollannanrs, 4 
po gabpac ag poobad an fianlarg az poch- 
aippfe ipin caz, 7 oce o1Cfnoad na opuinge 
pobcan beogaoize ann,” 


12 H 


2074 QNNata RIOShachtd ElRECNN. [1598. 


Ro gabpac saofoil acc iompude an baile in Zac apd ina 1lomtacmoys, 4 
baccapn az ccutim 7 ax comoiubnaccad a cele co cfnn tpi la, clopa noice 
co no pecitigic soill po Ofo1d. Ro cwppioc cecca hi ccfnn na pee hip do 
Pagid na ngZaoidel via pad pu co Fpticpicip an pune oia LAiccti von banoa 
baccapn ann tocc Zan Zuin gan sabaid o1a pousid Fup in mbaile pm Apoa- 
maca, 7 1ap poccam ooib hipuide (dia tcapota emeac 7 moantfm nanacail 
0016, 7 a criodlacad plan ap an cip Fo poccam d6ib hi ccmé nll) 50 peice 
vip Apomaca buofin. O po haipnhdead na hat(peca pin do na Zaowdelaib do 
cottap na mate oo cpio a ccomaiple ourp ciod do Sendaip mon ccaingn pin. 
Ro bacan opong ofob aga pada nan bo coin na soll vo Léccad ap an 1oméu- 
mang 1 mbacan co po mapbta iad 1oip, no 50 neiblioip a naenan do sonca. 
Cp a af ba pain veipid leo po dedoh a Léccad uadanb ap na maigmb 1 mbacan, 
act nama na bepoaip leo biad no veoch, é10ead, apm, na ondanap, phoan na 
luaide ap m bpont sionmota a tnonc 9 a anm do Léccad lap in ccaptin bai 
ann. Ro aéncaighpioc oa Zach LAS anmain an na compellab pm, 7 po cup- 
plot Opons Oia noaomb uaiple apn Zac caeb oaccallaim an bapoa sup an 
bpupt, 7 1ap nopnfp pecel voibmde po Faccaibproc an baule acc Ua néill 
amail po poncongspad ponpa. Tanaicc an captin, 7 an banoa 50 hOpomaca 
hi cc{n an po maip dia Mumncip, 7 po cuipead 1odlacad Led wile 6 Apomaca 
sup an iuban, 7 on iuban 50 pangaccan In ppine gall. lan ppaccbarl cine 
heoccain voibyioe, Ro popconsanp Ua nell pon daoimb pampnfloaca, uaiple, 7 
anuaiple an apmais odin(m 7 oadnacal 7 ba pfoh a lion 1ap na naintm 50 
Win, oa mile 50 Lht mon ngenenal, 50 nocc ccaipcinib décc, 7 Opons mon vo 
daomb uciple nac ccabainte(p a nanmanna pop apo. 

Ropcan moinpoms, mimfnmmncas mumnzin na bampiosna 7 popcap pabars 
popopbpaols gaoril oon cartsle6 pm. Cn ofchmad la vo mi Auguyc vo 
pad aniomapszail pm ata bude. Oo coovan monte ulad ora crIZ1b ian 
molach copccaip, 7 commaidme se po paccbad oaome 1omoa vaoanb. 

bate an Mécargh baf a5 mune na bamposna pms pe tpi mblaoan 
noece Zup an can pa vo sabail la a Outcapacanb pin (My pampad na bliaona 


* Unmolested, \iterally, “‘ without wounding or would not be at all understood at the present 
danger.” day in any part of Ireland. The above sentence 
“ Were dispirited, Roptap mememsz, mimfn- would be constructed in modern Irish as fol- 


mnaig.— This is a very old construction, which lows: 


1598. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2075 


The Irish then proceeded to besiege the town, and surrounded it on every 
side ; and they [of both parties] continued to shoot and fire at each other for three 
days and three nights, at the expiration of which time the English ceased, and 
sent messengers to the Irish to tell them that they would surrender the fort 
[at the Blackwater], if the warders who were [stationed] in it were suffered to 
come to them unmolested’ to Armagh, and [to add] that, on arriving there, 
they would leave Armagh itself, if they should be granted quarter and protec- 
tion, and escorted in safety out of that country into a secure territory. When 
these messages were communicated to the Irish, their chiefs held a council, to 
consider what they should do respecting this treaty. Some of them said that 
the English should not be permitted to come out of their straitened position 
until they should all be killed or starved together ; but they finally agreed to 
give them liberty to pass out of the places in which they were, on condition, 
however, that they should not carry out of the fort meat or drink, armour, arms, 
or ordnance, powder or lead [or, in fine, any thing], excepting only the captain’s 
trunk and arms, which he was at liberty to take with him. They consented on 
both sides to abide by those conditions; and they sent some of their gentlemen 
of both sides to the fort, to converse with the warders ; and when these were 
told how the case stood, they surrendered the fort to O'Neill, as they were 
ordered. The Captain and the warders came to Armagh, to join that part of 
his people who had survived. They were all then escorted from Armagh to 
Newry, and from thence to the English territory. After their departure from 
Tyrone, O'Neill gave orders to certain persons to reckon and bury the gentle- 
men and common people slain. After they had been reckoned, there were 
found to be two thousand five hundred slain, among whom was the General, with 
eighteen captains, and a great number of gentlemen whose names are not given. 

The Queen’s people were dispirited* and depressed, and the Irish joyous 
and exulting, after this conflict. This battle of Athbuidhe was fought on the 
10th day of August. The chiefs of Ulster returned to their respective homes 
in joyous triumph® and exultation, although they had lost many men. 

Ballymote, which had been in the possession of the Queen’s people for the 
space of thirteen years before this time, was taken in the summer of this year 


* Ga meiptneac mi-meanmnacé muinzin na_ oil do0’n caizgZleo pin.” 
bainpiogna, ) ba pubac po-ponbpaoileaé Baoi- > Joyous triumph, 1olaé copccamp, The word 


12 w2 


2076 AQNNata RIOShacnta EIREGNHN. [1598. 


ro) a. la clomn noonnchaid an conan (.1. tcomalcac 7 catal oub). Oa an 
sobepnoin Sip conenp chipopt, 7 O vomnaill Qlod puad ace vaonad an barle 
pon aporle,7 ace tainccpin cfnnargh va chionn vo clomn noomnchard. Rob é€ 
cmocnuccad an vala clann noonnchaid vo tabarnt an baile oUa ovomnaill 
do dpulm cfnnans, 7 Connanta 1 mi medoin fogmaip na bliadna po. Ceitpe 
ced punt, 7 tp ced bé vo pao Ua vomnaill vo clomn noonncha an an 
mbanle. 

Sloiccead adbal la Mapla upmuman vo cup tom hi bpont laoisip, 7 Ian 
napccnam ipin pligid vob vo pala pop a ccionn ip cconaip do deacatTan 
Ucicne mac Rudpaise oicc, mic Ruonaise caoic uf monoa, 7 Remann mac 
Sfam na SCmap mic Riocainod Sharanais, 7 captin cipal 1. Ripofho mac 
comaip icc timal. Ro bad moo ma luac an lom do canll 1apla upmuman 
don Tupup pin do daofnib ofchanb, 7 vanm, 7 ap ap eiccin tepna an ciapla 
Fon iap na suin. | 

Ro cup Ua neill peembinn illaignib 1pm ccé10 mi Dposmanp na bliadna po 
via pupoailim an Remann a bupc, an Uaitne ua monda, 7 an captin cimal, 
commlcc laigneac opaccbail pop an ccud ele dia ccompann coccand 7 1400 Flin 
vo dol vo venam sabalcaip, 7] oo tabaune apaill vo na cb baccan ma 
nacchaid ipceach voip no oficc(n. 7 po popconsain ponpa vo ponpad vol von 
mumain po tosainm clomne comap pucid, mic Semuip, mic Slain mic an 
lapla. lan léghad na pecpibenn vo na huciplb a oubnaman do coctan pide 
sur an lion, 7 sup an cconganb ap la po peopac 1 nopppasib. CTangaccan 
an tip pin Dia pals ap a ccoil pon sionmota Mac siollapacpance pingin, 
mac bniain mic pingin. Coccan ap a haitle sup an ccionn tcuad do plrab 
bladma an oaig Zaovel oiptip muman, 7 1apctaip mide vo chun oaén pann 
pu a. 6 WMaolmuasd, 7 conall mac cataoin, 7 Maz coclam .1. Sfan occ, mac 
Sfaim, mic aint, mic conbmaic, 7 O cfpball an calbac, mac wlham wip, 
mic piIpsanainm, mic maolpuanaid. Ge po bacan na maite pin le hachao 
az pfram a hucc a bpmionnpa po bad bude led an 6ccband anatmd pm no 


iolac is explained “pubacap no luzgaip, i. e. 4 Fineen, the son of BrianHe was Flo- 
joy, or enthusiastic exultation,” by O’Clery. rence, the son of Brian, or Bernard Fitzpa- 

© Auctioning: literally, ‘‘ were making the trick, the first Baron of Upper Ossory, who 
castle dear upon each other,” i.e. bidding against slew Rury Oge O’More in 1578, from which 
each other, or outbidding each other's price, as period the heads of the Fitzpatrick family con- 
at an auction. tinued remarkably faithful to Queen Elizabeth, 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2077 


by its rightful inheritors, the Clann-Donough of Corran, namely, ‘Tomaltagh and 
Cathal Duv. The Governor, Sir Conyers Clifford, and O’Donnell (Hugh Roe ) 
were auctioning® the castle against each other, in offering to purchase it from 
the Clann-Donough. ‘The close of the bargain was, that the Clann-Donough 
gave up the castle to O'Donnell, for a purchase and contract, in the middle 
month of the autumn of this year. Four hundred pounds [in money] and three 
hundred cows was the price which O’Donnell gave the Clann-Donough for the 
castle. 

A great hosting was made by the Earl of Ormond, to place provisions in 
Port-Leix [Maryborough]. When they had advanced a certain distance on 
their way, they were met by Owny, the son of Rury Oge, son of Rury Caech 
O’More ; by Redmond, the son of John, son of John of the Shamrocks, son of 
Rickard Saxonagh [Burke]; and by Captain Tyrrell, namely, Richard, the son 
of Thomas Oge Tyrrell. On this expedition the Earl of Ormond lost more 
than the value of the provisions in men, horses, and arms ; and it was with 
difficulty the Earl himself escaped, after bemg wounded. 

In the first month of the autumn of this year O’Neill sent letters to Leinster, 
requesting Redmond Burke, Owny O’More, and Captain Tyrrell, to intrust the 
guarding of Leinster to some of their allies in the war, and to proceed them- 
selves to make conquests, and to bring some of the adverse territories over to 
their cause, by solicitation or force ; and he particularly requested them to go 
into Munster, at the invitation of the sons of Thomas Roe, son of James, son of 
John, son of the Earl [of Desmond]. The gentlemen whom we have men- 
tioned, after reading the letters, proceeded with the greatest force and arms 
they could command into Ossory. The people of that territory spontaneously 
came to [join] them, except Mac Gillapatrick (Fineen, the son of Brian‘, son of 
Fineen). They afterwards went to the northern extremity of Sheve Bloom, in 
order to induce the Irish of East Munster and Westmeath to join them, namely, 
O’Molloy, and Connell, the son of Cahir [O’Molloy]; Mac Coghlan (John Oge, 
the son of John, son of Art, son of Cormac), and O’Carroll (Calvagh, the son 
of William Odhar, son of Ferganainm, son of Mulrony). Although these chief- 
tains had for some time stood by their Sovereign, they were glad to obtain 


and strenuous opponents of the Irish insur-  cation.—See Cox’s Hibernia Anglicana, vol. i. 


gents, which saved their property from confis-  p. 354. 


2078 ANNG2a RIOgfhachtda ElREGNN. (1598. 


bai acc taiptel Saca Tipe DAaonTuUccad plotcana uaoalb 7 oO po plova~ispiot 
laopem Tuccpac a nacchaid ap an va upmumain 7 nip bo proh no canactpao 
po 1apppac popna, acc a ccneachad po cévoip tne na nfpcecapolp pms hanla 
upmuman,7 po Zabad ciice caupléin vo barlcib unmuman led, Ro bad oboe 
opium cadneach an bn na Sionna. Ro consgaib Remann a bune aicce pfin po 
comaip coccaid clomne pioca:po vo Fpfpcal 7 vo pmotall(m app. bacan 
dan @ 06 Nd a Ti vo peactmuimb co campameanl ma ccomnaise ipin Tip pn, 
5 cpfca aipip Siti, 7 clomne huilliam acca tcabaint via paigio vo cum a 
ppoplonsponc, 7 a ccomappain saoidel acc toct via naccallaim, 7 acc vol 
rnaénnann pmia. Ro bad oibprde 6 oWbIdIp Colle na manac 1. D1apmanc, 
mac uaicne, mic Pilip, 7 clann MhGc bmamn 6 ccuanach «. clann Muine(ncas, 
mic tToinpdealbans, mic muinc(ntang, 7 Rianaagh im concoban na moaunge 
mac uillam caoic, mic Dapmaca ui maoilpiam, 7 pol mbmain occ ourcthche 
aryict. 

lan nool vo na saodelaib pm 1 ccommbai 7 hi ccapactpad muinncine 
Ui nell, 7 an ccon Zac cipe sup a pangacan oaén pann pnd, Ro ctmallpac 
(so ningse amaé na noinfp pm) 1 ng(nalcacan’ ap cappang cloime comap 
puaid mic aniapla. Appead loccan cévamup hi cconntaé lLuimnigh. ba 
hann bot an Ppemoenp .. Sin comap nopuip an can yin hi ccill mocelloce. 
lan na tuiccpm 06 na baof incpoda FIP an nZappaid nZaowelargs vo cuaioh 
an a nomsgabenl 50 concas. Oo covappom ona can mang pap 1 cconallchaib 
1 ccompocnaib plebe luacna,4 slinne conbnaise. Caimcc Sémup mac tomaip 
puaid ma cefno hi cconallcoib oon cup pin, 7 be an vana mac (.1. Sfan) vo 
clomn Tomeup pucnd ina ppocaip pOn ap na himceaccaib pin aga ccanpaing 
von cin. Oo bina an samnach no m b6 nlaoga an pé pinsinmb 7 an lain 
snoisf an tpi pinsinmb, 7 sac muc oa pebup ap pinginn 7 na connapta yn 
apza proccpa, 7 acca ppupail in gach campa 1 mbrorp. 

Oz cucalors iapla upmuman catpim na ccatbuiotm pm taimice co na 


° Druim-Aidhneach, now anglice, Druminagh, 
a townland containing the ruins of a castle, si- 
tuated on the margin of Lough Derg, which is 
an expansion of the Shannon between Killaloe 
and Portumna, in the parish of Derryglass, ba- 
rony of Lower Ormond, and county of Tippe- 
rary. It has lately received the modern name 


of Castle Biggs from the present proprietor. 
According to the tradition in the country this 
castle was erected by O’Madden in despite of 
the O’Kennedys. 

* The borders of Sliabh-Luachra and Gleann 
Corbrarghe.—These places are far asunder, the 
Shabh Luachra mountains being near Castle 


1598. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2379 


terms of peace from those strange warriors, who were traversing every territory. 
After agreeing upon terms of peace with these, they turned their faces towards 
the two Ormonds ; and from them they sought neither peace nor friendship, 
but proceeded to plunder them at once, on account of their enmity towards 
the Earl of Ormond. They took five of the castles of Ormond, one of which, 
Druim-Aidhneach‘, on the margin of the Shannon, Redmond Burke kept to 
himself, for waging and maintaining war on Clanrickard out of it. They re- 
mained for two or three weeks encamped in that country; and the spoils of the 
region bordering on the Suir, and those of Clann-William, were carried to their 
camp ; and their Irish neighbours came to converse and join in the same con- 
federation with them. Among those who joined them were O’Dwyer of Kil- 
namanagh, i. e. Dermot, the son of Owny, son of Philip; the sons of Mac Brian 
(’gCuanach, namely, the sons of Murtough, son of Turlough, son of Murtough ; 
the Ryans about Conor-na-Mainge, the son of William Caech, son of Dermot 
O’Mulryan ; and the race of Brian Oge of Duharra. 

After these Irish [septs] had formed a confederacy and friendship with 
O’Neill’s people, and after having induced [the people of] every territory into 
which they came to join them, they marched with the rising-out [i. e. forces] 
of these districts, at the instance of the sons of Thomas Roe, son of the Earl 
[of Desmond], into the country of the Geraldines. They first went to the 
county of Limerick. The President, Sir Thomas Norris, was at this time at 
Kilmallock ; and when he perceived that he was not able to contend with the 
Irish party, he went to Cork, to avoid [meeting] them. They [the Irish] then 
proceeded westwards, across the River Maigue, into Connello, and to the bor- 
ders of Sliabh-Luachra and Gleann-Corbraighe’. James, the son of Thomas 
Roe [Fitzgerald], came to join them in Connello on this occasion ; and James, 
the second son of Thomas Roe, was already along with them upon these expe- 
ditions, for he had come to draw them into the country. At this time they 
offered and sold at their camp a stripper, or cow in calf, for sixpence, a brood © 
mare for threepence, and the best hog for a penny ; and these bargains were 
offered and proclaimed in every camp in which they were. 

When the Earl of Ormond heard of the progress of these warlike troops, he 


Island, in Kerry, and Gleann-Corbraighe in the _ It is the glinn or valley from which the Knight 
north-west extremity of the county of Limerick. of Glinn takes his titular title. 


2980 ANNaGCa RIOShachTa ElREGNN. [1598. 


mancpluas co na capiscib po na ccuaipim go connzae luimnig, 7 po cum 
pecela Fo concas oa pupal an m bppepoenp cect ma comne 5s cill mocel- 
loce. O no promnprot an pluag Zanvdelac bacan 1 mantan conallac an ni pry, 
po cenmmspioc aman1 mompocnarb cille mocelloce 7 tuccpact a toaipbenad 
pln von oa TIZeapna pin capla aga cc6paidecc. Oo df{catan na TiIZeannaige 
rn (ap iomsabail c(ecmala pnrupom vo clo a cele) 50 mang eala. Tiasaice 
pum ma noveaohard 50 vonur mage heala, 7 po sabpac aga ngp(nnuccad, 4 
apza N5plopad, 7] aga pad ppt na puigbiccip ofol prac ma ppolcanar bao pln, 
inc 1adpom olonnpaigio an can bactcan 1naén margin. An a aot pm apread po 
chinnprot na oaoine mona hipin an Ppeproenc do dol 50 concars, 7 an canla 
opillead tap a aap 1 mbuicilepacanb. 

O po paccbad an tip von chun pm an cumar an cplois saowelans vo 
soippioc lanla ofpmuman a hugoanpap Ui Neill vo Shémup, mac tomair 
puaid, mic Sémuip, mic Sam mic an lapla,7 an cip pin (1. s(nalcars 6 oun- 
ccaoin 50 Siuin) bai cilce cteccaishte ace Saranchoib, lan oaitinccad, 7 
oiolmaoimb, ni po paccbacctan pom (po cfnn pecc la noécc) én mac Saranars 


& Magh Ealla: i.e. the plain of the River Ealla, 
now Allo. From this name it is evident that the 
name Ealla was anciently applied to that part of 
the Blackwater lying between Kanturk, where 
the modern River Ealla ends, and the town of 
Magh Ealla, now anglice Mallow. P.O’Sullevan 
Beare calls this place Moala. It was a manor 
belonging to the Earl of Desmond, and upon his 
attainder it was granted, by Queen Elizabeth, 
to Sir John Norris, a most distinguished gene- 
ral, who settled the crown of Portugal on the 
royal house of Braganza, and was then Lord 
President of Munster.—See Smith’s Natural 
and Civil History of Cork, vol. 1. p. 331. 

h By the authority of O?Neill.—This clearly 
shews that since O’Neill had received the con- 
secrated crown of ‘ phoenix feathers” from the 
Pope, he was regarded as the lawful monarch of 
Treland. 
so light of this regal power, arrogated to him- 


The English writers, however, made 


self by the ex-Earl of Tyrone, that they con- 
tinued to style his vassal ‘‘ the Sugane Earl.” — 


Moryson, ed. 1735, vol. i. p. 61. Cox (vol. i. 
p- 415), states that this Sugane Earl was “ the 
handsomest man of his time ;” and Camden 
calls him * hominem obsccenissimam !”’ 

i The Saxons.—These were the English Un- 
dertakers who settled in Munster after the ruin 
of the Geraldines. Fynes Moryson gives the fol- 
lowing account of the doings of O’More, and the 
other allies of O’Neill in Munster on this occa- 
sion: ‘‘ After the defeat of the Blackwater, Ty- 
rone sent Ony mac Rory O’ More, and one Captain 
Tyrel (of English race, but a bold and unnatural 
enemy to his country and the English), to trou- 
ble the Province of Munster, against whom Sir 
Thomas Norris, Lord President, opposed him- 
self; but as soon as he, upon necessary Occa- 
sions, had withdrawn his forces to Cork, many 
of the Munster men now, first about October, 
1598, broke into rebellion, and joined them- 
selves with Tyrone’s said Forces, spoiled the 
Country, burnt the Villages, and pull’d down 
the Houses and Castles of the Knglish, against 


1568. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2081 


set out with all his cavalry and infantry for the county of Limerick, to meet 
them, and sent a message to Cork, requesting the President to come to meet him 
at Kilmallock. When the Irish army, who were encamped in the west of Con- 
nello, heard of this, they marched eastwards towards Kilmallock, and shewed 
themselves to these two lords, who were in pursuit of them. Upon seeing 
them, the lords (i.e. the Earl and the President) agreed to avoid meeting them, 
and turned off towards Magh-Ealla*. The Irish pursued them to the gate of 
Magh-Ealla, and proceeded to defy, provoke, and dare them [to battle], saying 
that they could neverewreak their vengeance upon them better than now, when 
they were [all] together in one place. Notwithstanding this, what the two 
great men determined upon was, that the President should repair to Cork, and 
that the Earl should return to the territory of the Butlers. 

As the country was left in the power of the Irish on this occasion, they con- 
ferred the title of Earl of Desmond, by the authority of O'Neill’, upon James, 
the son of Thomas Roe, son of James, son of John, son of the Earl; and in the 
course of seventeen days they left not within the length or breadth of the 
country of the Geraldines, [extending] from Dunqueen to the Suir, which the 
Saxons’ had well cultivated and filled with habitations and various wealth, a 


whom (especially the female Sex) they com- 
mitted all abominable Outrages. And now 
they raised James Fitzthomas, a Geraldine, to 
be Earl of Desmond (which Title had, since the 
Wars of Desmond, been suppressed), with Con- 
dition that (forsooth) he should be Vassal to 
O’Neal. The Munster Rebellion broke out like 
a Lightning, for in one Month’s Space almost 
all the Irish were in rebellious Arms, and the 
English were murthered, or stript and banished. 
Thus having inflamed Munster with the Fire of 
Rebellion, and leaving this Sedition to be che- 
rished and encreased by this new Earl of Des- 
mond, and other Rebels of that Province, the 
Ulster forces returned back to Tyrone. The 
Infection which Munster Men have drawn from 
the corrupted Parts in Rebellion did more and 
more spread itself, so as the old practices, long 
held by the Arch-traitor 7yrone to induce them 
to a revolt, now fully attained their wished Ef- 


fect; to the working whereof, in the Hearts of 
the Seditious, there wanted not many strong 
Motives, as the hatred which those Geraldines 
bear to those Undertakers (of whom I formerly 
spoke in Desmond’s War) which possessed their 
Ancestor’s Lands; also the Encouragement they 
received by the good Success of the Rebells, and 
noless the hope of pardon upon the worst Event.” 
—Vol. i. p. 61. 

P.O’Sullevan Beare says that Pierce Lacy was 
instrumental in drawing O’More, and others of 
O’Neill’s allies, into Munster on this occasion. 
He describes this outbreak of the rebellion in 
Munster as follows, in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. 
Compend. tom. 3, lib. 5, ¢. ii. 

“In hoe statu rerum Petrus Lessius nobilis 
eques Momonius vir animi plenus, nec eloquen- 
tie inanis Anglos, in quos aliquod crimen com- 
miserat, fugiens, in Lageniam Huonem Omorram 
adit, elque persuadet, vt in Momonias faciat ex- 


Lar 


2082 GQNNaza RIOshachtd ElRECGNN. (1598. 


an a pan, no ap a piplictcc san mapbavd, nd Zan 1onnapbad e1pce. 7 ni mo 
po paccaibpiot an pl na pee céona cfnnaic, na canplén, na En pod do DUTAIS 
sfpalcac san cups peilb iapla ofpmuman, acc nama coanplén na mainge In 
cconntae ciappaise, 7 Earp Zerbcine 1 nb conull sabna, 7 Mas eala 1 
ccomtae copcaige. lan ccmocnuccad an monpaotain yin le blcc nammpine 
vo na pinbipeachanb pin Ui neill po gabaccan clo, 7 ceilebnad az an lanla 
ofpmuman pin vo 6iponfoan pin. Oo co Uaitne 6 mopda (7 an mfiv bat 
acc ppfecpa 06 vo na plonacab pin) Wlaogipp. Oo dveachad Remann 
a bune (sur an lucc baoi pon a porccad, 7 Fone mbaof a Cumacta don 
congcip ceona) 50 hupmumain. Oo caév einse amaé na nulleac baccap ap 
aon Lap na hucaplib pin via coimib, 7 Oia TTISZ16 Fan eapbard 1onmaip no évala 
vo tanba cupaup na huaipe pin. Ro an Captin cipal 1 ppappad lapla ofp- 
muman, 7 bat an cianla ag cat(m, 7 acc cuantuccad na muman, 7 acc dol 
Inoaoinib o1a1d 1 no1ad pe ho an oa mior bas pfime vo ofinead na bliadna po. 

Tice(pna Mhoca sainfcc 1. Emann, mac Ripofipo, mc pianarp builcen 
vo vol 1 munteapup w nell 1 pposmap na bhadna po. 

Ticcfina tpfra cluana meala, 7 catpach dam 1apccas 1. tomap mac 
Tepold mic Pianap, mic Emaunn, 7 bapan luacmangi, 7 opons mop vo sillib 
occa buicilenach vo eipse 1 ccommbad coccaid na ngaorvdel. 


peditionem: id plerosque Momonios summopere Anglus Momoniarum prefectus sue provincie 


exoptare: rebellandicupidos esse: omnes Giral- non ignarus esse a prouincia hostem arcere, pree- 
g ee 


dinos Iaimum Giraldinum creaturos Desmoniz 
Comitem, & Ducem secuturos: Maccarrhas Des- 
moniz aliquem sibi principem electuros, Quod 
Huon consilium probans, Onello consentiente, 
in hanc opinionem amicos suos, qui in Lagenia 
bellum administrabant, mouet. Hi erant Ray- 
mundus Burkus Lietrime Baro cum Gulielmo 
fratre, Dermysius Oconchur cum duobus fra- 
tribus Carbrio, & Quinto, Richardus Tirellus. 
Huon ducens pedites octingentos, & equites cir- 
citer triginta celerius omnium opinione in Mo- 
monias ire contendit, Lisize custodia Edmundo 
fratri demandata. Comes Vrmonius regi] ex- 
ercitus imperator, illi obuiam iturus videbatur, 
sed non iuit, vel Huonis celeritate anteuersus, 


vel prelio experiri non ausus. Thomas Norris 


sidiarios milites, Momoniarum delectum, Mo- 
monios optimates, quam maximas breuitate tem- 
poris vires potuit comparare, Moalam conuocat, 
preseferens ibi velle cum Huone confligere. Illi 
Huon appropinquans magnificas litteras scribit, 
quibus ab eo petit, vt acie dimicet. Quam con- 
ditionem Norris recusans Moale constituto pre- 
sidio Corcacham refugit. Huon sequitur, & eius 
velites cum Norrisis vltimo agmine leuiter mis- 
silibus pugnant. Sine mora multi preter opi- 
nionem Momonij ab Anglis deficiunt, Patritius 
Giraldinus, qui Macmoris, & Lacsnaz Baro dici- 
tur, Gulielmus Giraldinus eques Auratus Kier- 
rius Rasinnane dominus, Edmundus Giraldinus 
eques Auratus vallis, Edmundus Giraldinus 


eques Auratus Albus & omnes fere nominis 


1598. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2083 


single son of a Saxon whom they did not either kill or expel. Nor did they 
leave, within this time, a single head residence, castle, or one sod of Geraldine 
territory, which they did not put into the possession of the Earl of Desmond, 
excepting only Castlemaine, in the county of Kerry; Askeaton, in Hy-Connell- 
Gaura; and Magh-Ealla [Mallow], in the county of Cork. When these agents 
of O'Neill had [thus], in a short time, accomplished this great labour, they took 
their leave of and bade farewell to this Earl of Desmond, whom they themselves 
had appointed. Owny O’More, and such part of the forces as adhered to him, 
set out for Leix ; Redmond Burke and that part of the same hosting which he 
had employed, and over which he had command, proceeded to Ormond ; and 
the Ulster troops who were along with these gentlemen proceeded to their ter- 
ritories and homes, not without wealth or booty acquired’ on this expedition. 
Captain Tyrrell remained with the Earl of Desmond ; and the Earl continued 
spending and subjugating Munster, and gaining more and more* people over 
to his side, during the remaining two months of this year. 

The Lord of Mountgarrett'; namely, Edmond, the son of Richard, son of 
Pierce Butler, concluded a friendship with O’Neill in the autumn of this year. 

The Lord of Clonmel-Third and Cahir, namely, Thomas, the son of Theo- 
bald, son of Pierce, son of Edmond, and the Baron of Luachmhagh", with many 
others of the young Butlers, joined in this war of the Irish. 


Mo- 


Giraldini Momonij, quorum plerique Iaimum 
Giraldinum Desmonie Comitem renunciarunt, 
quo nomine a nobis etiam hinc erit appellandus. 
Conspirarunt etiam Dermysius, & Donatus Mac- 
carrhe Alle principatus competitores, Daniel 
Maccarrhe Magni filius, Patritius Condon, Odon- 
nochuus Onachtz, Odonnochus vallis. Desciue- 
runt quoque alij viri clarissimi, Rocheus Faram- 
niz Vicecomes, Richardus Buttlerus Montis 
Gerarti Vicecomes, qui Onelli filiam vxorem 
habuit, Thomas Buttlerus Cathare Baro, & 
alij: sed plures in Regine amicitia manserunt, 
non solum ciuitates omnes, & magistratus, sed 
principes, vel optimates. Illic6 ex Connachta 
confluunt multi, qui depopulata patria inedia 
laborabant, & &@ Momonijs armantur, ducibus 
Dermysio Oconchure, Gulielmo Burko, Ri- 


chardo Tirello, Bernardo Okealla, & alijs. 
monij quoque milites conscribuntur, & duces 
creantur. Ita in Momonijs bello accenso, Huon 
in Lageniam reuertitur.”—Fol. 157. 

ij Acquired: literally, ‘‘without want of wealth 
or booty of the benefit of the expedition of this 
time.” 

k Gaining more and more: literally, “ going 
into people gradually,” i.e. ‘‘ becoming more 
populous, or more numerously followed.” 

! Mountgarrett.—A castle situated on the east 
side of the River Barrow, and a short distance 
to the north of the town of New Ross, in the 
county of Wexford. The keep of Lord Mount- 
garrett’s castle still remains in tolerable preser- 
vation. 

"Luachmhagh, now Loughmoe, a church giving 


Lee 


2084 AaNNQaza RIOShachTaA eiRECGNN. [1598. 


O Oomnaill (1. Aod puad) vo con plos, 7 pocnacce a cip conaill la 
Mac Unlhham (1. cepoicc, mac uacéin ciocais, mic Slam, mic oiluenanp) hr 
pann meic wlham 1 ppogman na blhiadna po. Ro cup vin Ua vocantas lap 
(50 pocalde méoin amarlle pip) «1. Sfan occ, mac Scan, mic peilim, mic con- 
cobain cannag. Oa pucill ma po haimsead iad m aén tip van sabpac, no 
TMapa ccuDcaTan Fo pangacap na humonll gan pacuccad, 7 ba hinncibspwe 
baccap upmon cpuid, 7 cltpa, mnie, 7 aipnfi~ pan meic ulham wle. Ro 
LOn cionoilead led ma mbaoi vo cnovh pon tip 6 oilenanb bfcca amach, 7 sen 
mop an cecclamad, 7 an cnumniuccad cpeach do ponpac ni puanaccap pom 
oDUaD No Docan ina tcImceall, acc ualac a naipccpishte 7 a momana amcon 
50 pansacan plan can a nop oa ccimb 1. Mac wlham so cip amalsans, 7 
Ua vocantais 50 himp eoshain. 

QN can tna vo coroh 6 vomnanll 1 perlb baile an Mhécans 1 mi mlm 
pasmain na bliaona po amail pemeb(ncman, po cuinpioc conallars a ccaop- 
oseacca i ccomntaé plisis, 7 baf Ua vomnaill plin ina comnagse 1 mbaile 
Ro cup Ua Oomn- 


Cangacan ma decom 


an Mocagh 6 campip a pasbala go o1md noolacc mon. 
naill cionol pon a plosaib m sach apm 1 mbacan. 
cétup cenel cconall 50 lon a ccionol. Canaicc ona Mac wlham bupe 
cepoio mac Uacéin ciotais co na mbaof po a mamup, 7 1ap poctain ooib- 
poe 50 haon maigm vo paigid uf Domnall Fo banle an motangh 1 noemead 
mip vecembep vo ponnad ap paip ofipd lap vol hi ccloimm Riocaipo se po 
baccan lucc an cinet ppaice(p 4 1 ppuip(cnup 7 se po bai a uaman, 7 a uipea- 
ccla ponpa. Cmd pum co na plogaib san pabad, gan pacucchad 50 paiicc 
50 cai cait(nach 50 oopuy cille colgan hi ccnepupecail na marone muice. 
Rolficc ianam pecaoilead va pccermelcorb in Zac aipoddon Tip ma uptimceal!l, 
7 po unten clone Riocaipo vo ponnnad. Oo macht opnong ofob 1 mompocnaib 


ooInect pémainn, 7 painicc opong ele 50 0Gn Zuaine hi ccoll ua ppiacnach. 


name toa parish and village in the barony of 


Eliogarty, county of Tipperary, and about five 
miles to the north-east of Thurles. Near this 
village are still to be seen the magnificent 


ruins of the ancient castle, and more modern 


mansion house, of Purcell, titular Baron of 


Loughmoe. 


"The small islands: i.e. the islands in Clew Bay. 


" Caused.—The language is here too abrupt. 
The literal translation is: ‘*O’Donnell put a 
gathering on his hosts in every place in which 
they were.” 

° Kilcolgan, Cill colgamn: i.e. St. Colgan’s 
Church, now Kilcolgan, near Clarinbridge, in 
the county of Galway.—See Colgan’s Acta Sanc- 
torum, p. 350, where this place is referred to 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2085 


In the autumn of this year O'Donnell (i. e. Hugh Roe) sent a body of forces 
from Tirconnell with Mac William (Theobald, the son of Walter Kittagh, son 
of John, son of Oliver) into Mac William’s territory. He sent with him on this 
occasion O’Doherty (John Oge, the son of John, son of Felim, son of Conor 
Carragh) with a great force. They were scarcely noticed in any country by 
which they marched, or through which they passed, until they arrived in the 
Owles; and it was in these [territories] the greater part of the herds and flocks 
of cattle of all Mac William’s country then were. They collected all the cattle 
that were on the main land outside the small islands"; and though great was 
the gathering and collection of preys they made, they encountered no danger or 
difficulty on account of them, save only the trouble of removing and driving 
them off. And they returned safe to their territories, i.e. Mac William to 
Tirawly, and O’Doherty to Inishowen. 

When O’Donnell had obtained possession of Ballymote, [which was] in the 
middle of autumn, as we have before mentioned, the Kinel-Connel sent their 
creaghts into the county of Sligo; and O'Donnell himself resided at Ballymote 
from the time it was given up to him until after Christmas. O’Donnell [at this 
time] caused” his forces to be mustered in every place where they were : first, 
the Kinel-Connell, with all their forces, came to him ; and next, Mac William 
Burke (Theobald, the son of Walter Kittagh), with all those who were under 
his jurisdiction : and when these had come together to O'Donnell, to Ballymote, 
[which was] precisely in the end of the month of December, the resolution he 
adopted was, to proceed into Clanrickard, although the inhabitants of that ter- 
ritory were on the alert and on their guard, such was their fear and dread of 
him. He marched silently and quietly with his forces, and arrived unnoticed 
and unobserved at the gate of Kilcolgan® by break of day. He then sent 
marauding parties in every direction around him, through the level part of 
Clanrickard. One party went to the borders of Oireacht-Redmond?, and ano- 


as near Athcliath Meadhruidhe. 

® Otreacht-Redmond : i. e. the tribe of Red- 
mond, anglice Eraght Redmond, which was a 
tribe name assumed by a sept of the Burkes of 
Clanrickard. It appears, from an Inquisition 
taken at Galway in 1608, that the barony of 
Kiltartan, in the county of Galway, comprised 


three territories, viz.: Kinelea, otherwise called 
O’Shaghnes’s country, comprising one hundred 
and five quarters of land; Eraght-Redmond, 
fifty-eight and a half quarters ; and Killovye- 
rach, otherwise O’Heyne’s country, forty-five 
quarters. These districts are still well known 
in the barony of Kiltartan. 


2086 GQNNaza RIOSshachtd elREANN. 


[1598. 


Oo pénad ecca mona lap an luct pm do Cod Fo coll ua ppracpach .1. va 
mac Ropra mec Uaicne mic maoileclamn uf loclamn, coinpdelbac bude, 4 
bman do manbad. Ro mapbad ona ouime uapal vo clomn noomnaill galloce- 
lac baf 1 ppanpad Mhfc ullam an an ptuaiglo pin 1. God bude occ, mac 
Cloda bude, mic maolmuine mec vomnaill la coinpdelbac bude, mac Ropyra 
pon cup pin pra na mapbad budfin. Ro manboo bfop la opus ele vo 
muimneip Ui vomnanll, oa mac william mic Slain 6 pinn mil, 7 mac clpoice 
mic vabog 6 doipe ui ovomnall, 7 mac a mfic. Ro sabad ona la Masgnup, 
mac Clooa me magnupa la veapbpacaip ui vomncaill Mac hobfpo 6 oipfpc 
cellars 1. ulliam, mac uillice puad mic ullice orice. Hepbcan 1omda 1olanoa 
buannaoa on iapla ap 6poa hi cclomn Riocaino Ramice la hUa noomnaill a 
puccad cuicce do cp(caib comadble, vo taintib tTnoma, daincctib 7 vévalaib 
oo bneith lap ap an cip san Tpold, Fan tacan so painice 1omlan can a app 
50 baile an Mhoctangh. 

Ro bai mpfpam 7 (ppaonca ectip opung 00 odommb uaiple cuadmuman 
1m compomn, 7 1m comaigclp a cepice,7] a ppiainn, a mbailcead,7 a mbuan 
caiplen po bad ermilc 00 pecmobad no ovanpnop. 

O po hapnhdead vo bainpiosain Sharan 47 oon comaiple 50 po finslccan 
Einfmnarsh na haghaw amail po hapnfohead cfna, 7 an hon ofpmain oia 
vaoimb toncpaccan an bhadanm, Apread po chinn an ppionnpa 7 an 
comainle Sin Ripofpo bionsam vo Lficcfn anoip 50 noct mile vo pargoiuiprbh 
amaille pmpp do cpuaduccad 7 vo cotusgad an coccaiod abup 50 tTtiopao 
lapla op epex dia po hopoarsead an can pin coct m epmnn o Félbpig0e amach 
1 cculad, 1 ccopetup, 7] mapmail na po tionnpccnad a hionnpamail vo con 50 
hepmn pam 6 no sabpac Saxon vo lam a sabarl sup an can pm. Un Sin 
Ripoeno pempaice Rioipe onopac ede do mumcip na bampiogna, pob 


4 Dun-Guare, now Dungorey, a townland 
containing the ruins of a castle near the town 
of Kinvarra, said to oceupy the site of the pa- 
lace of Guaire Aidhne, King of Connaught, in 
the seventh century, ancestor of the family of 
O’Heyne, by whom this castle was erected.— 
See Genealogies, §c., of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 67. 

° Rinn-Mhil, now Rinvile, near Oranmore, on 
the shore of the bay of Galway. 


§ Doire- Ui- Dhomhnaill; i.e. O’ Donnell’s Derry, 
or Oak Grove, now Derrydonnell, in the parish 
of Athenry, and about three miles to the east 
of Oranmore. For the origin of this name see 
the year 1213, p. 179, supra, and note 4, ebid. 

t Mac Hubert of Disert-Ceallaigh.—This was 
an Irish name assumed by the head of a sept of 
the Burkes seated at Isertkelly, a castle in a 
parish of the same name, situated to the south- 


1598. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2087 


ther to Dun-Guaire’, in Coill-Ua-bhFiachrach. This part who went to Coill- 
Ua-bhFiachrach committed lamentable deeds, namely, they slew the two sons 
of Ross, the son of Owny, son of Melaghlin O'Loughlin, i. e. Turlough Boy and 
Brian. But a gentleman of the Clann-Donnell Galloglagh, who was along with 
Mac William on that expedition, namely, Hugh Boy Oge, the son of Hugh Boy, 
son of Mulmurry Mac Donnell, had been slain on this occasion by Turlough 
Boy, the son, before he himself fell. By another party of O’Donnell’s people 
were slain the two sons of William, son of John [Burke] of Rinn-Mhil’, and 
the son of Theobald, son of Dabuck, from Doire-Ui-Dhomhnaill®, with his bro- 
ther’s son. Mac Hubert of Disert-Ceallaigh*, namely, William, the son of Ulick 
Roe, son of Ulick Oge, was taken prisoner by O’Donnell’s brother, Manus, son 
of Hugh, son of Manus. Although the Earl had great numbers of hired soldiers 
quartered in Clanrickard, O'Donnell happened to carry off out of the territory 
all the immense spoils, heavy herds, and other booty and property, which had 
been collected for him, without battle or conflict, until he arrived safe at 
Ballymote. 

There existed strife and dissensions among some of the gentlemen of 'Tho- 
mond, concerning the division and joint-tenure” of their territory lands, towns, 
and strong castles, which it would be tedious to write or describe. 

When it was told to the Queen of England and the Council that the Irish 
had risen up against her in the manner already described, and the vast numbers 
of her people who had been slain in this year, the resolution adopted by the 
Sovereign and the Council was, to send over Sir Richard Bingham with eight 
thousand soldiers, to sustain and carry on the war here, until the Earl of Essex 
should [be prepared] to come, who was then ordered to go to Ireland after the 
festival of St. Bridget with attire and expense, and an army, such as had not 
been attempted to be sent to Ireland, since the English had first undertaken to 
invade it, till that time. This Richard aforesaid was an honourable knight” of 


west of the town of Loughrea, in the county of 
Galway. 

" Joint tenure.—* Commeceap .1. comhap.”— 
O’ Clery. 

“ Honourable knight.—By this the Four Mas- 
ters mean a man on whom honours had been 


heaped by his Sovereign. On account of certain 


complaints which had been lodged against this 
honourable knight, of ibata fides, by the chiet- 
tains of Connaught, he was removed and incar- 
cerated by the Queen, who felt convinced that 
he had killed too many of the Burkes in cold 
blood ; but when she heard of the defeat of her | 
Field-marshal, Sir Henry Bagnal, she was per- 


ANNaza RIOSshachtTa EIRECANN. 


2088 [1598. 


eolach 1 nepinn eipide, 7 bat na Zobepndip 1 cediccead connact peal oo bhav- 
nob pore pin. Cn ciapla op eppexr pm a oubpaman bop, neach € bat hi 
ceion, 7 In cenfiofmain, 7 1 nonéip ag an mbaimmiogaim, neach € vo mod 
posail 7 popsabanl pon ppoumnpib ianctaip eoppa a hucc na bainpiogna céona, 
5 ba lipprde po sabad catain dans diocoglong: hi progacht na Spamne 
sap blcc map an can pin. Calip canm na cachpach pin. 

lapla cuadmuman vo bith hn Saxoib on callamn go céle an bliadain pr. 

lanpla cille oapa «a. Urlliam, mac seanoicc, mic Feapoice vo dol hi Saroib 
pM eappac. 

O concébain Sliccish Oonnchad mac catail 6ice Do Toct a Sarorb 1pm 
n5fimnean. 

Cpoona vaomb uaiple dotuadmumam bacap 1 mmpfpampma pole amarl 
a oubnamap Tadce mac concobain mic vonncharo ui bniam len sabad oporcle 
punt cporppi, 7 sion sup bo heyide céccup po tionnpgam a Zabanl pon Maip- 
sels clopéce ap cuicce vo tut po ofHd. Ro Zabad lap canplen cluaine 1 
nuibh caupm, 7 caiplen na pecainbe1 noint(n 6 mblovd an tupnaé mfic eppeorp 
na moe. Ro bad oiob bhp concoban mac oomnaill mic matsamna, mic 
bnican ui bpiain vo Zabail bale an carplém 1 cclomn cuwiléin vactanas an 
Mhac conmana fronn, San, mac tag, mic conmfoa. Ga d10b ona comppoeat- 


bac mac matsamna, mictcoimpoealbars, mic matgamna 6 coill 6 pplannchada 


suaded that Bingham had acted with that seve- 
rity due to such obdurate rebels, and accord- 
ingly set him at liberty, and appointed him as 
successor to Marshal Bagnal. Camden mentions 
these facts briefly as follows, in his Annal. Req. 
Eliz, A.D. 1598: 

‘‘Ad hujus insolentiam” [O-Neali] ‘ com- 
primendam imprimis habilis visus est Richardus 
Binghamus, contra rebelles in Hibernia fortis & 
felix si quis alius. Ille igitur qui jampridem 
Connacthie Prefectura, provincialibus de seve- 
ritate quiritantibus, amotus, in Angliam vocatus, 
& in custodiam datus, nunc remittitur cum ho- 
nore & authoritate Marescalli Hibernia & Lage- 
niz Generalis. Werum statim atque appulit 
Dublinie diem obit. Vir genere claro «& anti- 
quo in agro Dorsettensi, sed veteran militie 


gloria clarior. Ad S. Quintini enim Conques- 
tum in Armonica ad Leitham in Hebridibus, 
Scotia, Creta Insula, ad Chrium contra Turcas, 
in Gallia & Belgio militavit, & que dixi, in Hi- 
bernia gessit.” 

x Calis—This is a mere error of the tran- 
seriber of Cadis, i. e. Cadiz. 

¥ Portcroisi, now Portcrush, on the Shannon, 
not far from O’Brien’s Bridge.—See it already 
mentioned under the years 1506, 1510, 1597. 

* Cluain, now Cloone, near the village of Tulla, 
on the east of the county of Clare. 

* Sgairbh, now Scarriff, a small town in the 
parish of Tomgraney, in the north-east of the 
county of Clare.—See it already mentioned un- 
der the year 1564. 

» Hy-mBloid.—This was the name of a sept of 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2089 


the Queen’s people, and was acquainted with Ireland; for he had been Govenor 
of the province of Connaught for some years before. The Earl of Essex, whom 
we have also mentioned, was one who was in favour, esteem, and honour with 
the Queen, and one who had made plunders and descents upon the provinces 
of the west of Europe for the same Queen. It was he who, a short time before, 
had taken a strong and well-fortified city in the kingdom of Spain, named 


Calis*. 


The Earl of Thomond remained in England the entire of this year, from 


one calend to the other. 


The Earl of Kildare (William, the son of Garret, son of Garret), went to 


England in the spring. 


O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge) returned from Englid 


in the winter. 


Among those gentlemen of Thomond, of whom we have spoken as being 
at strife with each other, was Teige, the son of Conor, son of Donough O’Brien, 
by whom the bridge of Portcroisi’ was taken; and although he was not the 
first who had attempted to take it [by force] from Margaret Cusack, it was to 


him it finally fell. 


He also took the castle of Cluain* in Hy-Caisin, and the 


castle of Sgairbh’, in the east of Hy-Bloid’, from the attorney of the Bishop of 


Meath’s son‘. 


Among these was also Conor, son of Donnell, son of Mahon, son 


of Brian O’Brien, who took Baile-an-chaislein*’, in Upper Clann-Cuilein, from 


Mac Namara Finn (John, the son of Teige, son of Cumeadha). 
was Turlough, son of Mahon, from Coill O’Flannchadha’‘, 


the Dal-Cais, of whom the O’Kennedys, O’Sha- 
nahans, O’Duracks, and O’Kearneys, were the 
most distinguished families. These families 
were dispossessed in 1318, by Turlough na 
Caithreime O’Brien, aided by the Mac Nama- 
ras, who, shortly after this period, took pos- 
session of the whole region lying between the 
River Fergus and the Shannon. The name Ui 
mBloid is still retained in the ecclesiastical di- 
vision, and is now applied to a deanery in the 
east of the county of Clare. 

© The Bishop of Meath’s son: i.e. the son of 
Hugh Brady, Bishop of Meath, who succeeded 


Among them 
who took from 


in 1563, and died in 1583. How the son of that 
Bishop came to have property in Clare, the 
Editor has not been able to discover. The 
Bradys of Tomgraney, who suppose that their 
real name is O’Grady, still possess property in 
the neighbourhood of Scarriff, The present 
Lord Chancellor of Ireland is descended from 
this Bishop, according to the tradition in the 
family. 

4 Baile-an-chaislein, now Castletown, in the 
parish of Dury, a short distance to the east of 
Ennis, in the county of Clare. 


€ Coill-O’°bhFlannchadha ;: i, e, O’ Flannchada’s 


12k 


2090 anNnNaca RIOshachta €lREGNN. (1598. 


lén sabad done Cogan an Shfsipy1 ciopoce, dian bo outcapaish ceduyp clann 
amlaoib, mic cfin Uf Sh(chnapaigh, 7 00 cfhganl Matsamain, mac toinpdeat- 
bang buice uf bniain le coll o pplannchada. 6a vo na oaomib uaiple céona 
coippoealbac mac munchaid mic concobaip ui bniain 6 Cataip mionain, co na 
Ro bad 
viob tna Tads caoc, mac coippdealbarg, mic bain, mic vonnchaid, mec mac- 
Zamna vo sabcul Luinge Saxanaige pa noolaice mop ian mbhc o1 pon plenan 
achaid pada pap ancan pin. Clpeatd vo pala 0150 po sab pont 1 cconca barp- 
cim 1antapnaise 1 ccompocnaib caippse an coblaig, Ro b(n cang an long co 
na pomaoin o1a poipinn. Nip bo cian 1an pm sup bectpom a canba do tadcc, 
7 5un 66 ctnom a cépaigecc pap. Cn cadgZ cedna vo sabanl an oii bice 


bnatain diapmaic puad vo dol 1 ccombaid Coccald na ngaofdeal. 


benle via baileib plin bat ag cfnnaghe 6 lumneach a ngioll le pracanb. 


wood. This was a woody district in the parish 
of Kilkeedy, barony of Inchiquin, and county 
of Clare, and on the borders of the county of 
Galway. The old inhabitants of this district 
informed the Editor, in the year 1839, that 
they had seen considerable remnants of Coill 
O’bhFlannchadha, in the townlands of Bun-a- 
chiopain and Ait-tighe-doighte, in the parish of 
Kilkeedy. They also told him that the castles 
of Doire-Eoghain, or Derryowen, and Cluain- 
Dhubhain, were always considered as in the 
district of Coill O’bhFlannchadha. 

* Cathair-Minain, now Caherminane, in the 
parish of Kilelagh, barony of Corcomroe, and 
county of Clare——See note ", under the year 
1591, p. 1907, supra. 

8 Carraig-an-Chobhlaigh: i.e. the Rock of the 
Fleet, now corruptly pronounced in the Irish 
language Canpaig a’ cobaleaig, now anglicised 
Carrigaholt, a village in the barony of Moyarta, 
in the south-west of the county of Clare. It is 
situated on a bay to which it gives name, and 
near the Moyarta River, which falls into the 
Lower Shannon, Near the village, on a rocky 
cliff overhanging the bay, are the ruins of the 
castle of Carraig-an-Chobhlaigh, built by Mac 
Mahon, chief of Western Corca- Vaskin. 


» Of debt.—The chieftain mortgaged this cas- 
tle to a Limerick merchant, and, taking advan- 
tage of the troubles, ousted the merchant with- 
out paying the debt. 

Under this year Camden records the death of 
three learned Englishmen, of whom one was the 
poet Edmund Spenser, —who lived for about 
nineteen years in Ireland, which he described 
as being “as beautiful and sweet a country as 
any under heaven,”—of whom he gives the fol- 
lowing notice: 

“Tertius, Ed. Spenserus patria Londinensis, 
Cantabragiensis etiam Academie alumnus, Mu- 
sis adeo arridentibus natus, ut omnes Anglicos 
superioris 2vi Poétas, ne Chaucero quidem con- 
cive excepto, superaret. Sed peculiari Poetis 
fato semper cum paupertate conflictatus, etsi 
Greio Hiberniz proregi fuerit ab epistolis. Vix 
enim ibi secessum & scribendi otium nactus, 
cum a rebellibus é€ laribus ejectus & bonis 
spoliatus, in Angliam inops reversus statim ex- 
piravit. Westmonasterii prope Chaucerum im- 
pensis Comitis Essexie inhumatus, Poetis fu- 
nus ducentibus, flebilibusque carminibus & 
calamis in tumulum conjectis.’”—Annal. Reg. 
Elis., A. D. 1598. 


Ware, however, states, in the Preface to his 


1598.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2091 


George Cusack Derryowen, at first the patrimony of the sons of Auliffe, the 
son of Cian O’Shaughnessy. Mahon, the son of Turlough Boy, obtained Coill 
O’Flannchadha. Among the same gentlemen was Turlough, the son of Mur- 
rough, son of Conor O’Brien, from Cathair Mionain*, and his kinsman, Dermot 
Roe, who joined in the war of the Irish. Among them, moreover, was Teige 
Caech, the son of Turlough, son of Brian, son of Donough Mac Mahon, who, 
about Christmas in this year, captured an English ship that had been going 
astray for a long time before. It happened to put in at a harbour in Western 
Corea-Bhaiscinn, in the neighbourhood of Carraig-an-Chobhlaigh®. Teige took 
away this ship from the crew, and all the valuable things it contained. It was 
not long after till Teige found the profit very trivial, and the punishment severe. 
The same Teige took Dunbeg, one of his own castles, from a Limerick mer- 


chant, who had it in his possession, in lieu of debt”. 


Edition of Spenser’s View of the State of Ireland, 
that he died in the year 1599, though others 
have it wrongly 1598. Spenser came to Ireland 
in 1580, as Secretary to the Lord Grey, and 
got a grant, in 1585, of 3000 acres of the lands 
ot the county of Cork, forfeited by the rebellion 
of the Earl of Desmond and his confederates, and 
resided in the castle of Kilcolman, two miles 
north-west of Doneraile, where he wrote his 
View of the State of Ireland, in the year 1596, 
and finished his celebrated poem, ‘“ The Faery 
Queen.’ —See Smith’s County Cork, book i. 
c. vii. Ware says that it were to be wished 
that some passages in his View of the State of 
Treland “ had been tempered with more mode- 
ration;” and Walter Harris, who was a man of 
great research and honesty, though deeply im- 
bued with prejudices against the Irish Catho- 
lics, has added the following words in brackets 
to Ware, giving his opinion of Spenser’s View of 
the State of Ireland : 

“This Book lay in MS. in Archbishop Usher’s 
Library, and was from thence published by Sir 
James Ware, the year aforesaid” [1633] “and 
dedicated to the Lord Wentworth, then Lord De- 
puty of Ireland. The Scope and Intention of 


the Book was to forward the Reformation of 
the Abuses and evil Customs of Ireland; and 
some things in it are very well written, parti- 
cularly as to the Political main design of reduc- 
ing Ireland to the due Obedience of the Crown 
of England. But in the History and Antiqui- 
ties of the Country he is often miserably mis- 
taken, and seems rather to have indulged the 
Fancy and Licence of a Poet, than the Judg- 
ment and Fidelity requisite for an Historian. 
Add to this his want of Moderation, in which, 
it must be confessed, he was exceedingly defec- 
tive.”—Irish Writers, p. 327. 

It is very much to be regretted that Thierry 
and other writers, being deceived by the cele- 
brity of his name, have helped to perpetuate 
some of his fictions; but truth will finally tri- 
umph; and the Editor, who intends to publish 
areview of Spenser’s View of the State of Ireland, 
in which he will give him full credit for his dis- 
cernment of abuses, and expose all his intentional 
figments, shall take no further notice of this di- 
vine bard-hunter, except that we learn from Ben 
Jonson’s letter to Drummond of Hawthornden, 
that he died in London, in 1599, for lack of 
bread! 


1 we? 


AQNNaza RIOshachta elReann. (1599. 


QOIS CRIOST, 1599. 
Cloip cmorc, mile, ctice céd, nocat, anaof. 


Qn cianla chille vapa pm a oubpamap do dol bi Saroib 1pm mbliadam 
pemainn .1. Uilham, mac genoicc, mic Zepdicc, Ro ctmall cocc m enmn 1 
n(ppach na bliadna po. lan nool 00 hilluing co nocc ppfpaibh dvécc do maitib 
na mide, 7] Fine Zall maulle pip, o po peolpac (Oo painccpiona 1pm prams) 
ni conpacup bf6 aém neich o1ob opin alle 7 po bad a cimb ole po cfnn va 
mior 1ap pm cainice ofimin a mbaip go Saroib 7 go hEpinn. Ni no fpacecnb- 
plum mac, na ofbpatain ina of610 vo Zébad a Comonburp, acc po hoiponead 
commbpataip 06 (1. Zeapoicc, mac eduaipod mic Fepdicc, mic cTémanp, mic 
Sam corm) Lap an mbainmiogain 7 la comanple Sharan. Nfch erpvde bat na 
captin pop pasoiuipib ag oénam phnbipr von bornpiosain Fo po Lice dia an 
inme pin DIA PaIs1o Fan cat, Fan coccad, Zan Zabaro, Fan Zuappacc. 

O maolmuad 1. Conall mac cataoip vecc 1 neannac na bliadna po, 7 a 
mac 1. an calbac vo Zsabail a 1onaro a hucc na bainpiogna. Apanll vo daommb 
uaiple a cimd ace poccna 7 ace puaropead pain (v0 pin snataighce Zaoiweal ) 
a noimd an anma pin. 

Fmsur, mac bain, mic bmiam, mc Rudpaige, mic catanl ui pipsail véce 
1mi manta, 4 po bad avbap eccaome ina tin plin eiprohe. 

Oomnall, mac nell mCingis, mic maolmuipe, mic Cloda, mic nell vo 
mapbao la Maolmuipe mac bain dice, 7 la hOlod mburde, mic pippfoa mec 
puibne 7 1a0p10e (00 cpochad) vo lopccad la hUa noomnaill Cod puad an 
mullac pite Clooa hi ccronaoh a migniom, 4 cpe coll a peachca. 

Semup, mac coinpdealbarg, mic cuatail ui Zallcubaip vo cpochad la 
hUa noomnaaill ap mullac na Site op (pp puaid an clepamad la vo manta 
lan na ofpbad pain co mbaoi ag bnach 4 a5 carrcelad Us domnaill, 7 acc 
canpaing Zall o1a tip. 


i According to the custom of the Irish.—Oo péip 
Bnacaigze Gaoiveal: i. e. secundum consuetudi- 
nes Gadeliorum. Calvagh O’Molloy succeeded as 
the eldest son of his father, according to the 
laws of England ; but others of his tribe, who 
would be preferred to him according to the 


Trish law of tanistic succession, attempted to de- 
pose him. 

j Mullach-Sithe-Aedha, now Mullaghnashee, or 
Mulnashee, the hill on which the church of Bal- 
lyshannon stands. i 

Violating his law, Tpe coll ap peacca.— The 


1599.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2093 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1599. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand five hundred ninety-nine. 


The Earl of Kildare, whom we have spoken of in the last year as having 
gone to England, namely, William, the son of Garrett, son of Garrett, prepared 
to return to Ireland in the spring of this year. He went into a ship with 
eighteen of the chiefs of Meath and Fingall ; [and] after they had sailed till 
out of sight at sea, none of them was alive ever since ; and it was from other 
countries, in two months afterwards, that an account of the certainty of their 
deaths arrived in England and Ireland. He [the Earl] left neither son nor 
brother behind him to succeed to his title ; but his kinsman, Garrett, the son 
of Edward, son of Garrett, son of Thomas, son of John Cam, was appointed by 
- the Queen and Council of England. He had been [only] a captain over soldiers 
in the Queen’s service, until God permitted this property to devolve to him, 
without battle or war, peril or danger. 

O’Molloy (Connell, the son of Cahir) died in the spring of this year ; and 
his son, Calvagh, took his place, being appoimted by the Queen. Some of the 
gentlemen of his tribe vied and contended with him (according to the custom 
of the Irish') for that name. 

Fergus, the son of Brian, son of Brian, son of Rury, son of Cathal O'Farrell, 
died in the month of March ; and [his death] was the cause of lamentation in 
his own territory. 

Donnell, the son of Niall Meirgeach, son of Mulmurry, son of Hugh, son of 
Niall [Mac Sweeny], was slain by Mulmurry, the son of Brian Oge, and Hugh 
Boy, the son of Ferfheadha Mac Sweeny. Both of these [i. e. the slayers] were 
hanged [and] burned by O’Donnell (Hugh Roe), on Mullach-Sithe-Aedha’, for 
this crime, and for violating his law‘. 

James, the son of Turlough, son of Tuathal O’Gallagher, was hanged by 
O'Donnell on Mullach-na-Sithe, over Assaroe, on the fourth day of March, it 
having been proved against him that he was spying and betraying O'Donnell, 
and drawing the English into his country. 


word coll is nearly synonymous with papugad, Glossary it is explained by the modern word 
and denotes to break or violate. In O’Clery’s mitleao. 


2094 GQNNGZG RIOShAchTa EIREGNN. [1599. 


Seomp! clopocc, mac Tomaip vo manbad 1 mi iil la comppoelbac, mac 
mactszamna mic toinpvealbaig mic matsamna, mic an eppuice ui bam im 
duchais a atap, vain vo pad Sip Ripoeno bionsam ofichais mactszamna 
uf bmican (ian na cup cum baip lap) oon tpeoinp! pempaice, 7 berprum a 
noiaid a atanda co po mapbadod Slop: lary oon chun pin, 7 po hadnaiclo 
e1plve 1 MaaMpTip mnypt. 

Mac ui concobaip cianparge .1. oonnchad maol, mac concobaipn, mic con- 
cobain, mic Seain 0o mapbad 1 mi CQugupc la opus oampard ranla ofpmu- 
man 1. la clomn Magnuya oicc, mic magnupa, mic emai mec pithis, 7 po 
bad vit mon lap an iapla an manbad pin, an ba via compann coccad 6 con- 
cobain badfin 2. Sfan, 7 a ofpbpataip an oonnchad pin co na mbaot ma coin 
ule. 

Sfan mac an grolla oub, mic Semuip ui cinnéiczig 6 baile an Sanpda cnuic 
yiche Gna 1 nupmumai vo manbad la hQoo, mac munchaid ui cinneitais 
6 Banle ui cuine. 

Pop lotpa 1 nupmumain «1. Sfan, mac Slain, mic siollapactpaice ui 
occain’vo manbad La opums vo prol ccimneiceis 1 mi ul vo ponnnad. 

Mop msth vomnaill mic concobain, mic tomppdealbangs uf bam véce 1 mi 
ranuapy bth pm nob 1onmolca 1 modaib mna. 

lapla cuaomuman 1. vonnchad mac concobaipn ui bmaim vo cowdecc a 
Sarorb hi mi lanuany, 7 anmain vo hh ppappad Janla upmuman 1 mbuicilep- 
acaib co cfnd achad 1apam. 

Mac vo clon ui neill 1. Conn, mac Coda, mic pipoonca, mic cunn bacans 
vo toct 1 mi Januapyp vo dénam cuapca az caipoib 7 ag compann coccaid a 
acan Wleasnib, 7 iin mumain, ora plop cia ofob po bat mbun a ccapaccpaod 7 
a ccinsecllca cua neill,7] 00 saowelaib. Ro an upmop an eannans ip na 
cipib pin, ag pasbanl bid via ampaib, 7 aga nfpcao 1pm ccoccad 1 mbaccap. 


! Misfortune, viz : literally, ‘ loss.” 
™ Baile-an-Gharrdha- Chniuc-Sithe- Una, now 


preservation, in the parish of Lorha, barony of 
Lower Ormond, and county of Tipperary.—See 


ene : : si Q 
Ballingarry, a townland giving name to a pa 


rish in the barony of Lower Ormond, about half 


a mile from the conspicuous hill of Cnoc-Sith- 
Una, now anglice Knocksheegowna, and about 
four miles to the south-east of Burrisokeane. 

" Ballyquirk, a townland, with a castle in good 


note “, under the year 1561, p. 1584, supra. 

° Lothra, now Lorha, a small village with the 
ruins of several churches and abbey walls, in a 
parish of the same name, barony of Lower Or- 
mond, and county of Tipperary. The pedigree 


of John O’Hogan, Prior of Lothra, who was the 


1599. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2095 


George Cusack, the son of Thomas, was slain in the month of July by 
Turlough, the son of Mahon, son of Turlough, son of Mahon, son of the Bishop 
O’Brien, on account of his father’s territory. , For Sir Richard Bingham, after 
he had put Mahon O’Brien to death, had given up his [Mahon’s] territory to the 
aforesaid George ; and he [Turlough] persevered in his endeavours to recover 
his patrimony, until he slew George on this occasion. And he [George] was 
buried in the monastery of Ennis. 

The son of O’Conor Kerry (Donough Mael, the son of Conor, son of Conor, 
son of John), was slain in the month of August, by a party of the soldiers of 
the Earl of Desmond, namely, by the sons of Manus Oge, son of Manus, son of 
Edmond Mac Sheehy; and that slaying was deemed a great misfortune! by the 
Earl; for O’Conor himself (John) was his ally in war, as was his brother, this 
Donough [who was slain], and all who were in their terrritory. 

John, the son of Gilla-Duv, son of James O’Kennedy, from Baile-an- 
Gharrdha-Chnuic-Sithe Una”, in Ormond, was slain by Hugh, the son of Mur- 
rough O’Kennedy, from Ballyquirk’. 

The Prior of Lothra’ in Ormond (John, the son of John, son of Gillapatrick 
O’Hogan), was slain by a party of the O’Kennedys in the month of July. 

More, the daughter of Donnell, son of Conor, son of Turlough O’Brien, 
died in the month of January. She was a woman praiseworthy in the ways of 
woman. 

The Earl of Thomond (Donough, the son of Conor O’Brien), returned 
from England in the month of January, and remained for some time afterwards 
with the Earl of Ormond, in the country of the Butlers. 

One of O’Neill’s sons, namely, Con, the son of Hugh, son of Ferdorcha, 
son of Con Bacagh, went, in the month of January, on a visit among the friends 
and warlike confederates of his father in Leinster and Munster, to ascertain 
who they were that were firm in their friendship and promises to O'Neill and 
the Irish. He remained in those territories during the greater part of the 
Spring, obtaining provisions for his soldiers, and confirming them in the war 


brother of Hogan O’Hogan, of the castle of Thomas, son of Siacus, son of Conor, Bishop oi 
Ardcrony, near Nenagh, is given differently by Killaloe.” It is probable that Mac Firbis has 
Duald Mac Firbis, as follows: ‘‘John, son of omitted a generation i.e. Gilla-Patrick, be- 
John, son of Melaghlin, son of John, son of tween John and Melaghlin. 


2096 ANNdGZa RIOshachtTa EIREAGNN. [1599. 


bai 1omatais! comne, 4 capaccpad etip an mac pin uf nell 7 Mac iapla 
TuadmMuMan .1. TAOS Mac concobain ui bniain an Zac caeb vo Shionainn. 

Toippdealbac, mac vomnaill, mic concobaip ui bmn oporttad 6ccbaid 
| aépa cuapapcoal 1 pprontopac na bhiadna po vo congnam lap an mbain- 
poscan 1 nashand a hfpccanac. Olpbpatain 6ce 1apla tuadmuman .1. com- 
nall, mac concobaip, mic vonnchand vo bch 1 ccfnour, 7 nm ccodnacup muin- 
vine 1apla Tuaomuman ag congnam blop lap an mbainmiogain. 

lan ngaboul na Luinge Saranaige pin tan a TCANZaman tuap vo TADS catoc, 
mac tommpoealbag, mic matgZamna po Par motuccad miomumncfnary, 4 
aippoe Cppaonta etip € 7 an mac pin an rapla.1. vomnall. Oo cua an cads 
rin1ccfnn ianla ofpmuman, 7 do pome a muinnc{pup map sac pann ele oan 
c{ngaul a ccon pmipp. lan ccoct vo tadg 1apccain can Sionaimn cucc 1onn- 
paighio omoche ap an é6cc macaém an domnall ua bmiam an peaccmad la 
vécc Do mi pebnu 50 cill Muipe 6 mbpacain. Oo sabad 7 00 Zonad vomnall 
lony, 7 po manbad onons va daoimb o1olmume. Ruccad é€ pfin von vin bic 
o1a 1omcomf(ce co na baoi act peactmain itlcam an can do Lficcead amach 
é 5an uppaoa, Zan apach. 

Ua vomnall 1. Aod puad, mac Coda, mic masnurpa, bat prde na comnaide 
1 mbanle an mécaig 1 cconncaé pligis 6 po ppaoince cat mn Ata bude 1 
nuptopach Cugupc 50 péil bisve na bhadna po. ba paoa laippium gan vol 
pM ccoicecpich up an pé pin 7 ni Frdin cade an Tionad epoalca ippasad uc 
ni po paccenb apd, n6 aancionn, diamain na opoibél 1 ccoiccead connact na 
po mnpercaip, n6 na capo sell, edine uadaib, Senmota tuadmuma an 
cyano. Ro péccnad imonpo plois(o larp do toct 1 TTUGDMUMaIN In Ecmains 
na pee pempaite. Tangacap tna cenel cconaill céccup ma ciondl. Ro 
bad oibpioe Cod écc, mac Cova oub mic Cloda puaiwd, mic nell sarpb 
uf vomnaill, Niall sanb, mac cumn, mic an calbars, mic magnura, mic Coda 
ouib, O vocancais Sfan 6cc, mac Sain, mic Felim mic concobain canpais, 
O baoigill Tads occ, mac Taldcc, mic Toippodeatbans, mic neill, Mac puibne 


P Teige, the son of Conor.—This Teige was the except that he had three illustrious sons, Colo- 
brother of Donough, fourth Earl of Thomond, nel Dermot, surnamed the Good, Colonel Mur- 
who was very loyal to the Queen and her go- tough, who figured during Cromwell’s usurpa- 
yernment. Teige seems to have been disaf- tion, and Turlough. 
fected, but very little of his history is known, 9 Kilmurry-Ibrickane.—This is the name of a 


1599. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2097 


in which they were [engaged]. There was a communication and friendly cor- 
respondence:carried on between this son of O’Neill and the son of the [late] Earl 
of Thomond (Teige, the son of Conor’ O’Brien), on both sides of the Shannon. 

Turlough, the son of Donnell, son of Conor O’Brien, hired soldiers and 
mercenaries in the very beginning of this year, to assist the Queen against her 
enemies. The young brother of the Earl of Thomond, also Donnell, the son 
of Conor, son of Donough, had the leading command of the Earl of Thomond’s 
people in assisting the Queen. 

After the taking of the English ship, of which we have above treated, by 
Teige Caech, the aaa of Turlough Mac Mahon, an appearance of enmity and 
an indication of contention arose between him and this son of the Earl, i. e. 
Donnell. Teige repaired to the Earl of Desmond and made his friendship 
with him, like every other party who had ratified their treaty with him. After 
Teige had returned across the Shannon, he made a nocturnal assault upon 
young Donnell at Kilmurry-Ibrickane’, on the seventeenth day of the month of 
February. He wounded and made a prisoner of Donnell, and slew many of 
his faithful people; and he conveyed him to Dunbeg to be confined, but he 
was only a week confined there, when he was set at liberty without securities 
or conditions. 

O'Donnell Hugh: i.e. Roe, the son of Hugh, son of Manus, had resided at 
Ballymote, in the county of Sligo, from the gaining of the battle of Ath-Buidhe, 
in the beginning of August, to the festival of St. Bridget in this year. He felt 
it long to have remained during this time without gomg into some enemy’s 
territory, but he knew not to what particular place he should go; for he had 
not left a quarter, limit, wilderness, or recess, in the whole province of Con- 
naught [the inhabitants of] which he had not plundered, or from which he had 
not taken pledges and hostages, save Thomond alone. Wherefore, at the time 
aforesaid, he ordered an army to be mustered in order to proceed into Thomond. 
First of all assembled the Kinel-Connel, among whom were Hugh Oge, the son 
of Hugh Duy, son of Hugh Roe, son of Niall Garv O’Donnell; and Niall Garv’, 
the son of Con, son of Calvagh, son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv; O'Doherty 
(John Oge, the son of Felim, son of Conor Carragh) ; O’Boyle (Teige Oge, the 


church and parish in the barony of Ibrickan, in t Niall Garv.—This is the Niall who afterwards 
the county of Clare. betrayed Hugh Roe O’Donnell to the English. 


ee 


2098 aNNaca RIOshachta eElReEaNN. 


(1599. 


panace oomnall, mac topdealbars, mic maolmuipe, Mac purbne basaineac 
vonnchad, mac maolmuipe mApgsisg, mic maolmuine, mic nell, ;aopide ule 
co na pocnaicaibh. CTanaice 1pin coipcfpcal céona Magmodip Cod mac con- 
Connacht mic conconnacht, mic conconnacht, mic bmain, mic Pilip, mic 
CTomaip,7 Mac ui puaine .1. tcadce mac bmiann, mic brain ballons, mic eogam, 
yan Mac Uilham ovo hoiponead la hUa noomnaill pin wap an can pm 
1, Tepeltt mac uaceip clocais mic Slain, mic oilueparp. 

lan ccoéc do na maitib pm ule co na pocparcce do Parsi Us vormnall 
50 baile an Mhocag. Ro bai oaroble,7 viomac an cpluaig 50 po lice pluags 
ippann MhGic ulliam o1ob an cefin no biad porn 1 cevadmumam 7 ba pao 
na haps poptap codnais popnaprwe a. Mac Uitliam 7 mall sapb mac cuimn 
uf vomnaill. Ro piplo 7 po pamas lap an luce pin on cclm corp do 
Zo1yvealbacaib Fo humall clomne siobiin. Ro sabad leo von cup pin olen 
Wchapoain, 7 po manbad occ pip véce do maichib clomne gobi, sionmota 
pocae ele vo daoimb a mantle pra. Ruccpac cpfcha, aipccte, 7 éoala 
1omoa leo ag poad ooib on pamn. 

Oala Ui vomnaill co na plogaib po apecnactap oo dol1 tcUadmuMaM 4 
ni po hampipead leo Fo pangacan Zan patuccad Fo mbacapn von caeb 1pTs 
ovabamn hi cclomn Riocaino. Ro Zabad longponc l(tan laocanmac leo 1m 
That nona vo lo ap an pucobhagh ecip cill colgan 7 ano paitin. bacap in 
puide ag cinnfo a ccomaiple oup cionnur no foibepoaip an cepic namiinl sup 
a tcudcacap, 7 50 po cmtplc ni o1a Lomeb, 7 50 po twlpioc a puan coippchim 
ya nool hi ccfnn monarpcap, 7 moppaotain vo1b cen mo cat an Luct pmlotame 
baccap leo. baoan pamlond 50 mfoon o1dce. Ro poncongnad poppa 1apam 
la hUa nvomnaill eipse Zan puipech oapccnam pm ccoiccpich ma pra po bao 
poluy la vob. Otpagpioc iapam po cédoip. Cotcan pfmpa ianam f pho 
dDions5a Faca pod Zach noipech 50 pangaccapn a moichodevorl na marone 1pm 


anglice, Roevehagh, a townland containing a 
small village in the parish of Killeely, barony 


’ Umhall of Clann- Gibbon: i.e. Upper Umhall 
or Murresk, in which the Mac Gibbons, now 


Gibbons, were seated. 

* Leath Ardan, now Lahardaun, a lough in the 
townland of Ballyballinaun, parish of Agha- 
gower, barony of Burrishoole, and county of 
Mayo.—Ordnance Map, sheet 88. 

4 Ruaidh-Bheitheach: i.e. the red birch, now 


of Dunkellin, and county of Galway.—See this 
place referred to at the years 1116 and 1143, in 
the earlier portion of these Annals, as published 
by Dr. O’Conor. See also the map to Z'ribes and 
Customs of Hy-Many. 

* Between Kilcolgan and Ardrahin.—The ham- 


1599. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2099 


son of Teige, son of Turlough, son of Niall); Mac Sweeny Fanad (Donnell, 
the son of Turlough, son of Mulmurry); and Mac Sweeny Banagh (Donough, 
the son of Mulmurry Meirgeach, son of Mulmurry, son of Niall): all these 
with their forces. Into the same rendezvous came Maguire (Hugh, the son of 
Cuconnaught, son of Cuconnaught, son of Cuconnaught, son of Brian, son of 
Philip, son of Thomas); the son of O'Rourke (Thomas, the son of Brian, son 
of Brian Ballagh, son of Owen); and the Mac William, whom O’Donnell him- 
self had some time before nominated, namely, Theobald, son of Walter Kittagh, 
son of John, son of Oliver. 

When all these ‘chieftains had come with their forces to Ballymote, to 
O'Donnell, they formed so numerous and vast an army that he sent a force 
into the territory of Mac William, while he himself should be in Thomond; 
and the chieftains who were [appointed] leaders of this force were Mac Wil- 
liam and Niall Garv, the son of Con O'Donnell. This force searched and 
mightily overran [the country] from the eastern extremity of Costello to 
Umhall of Clann-Gibbon‘, and during that excursion took the island of Leath 
Ardan‘, and slew eighteen of the chief men of the Clann-Gibbon, besides many 
other persons. They carried off great preys, plunders, and spoils, on their 
return from the territory. 

As for O'Donnell and his forces, they marched forward to proceed into 
Thomond, and made no delay until they arrived, without being observed, in- 
side the river in Clanrickard; and in the evening they pitched an extensive 
camp of armed heroes at Ruaidh-Bheitheach", between Kilcolean and Ardrahin™. 
Here they remained to consult with each other as to how they should attack 
the strange territory towards which they had come; and, having eaten some of 
their provisions*, they [all] went to take a sleep, except the sentinels, before 
they should undertake their great journey and toil. Thus they remained until 
midnight, when O’Donnell commanded them to rise up without delay, to march 
into the neighbouring territory before the day should break upon them. They 
rose up forthwith, and proceeded straight onwards by each direct road, until, 


let of Roevehagh is nearly due east of Kilcolgan, O’Donnell, by Cucogry O’Clery, which states, 
and not exactly between it and Ardrahin. ‘that after having pitched their camp and 

* Eaten some of ther provisions.—All this is _ lighted fires, they sat down to take refreshments 
much better told in the Life of Hugh Roe and to drink to each other in ale and Spanish 


1 Es oy 


2100 annaza rIoshachtd €IReEaNN. (1599. 


ccfnn ton do coill 6 pplannchada, vo tmloca céd ceneoil ppfpmaic 1 tcuad- 
mumaim. Ro pannpac a pefimelca an oi pm. Ro lficcitt opong d10b don 
caob bud cuald iptec 1 mboipinn 1m cads ua puaipc, 7 ™m Mac puibne 
mbazgamech, 7 opong ele cfp ipceac g0 baile uf occa na coillead moine, 50 
culms ui deaohaid, 50 vopup baile uf gmobca. Oo deachawd maguiodip Fo 
nopuins moin vo plos amaille pmp [co hamp Ui Chuinn]. Oo caéo tha 
Ua oomnall 50 tcotacht 7 50 cous a Plog amaille pmp ounplap colle 
6 pplannchada, vo bealac an piodpanl Fo cill nsme baoit 1 nuaccan valecaip 
ja midmfoon Laoi. Socut an luct 00 choroh budlp, tap a nap bud cucnd, do 
opum pronnslaryy, Do Copad finn, 7 50 cill mgme baoich 1 ccomdcal { Domnall. 
Tuccad dia parccid an ou pin cpeaca ceneol pefpmaic ule on diplnt, 50 
sito colum cille,7 50 colaig Cumann, 6 cluam panle(pnars go Lim an eich. 

Ni acc la Mac us puaince na la Mac pwbne cece na cfno la cneacanb 
bone in coharg pm. Ni pamec blop la Maguidip cect von lic ale, an po 


sabracan poe Longpont m Zac ainm inpucc avhang poppa. 
lan mbfiz hn ppopplonsponc oUa vomnaill m aohang pin hi cell mgine baat 
po paccaib an banle an a banach ma mfoon lat, appead do Deacand 1 TTMMOCaIT 


wine, without fear or dread, in the territory 
of their enemy.”—O’ Reilly’s copy, p. 61. 

¥ Coill-ObhFhlannchadha: i.e. the wood of 
the Ui-Flancy, a woody district in the parish 
of Kilkeedy, in the north-east of the barony of 
Inchiquin, and county of Clare. 

* Baile- Ui-Ogain: i. e. O’Hogan’s town, now 
Ballyhogan, a townland in the parish of Dysart, 
barony of Inchiquin, and county of Clare. Coill 
mhor, i.e. the great wood, was the name of a 
woody district comprising the lands of Bally- 
hogan and several of the adjoining townlands. 

* Tully-O’ Dea, a townland in the same parish, 
about three miles to the north of the church of 
Dysart. 

» Baile- Ui-Ghriobhtha: i.e. the town of O’Griffy, 
now Ballygriffy, a townland containing the ruins 
of a castle in the same parish. In a Description 
of the County of Clare, written about the year 
1584, this castle is called Ballygriffie, and men- 


tioned as belonging to O’Griffie. 


© Inchiquin.—The Four Masters have left the 
sense imperfect here, and four blank lines. It is 
stated in the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, that 
Maguire, with his part of the army, set out to 
scour the lands near Kilnaboy, where he met 
Conor O’Brien, whom he wounded, and took 
prisoner, and carried to his (O’Brien’s) own 
castle of Inchiquin, which he took, and in 
which he remained till the next day. 

4 Bealach-an-Fhiodfail.—The position of this 
road is still pointed out by the old natives of the 
parish of Kilkeedy, as extending from Rockforest 
to Kilnaboy. Fhiodhfail was the name of a wood 
now called Coill an fiodpail, comprised in the 
townland of Rockforest (which is but an attempt 
at translating it from piod, a forest, and pail or 
ail, a stone or rock), in the parish of Kilkeedy, 
about five miles eastward from Corofin. 

© Cill-Inghine Bhaoith, now Kilnaboy, near 
Corofin.—See it mentioned before under 1573. 

* Druim-Finnghlaisi.—This name is now ob- 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9101 


by morning twilight, they arrived in the eastern extremity of Coill-O’bhFlann- 
chadha’, in the cantred of Kinel-Fearmaic, in Thomond. Here they formed 
marauding parties, and sent one of them northwards into Burrén, under the 
command of Teige O’Rourke and Mac Sweeny Banagh; and another party 
southwards into Baile-Ui-Ogain’ of Coill-mhor, to Tully-O’Dea*, and to the gate 
of Baile-Ui-Ghriobhtha®’. Maguire, with a strong body of his forces, went 
forth {towards Inchiquin*]. O’Donnell [himself] proceeded, with the flower 
and main body of the army, through the middle of Coill-O’bhFlannchadha, 
Bealach-an-Fhiodhfail*, and, before mid-day, arrived at Cill-Inghine-Bhaoith*, 
in the upper part of Dal-gCais. Those who had gone to the south returned to 
the north by Druim-Finnghlaisi‘ and Corofin, and joimed O'Donnell at Cill- 
Inghine-Bhaoith. Thither the spoils of all Kinel-Fearmaic, from Diseart*® to 
Glencolumbkille*, and to Tulach-Chumann', and from Cluain-Sailchearnaigh* 
to Leim-an-eich', were brought to O’Donnell. 

The son of O’Rourke and Mac Sweeny were not able to return to him on 
that night with the spoils of Burren ; nor was Maguire able to return from the 
other direction, for they had pitched their camps wherever the night overtook 


them. 


O'Donnell remained that night encamped at Cill-Inghine-Bhaoith, and left 
it before noon on the following day ; and he then proceeded to Kilfenora, in 


solete, but the situation of the place is certain, 
as it is shewn on the engraved map from the 
Down Survey, under the anglicised form of 
Drumfinglass, as lying due south of Corofin, 
and between it and Dysart. 

8 Disert, now Dysart. 

» Glencolumbkille, 5\{no coluim alle: i.e. St. 
Columbkille’s Glen. This is a wild and beau- 
tiful valley in the east of the parish of Carron, 
barony of Burren, and county of Clare, and close 
to the verge of the county of Galway. There 
is in this valley a small church dedicated to St. 
Columbkille, and near it is the residence of 
Terence O’Brien, Esq., now the senior repre- 
sentative of Donnell Spaineach, the son of Col. 
Murtough O’Brien, who capitulated with Gene- 
ral Waller. 


i Tulach Chumann, now Tullycummon, a town- 
land in the parish of Kilnaboy, adjoining Cas- 
tletown in the barony of Burren. 

* Cluain-sailchearnaigh, now Cloonselherny, a 
townland containing the ruins of a castle, in the 
east of the parish of Kilkeedy, barony of Inchi- 
quin, and county of Clare, and close to the boun- 
dary of the county of Galway. 

1 Leim-an-eich, i.e. Saltus Equi, now Lemaneh, 


a townland containing the ruins of a large castle 


in the parish of Kilnaboy, in the barony of In- 
chiquin, close to the boundary of that of Bur- 
ren. This castle was erected by the ancestors 
of Sir Lucius O’Brien of Dromoland. 
the situation of the places here mentioned, it is 


From 


quite evident that Kinel-Fearmaic comprised 
the entire of the present barony of Inchiquin. 


2102 GNNaZa RIOSshachTd EIRECNN. 


[1599. 


6€D Concumpuad go cill plonnabnac. Ro pgaoilic pccermealea eipte poe bud 
ofpp 50 hhons, sup an mbpfhincip pefmacans, 7 cconcamarg [cconmacang | 
50 vonuyp imp) Ofomam, so cill eppurcc Lonain, 50 banle padin, 7 Tap a nap 
pon 50 cll Flomabpac co na ccpfchaib,7 co na névalaib 1 ccomne Ui vom- 
nall. Cnoap hipwmde 50 hopbanac co puccpac a plois pain ap Zach apo 1 
mbaccap. Tanaice om Mac ui pucipe,7 Mac puibne bagameac Fo ccnfchaib 
bonne via parsid. Tanaicce ona Maguidin so ccpfcab 7 Fo naincemb 1omoa 
dia 1oMnpalsid von LHe ale. An can ac comaine Ua ovomnaill na cnuie aga 
Vionad, 7 aga noubad ma uptimcell vo tamntib vo tpomalmaib gaca cipe 
cTpepa coudcacan a plas. Ro ctmall poadh cap a ap do dpomclad na 
bonne bfnngcanbe a moich néll na marone van boinim Fo por Zab porme oon 
nuacongbail oon cuplach, 50 maimptin copcumpuad, vo capcain na ccler- 
peach 7 do pone capipfm na howdce pm ipin puba 1 maptan ua priacnac 
mone. Oo taéo an a banach tne uaccan clone mocaino, la vonup banle 
acha an pros. Ni hatmypoth aimtecta 1apam o ca pin 50 banle an Mhocagh, 
(cc po baf Mac wlham 7 Niall sapb ua comnaill pon a cionn iWlGtimel 
Ua mame 50 naincemb, 7 50 nfoalarb 1omda leo a pann Mhfc william. 

Ro iomtpamlas an tpaoi pfinchad 7 Pp dana Mac bnuaroloa Maorlin 
65 5up bo 1 noiogail dropccaoilce Smanain ois la Muincipcac mop mac 


™ Kidhneach, now Inagh, the name of a river 
and of a Roman Catholic parish near Milltown 
Malbay, in the west of the county of Clare. 

" Brentir of the Fearmacaigh and Cormacaigh: 
Le. the fetid district of the Kinel-Fearmaic and 
Ui-Cormaic, so called from its situation on the 
frontiers of the territories of these tribes. Bren- 
ter, or, as it is now locally called, 6péinczpe, is 
a district comprising seven townlands, lying 
north-east of Sliabh Callain, or Mount Callan, 


in the west of the county of Clare. A family of, 


the O’Connells were transplanted hither, from 
Kerry, in Cromwell’s time; but the whole dis- 
trict is now the property of the Marquis of 
Thomond, under whom Charles O’Connell, Esq., 
of Ennis, rents two townlands of this district. 

° Inis-Dimain: i.e. Diman’s holm or island, 
now Ennistimon, a small town in the west of the 


county of Clare. 

P Cill-Easbuig-Lonain.—This is a mistake of 
the transcriber for cll eapnoig plannain: i.e. 
the church of Bishop Flannan, now Killaspug- 
lonane, a townland containing an extensive bu- 
rial ground, in the barony of Corcomroe, and 
county of Clare. 

4 Baile-Phaidin, now Ballyphaudeen, a town- 
land in the parish of Kilmacreehy, in the barony 
of Corcomroe. 

* Nuachongbhail, now anglice Noughaval, an 
old church, giving name to a townland and pa- 
rish in the barony of Burren and county of 
Clare, and adjoining the parishes of Kilnaboy 
and Kilfenora. 

° Turlach, i.e. dried lough. There are many 
places of this name in the northern part of the 
county of Clare; but the Turlach here referred 


1599. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2103 


the cantred of Corcomroe. From thence he dispatched marauding parties 
southwards to Eidneach”, to Brentir of the Fearmacaigh", to Cormacaigh, to the 
gate of Inis-Dimain’, to Cill-Easbuig-Lonain?,and to Baile-Phaidin*,who returned 
to him to Kilfenora, in. an easterly direction, loaded with spoils and booty. 
O'Donnell remained here until the following day, when his troops came up 
with him from every quarter in which they had been dispersed. The son of 
O’Rourke and Mac Sweeny Banagh came up with the spoils of Burren; and 
Maguire came up from another direction with much booty. When O’Donnell 
saw the surrounding hills covered and darkened with the herds and numerous 
cattle of the territories through which his troops had passed, he proceeded on 
his way homewards, over the chain of rugged-topped mountains of Burren ; 
and, passing by Nuachongbhail’, Turlach*, the monastery of Corcomroe, and 
Carcair-na-gClefreach’, arrived at Rubha”, in the west of Hy-Fiachrach-Aidhne, 
where he stopped for the night. On the morrow he passed through the upper 
part of Clanrickard, and by the gate of Athenry. His adventures from this 
forward are not related, until he arrived at Ballymote, except that he was met 
by Mac William and Niall Garv O'Donnell at the frontiers of Hy-Many, with 
many preys, and spoils, and booty, which they had carried off from Mac Wil- 
liam’s country. 

The learned historian and poet, Mac Brody (Maoilin Oge), represented that 
it was in revenge of the demolition of Grianan Oiligh’, formerly, by Murtough 


to is Turlach-na-gcoilean, an old castle to the 
right of the road as you go from Corofin to the 
New Quay, in the barony of Burren, and county 
of Clara. It is very near the old church of Ter- 
mon Cronan. 

* Carcair-na-gCleireach, i.e. the Narrow Pass 
of the Clerics or Priests. This name is still 
well-known (as the Editor has good reason to 
remember), and is applied to a steep pass over 
a rocky hill in Burren, in the townland of Ros- 
salia, parish of Abbey-Corcomroe, barony of 
Burren, and county of Clare. It is called in 
English “the Corker road.” 

4 Rubha, now Roo, or Rue, a townland near 
the little town of Kinvarra, in the barony of 
Kiltartan, and county of Galway, and on the 


boundary of the barony of Burren, in the 
county of Clare. A castle called Coradh-an- 
Rubha, anglice Corranrue, which belonged to 
O’Heyne, stood at this place till the year 1755, 
when it fell at the very moment that the earth- 
quake happened at Lisbon. 

W Grianan- Oiligh, now Greenan-Ely. ‘The ruins 
of this fortress of the Kings of the northern Hy- 
Niall race, are still to be seen on Green- Hill, in 
the barony of Inishowen, and county of Done- 
gal, about six miles 
Derry.—See the Ordnance Memoir of the pa- 


to the north-west of 
rish of Templemore. This fortress was demo- 
lished, and many of its stones carried off as a 
trophy, by Murtough More O’Brien, in the year 
1101. 


2104 aNNaza RIOshachtTa eElRECNN. [1599. 


coinpoealbas [mic ctards] mic bmiamn bonome Pecc pram Ro cloarg via (ca 
epecame colaim cille pon piol mbmaim) Léipcpeachad 7 lLammopead cuad- 
muman La hua noomnaill oon cup pm, 7 taimec an Maoflin 6ce céona 1 cefnn 
Ui vomnaill ve chuing10h capice a Cpwmd Tanatacapn opons oo na plosanb hi- 
Pm. 7 DO pavad 06 In 61Se conad ann do pome Maoilin an pann 


Oo bat 1 nodn 1 noiogarl ols, 

a Qlod pumd do nlc an paid 

coct ban pluais 50 hat mas nadain, 
a tTuald 1antan cabain cag. 


IS an cchod peaccmain vo Manca tanarce Zobepnoip coiccid connact 
1. Sip conepp chpont 50 Zaillim so plos mop vo oagoaoimb ucaple 7 50 pais- 
omubh romda amarlle pura. lap mbft 061 ngap vo peccmaim 1 ngcallimh 
po cuin a peacc, nd a hoct vo banvadaib Zalloa 7 Zao1velca Fo conntaé an 
clan ora plop cia dob umal, no vob (ppumal oon bampiogain nce do 6poag 
cTepoice ofolmain 7 captin Upcain, 7 Sippiam conntaé an claip pin 2. Ripofpo 
rsoploce in cefnnup poppa go poccain ooib co haipm 1 mbaoi comppoealbac 


* The curse of Columbkille-—The reader will 
bear in mind that the Earl of Thomond was 
at this time a Protestant, and exercising the 
‘“‘bitterness of marshall law” against the Irish 
In the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, by 
Cucogry O’Clery, the words in which St. Co- 
lumbkille is said to have delivered this pro- 


poets. 


phesy are quoted, but they are decidedly mo- 
dern, and fabricated for the occasion.—See the 
year 1572, p. 1657, supra. 

¥ Land of Magh-Adhmr: i.e. Thomond, so 
called poetically from Magh Adhair, the place 
where the O’Briens were inaugurated. This 
place, now called in English Moyry Park, is si- 
tuated in the townland of Toonagh, parish of 
Clooney, barony of Upper Bunratty, and county 
of Clare, and about three miles and a half west 
from Tulla. The mound on which the O’Briens 
were inaugurated is still to be seen at this place. 
It is of an irregular form, and measures 102 feet 
in length, and 82 feet in breadth. 


According to all the ancient Irish accounts of 
the Fir Bolgs, this place received its name from 
Adhar, son of Umor (the brother of Aengus, 
who built the stone fort of Dun-Aengusa, on 
the Great Island of Aran), who was chief of this 
plain in the first century, long before the race 
of Heber and Oilioll Olum had obtained domi- 
nion in Thomond. For some account of the 
inauguration of chiefs of the O’Briens, at this 
place, see the Caithreim Thoirdhealbhaigh, at the 
years 1242, 1267, 1277, and 1311. See also Cir- 
cuit of Muircheartach Mac Neill, p. 47, printed for 
the Irish Archeological Society, where the si- 
tuation of this mound was pointed out for the 
first time since the invention of printing. 

* From the North.—This line is very artfully 
contrived by Mac Brody, who intended that 
O’Donnell and Teige, the brother of the Earl 
of Thomond, should understand by it, that the 
Irish of the south expected that their deliverer 
would come from the north; and, on the other 


1599. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2105 


More, son of Turlough [son of Teige], son of Brian Boroimhe, that God, in 
consequence of the curse of Columbkille* upon the O’Briens, had permitted 
Thomond to be totally plundered and devastated on this occasion by O’Donnell. 
This Maoilin Oge came to O'Donnell, to request of him the restoration of his 
cattle, which a party of the troops had carried off ; and they were all given back 
to him; upon which Maoilin composed the following quatrain : 


It was destined that, in revenge of Oileach, 

O Hugh Roe! the Prophet announced, 

Thy troops should come to the land of Magh-Adhair’; 
Fromethe North’ the aid of all is sought. 


In the first week of March the Governor of the province of Connaught, Sir 
Conyers Clifford, went to Galway with a great army of distinguished gentlemen 
and soldiers. After having been nearly a week in Galway, he sent seven or 
eight companies of English and Irish soldiers to the county of Clare, to know 
who were loyal or disobedient to the Queen there. He appointed Theobald 
Dillon, Captain Lester, and Richard Scurlock’, the sheriff of the county of Clare, 
as commanders over them, until they should arrive at the place where Turlough 


hand, if, in case he should be persecuted for it 
by his own lord and master, the Earl of Tho- 
mond, he could shew that it should be punc- 
tuated thus: 


“Oo bai 1 nodn 1 noiogxail Orlg, 
Cod puaid, vo nfe an paid, 
Coéz ban pluaig Fo hat marge n-Cdcap 


CQ cua. laneéan cabaip cag.” 


“It was in destiny in revenge of Oileach, 
O, Hugh Roe, the prophet announced 
The coming of your host to the land of Magh 
Adhair 

From the North. Let the help of all be 

sought.” 

By understanding the quatrain in this way, 
the last three words would mean nothing more 
than, ‘‘ The Lord help us all; and it would 
convey no direct insult to the Earl of Thomond 
(Donough O’Brien, fourth Earl), who firmly be- 


lieved that it had been prophesied that he him- 
self was predestined to be the instrument in 
subduing the northern rebels.—See Pacata Hi- 
bernia, book 2, c. xxi. That St. Columbkille had 
predicted that the northern Hy-Niall would one 
day plunder ‘Thomond in revenge for the demo- 
lition of the northern palace of Oileach, was not 
too hard for this Earl’s belief, and that it was 
fulfilled on this occasion, when his territory 
was overrun with fire and sword by Hugh Roe 
O’Donnell, was a harmless inference by Mac 
Brody, who may have appeared to regret it 
before the Earl; but the last line, if read, “* 
zuaid 1anzap cabuip Cais, from the North the 
aid or relief of all is sought,” would cause the 
Earl to exercise the ‘‘ bitterness of Marshall 
law” against him, as recommended by the d- 
vine poet Spenser. 

* Scurlock.—This name is now more usually 
written Sherlock. 


12 mM 


2106 QNNQZa RIOsShaAcnNTa EIREGNN. 


[1599. 


6 bmam oa czuccad map an ccéona ugoappap uaipcib. Gavan an céo 
aohang In cell caeior 1 noipt(p o ppelpmaic ap poccain vob don Tip. 

Oc cualacan 1 mbaof oo daoimb o1iolmuine pop mumc(pup Caroce mic 
concobaip uf bniain poccain voibpioe don cin bavan ma noinchill, 7 ace vol 
tne bealac an piodpal o cill caofor prap vo Munntip na bamplogna an na 
bapac po 1onnpaisplot Muintip TADS 140 Fo po manbavd oaoine 1omda (conpa 
va Zac lech. Gen bo mo po mapbad vo muincip na bampiogna, m hinmpetp 
ect oipdeapic d10b vo tuicim. Ro manbad vo Lit na ngaowdel ouine varal vo 
piol mbmam a. olapmaitc puad, mac mupchaid, mic concobaip. Can a 
nofnnad ann vo Liccead an typlige vo mucin na bainpiogna 50 po sabpac 
capiplm 7 comnoange hi ccill gine baoit 1 noeipead Laot. 

Apread po chinn cadg mac concobann ui bmain ian pin pfidruccad pip an 
mbounniosain, 7 d1ulcad via ampaib, 7 50 ponnnadac vo Luce cabainte an 
cachain pemnaice. Ro cup a tecta do paisid tepoicc oiolmuin Zo cill 
insine baoit, 7 sup an ngobepnoin oon sarllim. 

Ro paccaib cepoicc oiolmuin 7} muimnzin na bamnmosna cill msine baoit 
ap a banach, 7 vo codpioc 50 haipm 1 mbaot coippoelbac mac vomnaill 
uf bmain bai ma clit poyccand, 7 ma culons coipl(nga ag sach aén le buo 
cal do mumnzip na bampiosna. O pangaccap pom 7 coippdealbac hi cel 
a cele po gabpac 1ompurde 1m Ccatonp mionain 1 mbapuncachc Chopcmoo- 
puad bonle e1prde bat inact ucom laccponn, 7 ma mume miinle sup a cciccld 
plao, 7 papuccad an cine ina timcell a lop coippoelbais, mic munchaid, mic 
concobaip ui bmain oume uapal eipde bat hi pann saoidel an can pin. Rob 
éicc(n an boanle pin do tabaine an lam muimncine na baanmiognea. 

Ro paccanb Comnpdealbac 7 cepoitt co na mumntip cataip mionam, 7 
po coiploce hi cconcbaipeind iaptanas do dénam pioda le TadsZ caoe mac 
mactpzamna 76 na po peopat a pioduccad puccypac cp(cha 7 évala 1omoa ap 


an tin. Coctapn poip ap a haicle oo concobaipeind capt{pars, 7 1apam 50 


> Cill-Caeidi: the church of St. Caeidi, now the Earl of Thomond’s brother. 


Kilkeedy, an old church giving name to a parish 
in the east of the barony of Inchiquin, and county 
of Clare. The Ui-Fearmaic, otherwise Cinel- 
Fearmaic, were the O’ Deas and their correlatives, 
whose territory comprised all this barony. 

° Teage, the son of Conor O’ Brien He was 


4 Bealach-an-Fhiodhfail, now the Rockforest 
road, extending from Kilkeedy to Kilnaboy, in 
the barony of Inchiquin. 

® Cathair-Mionain, now anglice Caherminane, 
a castle in the parish of Killelagh, barony of 
Corcomroe.—See note ®, under the year 1591, 


1599.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2107 


O’Brien was, to whom authority over them was likewise given. On their arrival 
in the territory, they remained the first night at Cill-Caeidi’, in the east of 
Hy-Fearmaic. 

When the faithful friends of Teige, the son of Conor O’Brien‘, had heard 
of their arrival in this country, they lay in ambush, and, as the Queen’s people 
were on the following day marching westwards from Cill-Caeidi, through Bea- 
lach-an-Fhiodhfail*, Teige’s people attacked them, and many persons were slain 
between them on both sides; but although there were more of the Queen’s 
people slain, the death of no distinguished man of them is recorded. [But] 
on the side of the Irish was slain a gentleman of the O’Briens, namely, Dermot 
Roe, the son of Murrough, son of Conor. Besides what was done there, the 
pass was ceded to the Queen’s people, who at the close of the day halted and 
rested at Cill-Inghine-Bhaoith [Kilnaboy]. 

The resolution which Teige, the son of Conor O’Brien, adopted after this 
was, to make peace with the Queen, and to dismiss his hirelings, and especially 
those who had made the aforesaid attack. He sent his messengers to Theobald 
Dillon, to Cill-Inghine-Bhaoith, and to the Governor, to Galway. 

On the following day Theobald Dillon and the Queen’s party left Cill- 
Inghine-Bhaoith, and proceeded to the residence of Turlough, the son of Don- 
nell O’Brien, who was a sheltering fence and alighting hill to any of the Queen’s 
people that wished to go to him. When they and Turlough met together, they 
laid siege to Cathair-Mionain’, in the barony of Corcomroe, a castle which was 
then a den of robbers and a cover for plunderers, into which the plunder and 
spoil of the surrounding country were wont to be carried to Turlough, the son 
of Murrough, son of Conor O’Brien, a gentleman who was in alliance with the 
Irish at that time. The castle was obliged to be surrendered to the Queen’s 
people. 

Turlough and Theobald, with their people, then left Cathair-Mionain, and 
proceeded to West Corca-Bhaiscinn‘, to make their peace with Teige Caech 
Mac Mahon ; but, as they could not come on terms of peace with him, they 
carried off many preys and spoils from the territory. Then, after this, they 
passed eastwards into East Corca-Bhaiscinn®, and afterwards to Ennis, where 


p- 1907, supra. Moyarta, in the south-west of the county of Clare. 
* West Corca-Bhaiscinn: i.e. the barony of & East Corca-Bhaiscinn: i.e, the barony of 


12 M2 


2108 QNNaza RIOSshachta eiReEaNnnN. 


(1599. 


hmp, 50 mbaof Seippion cfice la véce aca 1 ninip, 7 oaome uaiple an tine 4 
na Conntaé wile acca pppfccna. CM ccionn na pee pin do veachad tepoitc 
oiolmum 7 captin lepton ap an cin ian ppaccbail clitpe mbanna pargoiuimde, 
Shippiam, 7 Shuibpippram (amanlle le haomail an ciop na bainpiogna do diol) 
ince. 

Tanaice ona 1apla Tuadmuman hi ccionn treccmaine 1ap pm don Tip ap 
mbfit 06 a ngan vo parte 1 mbuitilenacaib. O do pact Fo TUaoMUMaIn, 
appead po tall san coolad va o1dce 1 nen baile Fo nof(chaid vo diogail (ppo- 
nopa 7 1onnpaiste a o(pbpacan ap cadg caoc, mac matgamna. Ro tional 
upmon an tine ma docom do dol hn cconcbarpemd iaptanarg, 7 po puld pe 
hashaid caippse an coblaig an luan pia ceaipee by mi apml do ponnnad. 
Tuccad cnod 7 cltpa an cine ule o Cnoc dvoine, 50 Lim conculainn dia paso 
sup an ppoplongponc pin. Fuaip an cianla an baile po c{no chtpe la ap a 
haicle,7 ap ofipead paoipe na capce po tappaing an ciapla opoanap o Lum- 
neac vo dol pe hacchad an oum bicc,7 1ap puldiuccad an opdanaip pon 
rioncaib an baile ni po anpac an banoa pr haon uncon vo conté(m pa an can 
po poccnad uata an baile von 1anla, 7 ni puainpioc vo maic(m nanaconl act 
an peal bavan aga mbneit 50 Fapmain na cnoice m po cpochad ina cctip- 
ladaib race aghaid 1 naghaid. Puan an cianla otn mon meric an plpmacans 
on mod ccéona. lap nsabail na mbailcead mbonpcneac pin don 1apla po 
léice an Topvanap mop uada Zo luimneac, 7 vo CuM@d pin can pliab pop 50 
huplan cuadmuman. Tucc pé da outcapacab plin sach bonle oan Zabad 


Clonderalaw, in the south of the county of 
Clare, adjoining West Corca-Bhaiscinn. 

For the dishonour, literally, ‘for revenging 
of the dishonour and attack of his brother on 
Teige Caech Mac Mahon.” 

' Carraig-an-Chobhlaigh, i. e. the Rock of the 
Fleet, now called corruptly, in Irish, capnarg a 
cobalzaig, and anglicised Carrigaholt, a village 
in the parish and barony of Moyarta, in the 
south-west of the county of Clare, about a mile 
and a half to the north of Kileredane point. 
Near the village, on a rocky cliff overlooking 
the bay, to which it gives name, stands the 
castle of Carraig an Chobhlaigh, which was 


built by Mac Mahon, chief of West Corca- Vaskin, 
or the barony of Moyarta. It is in good repair, 
and occasionally dwelt in by Mr. Burton, to 
whose family it has belonged since the confisca- 
tion of the property of Lord Viscount Clare in 
1690. 

« Cnoc-Doire, now Knockerra, a hill situated 
close to the boundary of the baronies of Moy- 
arta and Clonderalaw, and about four miles to 
the east of the town of Kilrush, in the county 
of Clare. 

! Leim-Chonchulainn: i.e. Cuchullainn’s Leap, 
now corruptly Loophead [for Leap-head], a 
headland in the north-western extremity of the 


1599. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2109 
they held a session for fifteen days; and the gentlemen of the county in general 
attended them. At the end of this period Theobald Dillon and Captain Lester 
departed from the territory [of Thomond], leaving in it four companies of sol- 
diers, a sheriff, and a sub-sheriff, and after having received a promise that the 
Queen’s rent should be paid in it. 

About a week after this, the Earl of Thomond came into the country, after 
having been nearly a quarter of a year in the country of the Butlers. Upon 
arriving in Thomond, he proceeded, without sleeping two nights in any one 
town, until he went to take vengeance on Teige Caech Mac Mahon for the dis- 
honour’ which he had shewn to his brother, and the attack which he had made 
against him. The greater part [of the forces] of the country collected to him, 
and, marching into West Corca-Bhaiscinn, encamped before Carraig-an-Chobh- 
laigh' on the Monday before Easter, in the month of April. The property and 
cattle of the entire country, extending from Cnoc-Doire* to Leim-Chonchulainn', 
were carried to him to that camp. In four days afterwards the Earl obtained 
possession of the town ; and when the Easter holidays were over, he carried 
ordnance from Limerick for the purpose of assaulting Dunbeg™; and when the 
ordnance was planted against the castle, the warders did not await the dis- 
charge of one shot, when they surrendered the castle to the Earl; and the 
protection they obtained lasted only while they were led to the gallows-tree, 
from which: they were hanged in couples, face to face. In the same manner 
the Earl obtained possession of Dun-mor-mhic-an-Fhearmacaigh". After having 
taken these castles of Corca-Bhaiscinn, the Earl sent the great ordnance [back | 
to Limerick, and proceeded himself eastwards across the mountain to the plain 
of Thomond. He restored to the lawful inheritors every castle that had been 


county of Clare. This head is now always called cised Sline-head, and Slime-head, for Leam- 


Ceann léime, i. e. ‘ Head of the Leap” in Irish. 
Mr. Brannan, in his Irish poem describing the 
Shannon, says that Loop-head is a corrupt 
translation of Ceann léime, or Leap-head, and 
asks, if the Irish language were lost what phi- 
lologer could ever discover that Loop-head was 
a translation of Ceann léime. A still greater 
corruption of the same name has taken place in 
Connamara, where Ceann léime has been angli- 


head, 

™ Dunbeg.—See its situation already pointed 
out under the year 1598. 

1 Dun-mor-mhic-an-Fhearmacaigh : i. e. the 
great dun, or fort of the son of Fearmacach, 
now Dunmore, a ruined castle within less than 
a mile of Dunbeg, in the parish-of Killard.— 
See it already referred to under the year 


1598. 


2110 aNNaZa RIOSshachta ElReEaNN. 


(1599. 


maille le hfponoin von baunptosain. 
caiplém cluame. 7 lop Coda finn. 

lapla op eppex (1. Robfpo) v0 tect 1 nEpimn po belcame na bliadna po 
amoal vo tngeallad Fo nlomac monnmaip, 7 napmala, 7 muimppion, Puvarp, 
lucnde, bioh, 7 oighe, 7 acbfipoip luct a ppainccpiona na cangacap a hionn- 
pamcal pin oapmeal so hepmn pram guy an can pin 6 vo puacc lapla pcpans- 
boe 7 Robfict mac ptiamna le viapmaic mac mupchada la mg laigin peer 


Ro bad oibpem vome eosam, 04 banle 


ram. lap tcoct oiapla op eppex 50 banle acha chat po henpuaccnad nfite 
romoc lap, 7 po ba oibpde cétup Fac aon vo Zaoidelaib la bad autpec vol 
m acchad na bainmogna go pfuiccead maitimnap 7 papdin im Zac com va 
nofna 50 pm. 6a dona foccantaib céona Zac aén ofipennchoib a v€nad, 
50 no bifnad a baile, no a duchaig ve la Saranachaib a lop anbponlaimn, no 
forpéicene 50 ppuiccead aiplcc ma moligfoh pogap 7 eipcect von chup pn. 


Ro 


cuinead lap aniapla pin Zapapum paigoraimide maille le sac ni pangacan 


Qn a af nip b6 mop vo clannab saowel vo Cod pan cosaipm pin. 


alf 50 capnarce Pipsupa, 50 hubap cinn ctnaga Zo tnas bale oume deal- 
Zan, 50 opoiclc acha, 50 cill manncain 50 nay laig(n, 7 Zo anale bailce sen 
Ro cleclamad van lappide peacc mile parsoiuin don apmanl ap 
FMp puaip, 7 vo cud a hatch chat plan Zac noineac, uain po harpnholo 06 


mo tac. 


na bai 1 nepimn oo lucc posla na bainmosgna onfm po bad upa 06 dionn- 
paicchid nav sfpalcars perb po baoan von cup pin. Ni po hanad lap an 
ianla co na plosaib 50 pansacan 1 ccfinemfoon corccid lang{n, 7 nip bo 
paso canac 1 cefin 06 gaol laigth dionnpargid von cup pm. Roptan 
ladyoE Dan Oomnall ppamneac mac oonnchad, mic cataoin cappary cao- 


manais, 7 Uaicne, mac Rudpase dicc, mic Rudpaige ut monoa, Siol cconco- 


° Doire-Eoghain, now Derryowen, a castle in 
the parish of Kilkeedy, barony of Inchiquin, 
and county of Clare. 

P Cluain, now Cloone.—See it already referred 
to under the year 1598, supra. In 1584 the cas- 
tle of Cloone, or Cloyne, in the country of West 
Mac Namara, belonged to Donogh O’Grady.— 
MSS. T.C. D., E. 2, 14. 

4 Lis-Aedha-finn, i.e. the Fort of Hugh the 
Fair, now Lissofinn, a townland containing the 


ruins of a castle situated to the south-west of 
the village of Tulla, in the parish of Tulla, 
barony of Upper Tulla, and county of Clare. 
This place took its name from Aodh Finn, the 
ancestor of Mac Namara Finn. 

t About May.—He landed on the 15th of 
April this year, and was sworn in Dublin on 
the same day. He was invested with larger 
powers and furnished with more splendid allow- 
ances than had ever before been conferred on 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2111 


taken, to the dishonour of the Queen. Of these were Doire-Eoghain’, the two 
castle-towns of Cluain? and Lis-Aedha-finn*. 

The Earl of Essex (Robert) came to Ireland, as had been promised, about 
May‘ this year, with much wealth, arms, munition, powder, lead, food, and 
drink ; and the beholders said that so great an army had never till that time 
come to Ireland since the Earl Strongbow’ and Robert Fitz-Stephen came in 
former times with Dermot Mac Murrough, King of Leinster. When the Ear] 
had arrived in Dublin, he published many proclamations, among which the 
first was [to the effect], that every one of the Irish, who was sorry‘ for having 
opposed the Queen, should receive forgiveness and pardon in every crime they 
had till then committed. Among the same proclamations was this, that every 
one of the Irish who would assert [and prove] that they had been deprived by 
the Englishmen of their mansions or patrimonies, by force or violence, should 
be heard and attended to, and obtain a restoration of such property as he was 
unlawfully deprived of. Not many of the Irish, however, responded to these 
proclamations. 

Garrisons of soldiers, with all necessaries, were sent by this Earl to Carrick- 
fergus, to Newry, to Dundalk, to Drogheda, to Kilmantan [ Wicklow], to Naas 
of Leinster, and to other towns besides. He then selected seven thousand 
soldiers of the best of his army, and marched [them] from directly [south] 
westwards ; for he had been informed that there were not of the plunderers of 
the Queen in Ireland a tribe that could be more easily invaded than the 
Geraldines, as they were then [circumstanced]. The Earl and his troops 
never halted until they arrived in the middle of the province of Leinster; and 
[surely] his approach to the Irish of Leinster was not the visit to friends from 
afar! ‘These were Donnell Spaineach, the son of Donough, son of Cahir 
Carragh Kavanagh; Owny, the son of Rury Oge, son of Rury O’More; the 


any Lord Deputy, and provided with an army 
the largest that Ireland had ever seen landed on 
her shores, consisting of 20,000 foot and 2,000 
horse. His instructions were to prosecute the 
Ulster rebels, and to plant garrisons at Lough 
Foyle and Ballyshannon; all which he neglected, 
but wasted his time in doing little service.—See 


Camden’s Annal. Reg. Elis., A. D. 1599; P. 


O’Sullevan Beare’s Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., 
tom. 3, lib. 5, c. ix.; and Cox’s Hibernia Angli- 
cana, vol. i. p. 416. 

S Since the Earl Strongbow.—The Four Masters 
should have added that the Earl Strongbow did 
not bring so great an army into Ireland as Essex 
had on this occasion. 

t Sorry.—The language is here defective. It 


2112 


QNNaza RIOSshachTa ElREGNN. 


~ (1599. 


bap pailsis, sabal pagnanll, 7 pocade vo vaomb uaiple ele nac apmefp. 


Tuccatan om an lucc pin amaip arpmerle, eappcaipotmla, 7 vebta voilge 


ooipnfptarl 06 in Chongib aimphorb, 7 1 mbeilgib bélcumpaib 1 ccocpatcip pe 


a potle po po viotargf> mopan oo mumntip an tanta leo. 


(pn a aoi tan 


sac neccualans oa PRuaip painicc paofotd 1 mburcilepacaibh. Tice lanla 


upmumean maille le honoip, 7 le heapmecin ma chfin. Canaice om ciccfpna 


should be: ‘‘that such of the Irish as were sorry 
for having joined in the rebellion should, on re- 
turning to their allegiance, receive pardon and 
forgiveness.” 

" Gaval-Ranall: i. e. the O’Byrnes of Rane- 
lach, in the present county of Wicklow, who 
were at this time the most powerful sept of the 
O’Byrnes of Wicklow. 

“ Narrow passes.—The English writers make 
no mention of this attack by O’More; but 
O’Sullevan Beare says that five hundred of 
Essex’s army were killed by Huon (i.e. Uaithne, 
a name now sometimes anglicised Anthony) 
O’More, in a defile called Bearna na gCleti, 1. e. 
the Gap of the Feathers. This name is now ob- 
solete, nor has any evidence been yet discovered 
to prove the exact situation of the place. 

P. O’Sullevan Beare gives the following ac- 
count of Essex’s progress on this occasion in his 
Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 5, ¢. ix.: 

‘“‘Tandiu per tot regios imperatores, & exer- 
citus re infeliciter gesta, statuunt Angli sum- 
mis viribus Catholicos extinguere. In quam 
rem Robertus Essexie Comes, qui tunc tempo- 
ris onnium Anglorum primus fama rerum ges- 
tarum habebatur, authoritate nulli secundus 
Ibernie Prorex, & exercitus regij Imperator 
creatur. Qui Londino profectus sub finem 
Martij mensis anno millessimo quingentesimo 
nonagesimo nono (vt docet Camdenus) Dubh- 
linnam appulit. Vbi ex ijs, qui nuper ex An- 
glia venerant, & in Ibernia fuerant, comparato, 
quam maximo potuit, exercitu, in Onellum 
facturus expeditionem videbatur, & ita in illum 


Onellus sese parabat, & etiam Odonellus Onello 
laturus opem. At ille preter omnium spem in 
Momonias ire contendit septem millia peditum, 
& equites nongentos ductitans. Cui in Lagenia 
per iter angustum exercitum ducenti factus ob- 
uius Huon Omorra cum quingentis peditibus 
vitimum agmen fundit, aliquot milites, atque 
duces occidit, spolia, & inter cetera multos plu- 
meos apices capit. Wnde locus hodie dicitur 
Transitus plumarum In Momonias Essexius 
cum peruenisset, statim obsidet Catharam ar- 
cem Thome Buttleri Baronis, in qua tantum 
septem, vel octo bombardarij custodie causa 
Arci auxilio veniunt Comes Des- 
monius, Raymundus Baro, & eius frater Guliel- 
mus ducentes mille tantum pedites, & equites 


erapt relicti. 


paucos, coplas regijs minime conferendas (ne- 
que enim se parauerant quod existimabant in se 
Essexium tam citd signa non fuisse laturum.) 
Ad arcem aditus erat per pontem, quem Vinkel 
Anglus tribunus militum non inualida manu 
tenebat. Secundo die obsidionis Gulielmus 
Burkus cum peditibus quingentis, & ducentis 
equitibus arci opitulatum profectus Vinkelem 
ex ponte eijcit nonnullis regijs interemptis, & 
Iaimo Thome Baronis fratre cum quinquaginta 
peditibus in arce presidio collocato incolumis 
revertitur. Tamen arx continue tormentis 
quassata diruitur, Desmonio non obstante, qui 
nullum pugnandi tempus intermittendo, cona- 
batur oppugnationem prohibere. Decima nocte 
oppugnationis Jaimus cum militibus prostratam 
Essexius in 
arce relicto presidio Lomnacham adit, Catholicis 


arcem relinquens ad suos fugit. 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 211 
113 


O’Conors Faly, the Gavall-Ranall", and many other gentlemen not enumerated. 
These people made fierce and desperate assaults, and furious, irresistible onsets 
on him, in intricate ways and narrow passes", in which both parties came in 
collision with each other, so that great numbers of the Earl’s people were cut 
off by them. The Earl, however, in despite of all the difficulties which he 


met, at last arrived in the country of the Butlers. 


The Earl of Ormond came 


to receive him with honour and respect; as did also the Lord of Mountgar- 


° 
non ausis. occurrere. Inde Asketiniam petit, 
presidium firmaturus. Iam Daniel Maccarrha, 
Comesque Desmonius duo millia, & quingentos 
milites coegerant, cum quibus itineris angustias 
obsident. 


fuit constitutus Gulielmus, secundo Dermysius 


Primo ad hostem versus venientem 


Oconchur in locis planis, & expeditis: Vltimo 
Vaterus Tirellus, & Thomas Plunketus in ipsis 
itinerum angustissimis faucibus cum quingentis, 
& octoginta militibus sunt collocati. Inter quos 
si medius hostis circumueniretur (vt speraba- 
Ac ita illud 
fuisse imperium datum a Petro Lessio tesserario 
maximo, vt illum Vaterus & Thomas primum, 


tur) impune delendus videbatur. 


deinde Dermysius, & Gulielmus a tergo adori- 
rentur, multi confirmant, sed vaterus, & Tho- 
mas contrarium afferebant. Itaque die Saturni 
Essexius copias in quatuor agmina distinctas ad 
angustias ducit, lamque Tomonie, & Clanri- 
charde Comites, & Macpieris Baro primum ag- 
men ex Ibernis militibus habentes Gulielmum, 
& Dermysium pretereunt nemine repugnante, 
vt erat iussum. Deinde Vaterum, & Thomam 
pretereuntes ex angustijs in planum sese con- 
ferebant. Quod cum Dermysius vidisset ratus 
per perfidiam a Vatero, & Thoma hostem dimitti, 
in equo loco, vbi erat, ccepit prelari, & 4 mul- 
titudine hostium cedere loco coactus ad Guliel- 
mum sese recipit. Ambo rursus prelium re- 
dintegrantes tres horas hostes secuti acriter 
dimicant, sed parum damni inferentes, quia 
fuit hostis angustijs dimissus, in quibus Vate- 
rus, & Thomas totis viribus resistere debebant. 


Ceterum hi causabantur, sibi imperatum fuisse, 
ne preliarentur, donec alij pugnam inchoarent, 
sed contrarium multi affirmant, & dicunt illos 
pactos fuisse cum Essexio per quendam Tirel- 
lum, ne ipsi obessent. Wt secundum crimen 
punirentur Daniel Maccarrha censuit, non ta- 
men comes militum secessionem timens. Postea 
rixa orta Thomas fuit 4 Petro Lessio interfectus. 
Vt redeamus ad rem Essexius Asketiniam per- 
uenit, in cuius castra Catholici noctu faciunt 
impetum. Asketinia firmiore presidio munita 
Essexius vlterius progredi non ausus die Lune 
sequente rediuit per aliud iter. Vbi ex arbo- 
reto iuxta Finiteri pagum Catholici erumpentes 
primum, vitimum, & media agmina simul inua- 
dunt. Henricus Norris eques Auratus Anglus 
Iohannis, & Thome frater in Catholicos equo 
vectus firmo bombardariorum agmine vallatus 
plumbea glande confossus equo corruit. Ali) 
ex regijs multi, & ex Catholicis nonnulli desi- 
derantur: nam ab hora nona ante meridiem, 
vsque ad quintam pomeridianam fuit pugnatum, 
donec Essexius Cruomuie consederit. Vnde - 
rursus Desiam vsque Desmonius sequitur per 
sex dies noctu, & interdiu prelians, & eius ex- 
ercitum extenuans. Post Essexij reditum Dubh- 
linnam arx Cathara a Iaimo Buttlero Baronis fra- 
tre presidiarijs Anglis occisis, breui recuperatur. 

‘** Secundum expeditionem rursus Essexius fa- 
cit in Oconchures Iphalios, & Omorras, cum qui- 
bus parum prosperé pugnans exercitum indies 
minuit. Quarein Onellum profecturus ex An- 
glia subsidium petit.” 


12 N 


2114 GQNNaza RIOshachta EIREGNN. 


[1599. 


méca Zoaunfec 1. Emann, mac Ripoepd, mic praponp buicilep bat hi mumncea- 
pup ui néill achand pap an can pin. O vo puaccacan buicilenaig hi ecfnn an 
1anla Llotcan 50 Lion a pocpaicce 1 tepmian cluana meala, 7 po Zabpac acc 
lompuide im cactaip otine Mapcecais. Tomap, mac cTepoict, mic piapaip 
buitileip po bad tciccfina pop an mbanle hipin,7 bat poe hi ccombard ui néill 
Jiapla ofpmuman achaid map an can pin. Nip b6 conba oon 1apla co na 
plogaib an 1ompuide 1 mbacan 50 po caippnglo 6poanap mop led 6 pont 
laincce d1a pargsid, 7 50 po Lfccad an Lf pa nfpa ooib von barle, conad rap 
rm pob fccfh oab an bale vo cabaint diapla op eprex 7 von bai- 
Piosain ; 

Ip na laiaib mn po pmdi1apla op epex pe hashad catpaig otine hhapceas 
cTanaicc ppeplvenp oa Coiccld Muman .1. Sin Tomar nonuip 6 concans Fo cill 
mocelloce 00 toct do latain an 1apla ia pra oiecplo Zo luimneac. barprde 1 
nZan o Ccoictivep Ina Comnaide 1pm mbarle pin ay 1lompuipeac Fp an ianla 
vo techt tap Sian, | no snataisead Zach pe la cuainc oo cup mm cnocaib 
conntae luimms our an ppuigbead baogal gona no sabala ap opuing érccm 
vo bioobadaib na bainmogna. In anole lo o1a noeachaid ip m ccfnn coin 
von conntae vo pala 06 (7 Zan neaé aca acc 1appaid anole) Comap a bunc, 
mac teboite, mic uilliam, mic Emainn 6 cauplén uf conains. Ni bai aém neach 
pop eoch 1 prochain tomaip sionmotapom budolin. bacap ona a ngap vo 
cé0 paishoitin Zaoelac na pappad. lap na ppaiccpin oon ppeyroenp cucc 
poe panncac polamang via parsid 50 po ofolaizpicchead a proccup OfICIT 
vo muINNTIP TOMaIP DON Cup Pin, 7 Do DINZenTat ni bad mo munbad a Tapce 
fo Zonad an ppeploenp uaip vo pala popccom pis piopamnup do pice do hi 
ccompac conpam a sell 7 uaccain a bnasac. Oc conncatap a muincin 
elpplum ap na cnectnuccad amlaid pin po 1ad0poc Ina uipntimcell Fo puccpac 


* Lord of Mountgarrett.—Moryson says that 
“in the county of Kilkenny the Viscount of 
Mountgarret, a Butler of the Earl of Ormond’s 
family, was son-in-law to Tyrone, and that he 
was, at this period, in rebellion with his bre- 
thren, and with some of his sons, and with his 
followers, being in number one hundred and 
thirty foot, and twenty horse ; that he held the 
castles of Ballyragget and Colekil, but that the 


rest of the castles, and the whole county, were 
held by the Earl of Ormond for the Queen.”— 
Vol. i. p. 72. 

Y Cathair-Duine-Iascaigh, now Cahir, in the 
county of Tipperary. There is a view of this 
castle, as it stood at this period, in the Pacata 
Hibernia.—See Dublin edition of 1810, p. 76. 

* To fall in with : literally, “ offend Wl.” P. 
O’Sullevan Beare, states that he met Thomas 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1599.] 2115 


rett* (Edmond, the son of Richard, son of Pierce Butler), who had been in alliance 
with O'Neill some time before. As soon as the Butlers had joined the Eazl, 
they proceeded with all their forces to Trian-Chluana-Meala, and laid siege to 
Cathair-Duine-lasgaigh’. Thomas, the son of Theobald, son of Pierce Butler, 
was lord of that town; he was in alliance with O’Neill, and the Earl of Des- 
mond, for a period previous to that time. The siege carried on by the Earl 
and his forces was of no avail to them until they drew great ordnance from 
Waterford to it, by which was thrown down the nearest side of the fortress, 
after which the fortress was forced to surrender to the Earl of Essex and the 
Queen. 

In the days that the Earl of Essex was storming Cathair-Duine-Iasgaigh, 
the President of the two provinces of Munster, i. e. Sir Thomas Norris, came 
from Cork to Kalmallock to wait on the Earl before he should go to Limerick. 
He was nearly a fortnight residing in the town, awaiting the coming of the 
Earl across the Suir, and was in the practice of scouring the hills of the 
county of Limerick every other day, to see whether he could kill or capture 
any of the Queen’s enemies. On a certain day that he went to the eastern 
extremity of the county he happened to fall in with* Thomas Burke, the son of 
Theobald, son of William, son of Edmond of Castleconnell, neither being in 
search of the other. Thomas alone’, of all his people, was on horseback; he 
had nearly one hundred Irish soldiers along with him. When the President 
saw him he made a determined and dexterous attack upon him, and about 
twenty of Thomas’s people were cut off on the occasion ; and more would have 
been slain, were it not that the President was so soon mortally wounded; for 
he received a violent and venomous thrust of a pike where the jaw-bone joins 
the upper part of the neck. When his people saw him thus wounded, they 
collected around him and carried him back to Kilmallock’, where he remained 


Milton’s 
“s God and his son except, 

Created thing nought valued he nor shunned.” 
— Paradise Lost, book ii. lines 679, 680. 


Burke at Killthilia, now Kilteele, a small vil- 
lage in the barony of Coonagh, in the east of 





the county of Limerick, and about two miles 
to the south of Pallasgreen. 


* Thomas alone.—The original is incorrect Irish, 
and, if literally translated,would stand in English 
thus: ‘* There was no one ona horse along with 
Thomas except himself’ This is nearly as bad as 


> Kilmallock.—P. O’Sullevan Beare says that 
he returned to Maola, now Mallow, where he 
died in fifteen days after his arrival, and this is 
probably the truth. 


12 n2 


2116 GQNNQZa RIOShHAachtAa EIRECNN. 


1599. 


le6 € tan a ap 50 cill Mocellocc,7 baf pé peaccmume ma otanplige po 
lamanb US 50 ppuain bap 1apam 1 mi ul pammoe. 

O no sabad Cataip dine napcecars la napla op epex, tanaice pon 4 
lapla upmuman, 7 mate an cploig Jo luimneac, 7 po faccab a campa don 
caoib amuig do Luimneac. Tanarce ma cfnn oon baile ceona sobenndin coicerd 
connacc 3. Sip Conepp Clipopc 7 iapla clomne miocaipo 1. Uillfcc mac 
Riocaino Sharancas, 7] 1apla cuadmuman Oonnchad mac Concobam ui bmcun. 
O po Cmoénagspioc na huaiple pin a ccomaiple hn ppocain anole po fill an 
sobennéip 7 lapla clomne procaipod tap a naip hi cconoachtoibh. Ro cpiall 
lapla op eprex, lapla upmuman, 9 lapla cuaomuman ool 1 murmneccaib oup 
ann ppuisbiccip ell ngabala pon sfalcacaib. 

Cin céd oidce po Faccaibpioc Luimneac 1 mi 1un po Zsabpac campa pop un 
abann aca vana. Os sabcal vob an a bapac oa pataipn pap peac mom 
pobain po taipbfinpioc ampag 7 occbmd lapla ofpmuman, 7 an Zappa 
HSeanalcach a npnwypi o61b. 6a pnaocoa fonspanna an praduccad, 7 an parl- 
TIusad Tuccacap plop 1onaid a bpmonnpa an a céd Cuaipne dia pausio, ip 
po Lficcpot DE, 7 DETAC a noub phoan, 7 parte peilen a sonnadaib sén 
paoancacanb poa pnb. Roclor lap bedp slaéwblicloac, Zap 7 spfoan a 
ngalgac, 7 a ngiollannaide 1 monad na humla, 7 na honona, 7 na mbmiatan 
rim pomblapca po bad cubag vo cantam ppp. Occ cfna pob e 1ompeca- 
pad na hiongaile pin, iiomat oaoine do dfolartpiuccad o lanla op epyex, 7 
san appcan bad roncipme do lficcfn 06 an la pin 50 po Zab longponc fo blec 
6eapp Zelbcine poip. Oia vomnans an a banac appead po chimn lapla op 
eppex, lapla upmuman,7 lanla cuadmuman mancpluag oo con le mumippion 


° Under the care, literally, ‘‘ under the hands 
of physicians.” 

4 In the month of July.—The English writers 
make no mention of the manner of Sir Thomas 
Norris’s death. P. O’Sullevan Beare gives some 
curious particulars of his battle with the Mun- 
ster chiefs, totally omitted by the Four Masters. 


He mentions his death before the expedition of 


Sir Conyers Clifford against O’Donnell, at Bal- 


lyshannon, when Murrough O’Brien, Baron of 


Inchiquin, was drowned (1597). O’Sullevan is 


probably right, for he appears to have been 


better acquainted with the affairs of Munster at 
this period than the Four Masters. Sir Richard 
Cox says that ‘there is little credit to be given 
to that author, and yet, that some things that he 
says must be allowed to be true.” O’Sullevan’s 
words are as follows: 

‘* Aliquot inde mensibus Thomas Burkus Cas- 
telconelli Baronis frater, qui ab Anglis desciuit 
receptis 4 Raymundo Barone, & eius fratre Gui- 
helmo militibus in Muscria Kurkia castella non 
satis munita expugnabat. Que circa loca Nor- 
ris qui cum exercitu erat, cum equitibus am- 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2117 


six weeks on his sick bed under the care* of physicians, when he died in the 
month of July* precisely. 

When the Earl of Essex had taken Cathair-Duine-lasgaigh, he and the Earl of 
Ormond, with the chiefs of the army, proceeded with their army to Limerick, 
and pitched his camp outside Limerick. To this town the Governor of the pro- 
vince of Connaught, 1 e. Sir Conyers, the Earl of Clanrickard, 1. e. Ulick, son of 
Richard Saxonagh, and the Earl of Thomond (Donough, the son of Conor 
O’Brien), came to meet him. When these nobles had finished their consultation, 
the Governor and the Earl of Clanrickard returned back to Connaught; [and] the 
Karl of Essex, the Earl of Ormond, and the Earl of Thomond, proceeded into Mun- 
ster, to see whether they could get an opportunity of invading the Geraldines. 

On the first night after they had left Limerick, in the month of June, they 
encamped upon the banks of the river of Adare®; [and] as they advanced 
westwards on the next day, Saturday, through the bog of Robhar‘, the sol- 
diers and warriors of the Earl of Desmond and the Geraldine host shewed 
them their faces. Fierce and morose was the salute and welcome which they 
gave to the representative of their Sovereign on his first visit to them [and 
to his army]; for they discharged into their eyes the fire and smoke of their 
black powder, and showers of balls from straightly-aimed guns; and he 
heard the uproar, clamour, and exulting shouts of their champions and com- 
mon soldiers, instead of the submission, honour [that should have been shewn 
him], and of the mild and courteous words that should have been spoken 
to him. Howbeit, the result of this conflict was that great numbers of the 
Earl of Essex’s men were cut off, and that he was not suffered to make any 
remarkable progress on that day; so that he pitched his camp a short distance 
to the east of Askeaton. On the next day, Sunday, he and the Earls of Ormond 
and Thomand resolved to send a body of cavalry to lay up ammunition in 


plius ducentis, & peditibus mille in Thomamire per Galeam ferit in capite ferream haste cuspi- 
contendit, ilumque cum equitatu, & bombar- dem relinquens. Norris vulnere afflictus Moa- 
darijs ad Killthiliam nanciscitur. Thomas, qui lam redit vbi intra quindecim dies moritur.”— 
ducentos tantum pedites tune habuit, loco ce- Hist. Cathol. Iber. §c., tom 3, lib. 5, ¢. vi. 

dere putauit. Ea re non contentus Norris in © The river of Adare: i.e. the River Maigue. 
elus vitimos ordines cum equitatu proruit: in € Robhar, now anglice Rower, a townland on 
cuius impetum Thomas sese conuertit, & Iohan- the west side of the River Maigue, in the parish 
nes Burkus Nobilis Connachtus Norrisem hasta of Adare, county of Limerick. It is now divided 


2118 QNNQGZa RIOshachta EIREGNN. 


(1599. 


50 h(pp seibcine, gan iad pln vo vol ni bad pra rap 1p mm mumain don chupi 
pm. Acc pillead vob porn an a bapac oa Luan la caeb baile an elecenars 
Fuapacap tnoro cnn, talcaipn, 7 sleo gonac Faibteac o slpalcacaib, 7 po 
mapbad opong ofpim vo munncin lapla op eppex an la& pin im Rioipe ompdfine 
po bad mép amm 4 onoip 1. Sin hanpp nopmp. Oo chums lapla op epper 
1ap pin 50 cill Mocelléce, 7 1ap mbfic cp howce 06 1pm mbaile pm tcuce a 
acchad budd(p ap chfin peabpac plebe caoin mic ofinccoualars vo dol 
i cctmocanb poiptec, 7 an tan vo paotlead sabaul 06 Fo concais ba pi conan 
1 nveachald van at mainiptpec Flpmarge, hi cconacanl, hi mag fle, 7 v0 lop 
mop mocuoa. Gaccan om sfpalearg ag canrt(m, ag coml(nmam, ag toccpoum, 
ace tTopaigecht, acc puluuccad, ace poipd(pecad popna an aip(cc pin. O 
pamice lanla op eppex vo na ofipib po pillpoc GB Halcang 50 m(ppoachz, 7 50 
mon m(nmain oa tcimb, 7 va ccIgZ1b. =O pdamicc an tianla ceona 50 dan 
nsapbain po ap lapla cuadmuman vad lam le painnse 50 heocoill, so cop- 
cals, 7 1apam go luimneac. Oo taéo lapla of epper o dn Zapbain 50 pont 
lange, apprde 1 mbuicilepacanb, 7 iwlaigmb. Nip bo pommec po apccnatan 
Te Fac conaip tplapa ctcuocatcap 6 ca pont lainse 50 hat chaz, uaip po 
baccan Zaoimil lag aga ccospaimm, 7 acca mapmoipecc, aga ctoacmang 4 
acc tcimcellad Fo po manbant, 7 Fo po muvhaigic opecta ofpmana o10b mn 
Zac péd, 7 m sac plige mn no gabpac. ba plo acbfnoip sanioil Epeann sun 
b6 p(pp 06 na Tapad an Tupup pin 6 atchat 50 hub conall sabpna, 7 cillead 
06 can a aip Lap an céd commnysleo po cotaicchead na aghaid san umla san 


into two parts, of which the greater is called 
Rowermore, and the smaller Rowerbeg. 

& Baile-an-Eleteraigh, now Finneterstown, in 
the parish of Adare, about nine miles from the 
city of Limerick. This name was originally 
baile an peimizeanang, i.e. Ferriter’s town, of 
which the form given by the Four Masters, and 
the present local Irish and anglicised forms of 
the name, are corruptions. There is another 
place of the name in the parish of Drehidstrasna, 
in the barony of Connello, where formerly dwelt 
a branch of the Fitzgeralds descended from John 
More na Sursainge [of the surcingle], natural 


son of the celebrated John of Callan. 


» Ceann-Feabhrat.—See note °, under the year 
1579, p. 1721, supra. 

i Mountain of Caoin, §c., now Slieve Reagh, in 
the south of the county of Limerick.—See note 
4, under the year 1560, p. 1580, supra. 

i Roche’s country: 1. e. the barony of Fermoy, 
in the county of Cork. 

k The monastery of Fermoy, a small town in the 
barony of Clangibbon, in the county of Cork, 
where, on the bank of the Blackwater, an ab- 
bey for Cistercian monks was founded in the 
year 1270, by Sir Richard de Rupella, who was 
Lord Justice of Ireland in the year 1261. The 
barony of Clangibbon, in which this monastery 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2119 


Askeaton, and not to proceed any further westwards into Munster themselves 
on this occasion. On their return eastwards the next day, Monday, [when they 
arrived] near Baile-an-Eleteraigh*, they received a stout and resolute conflict, 
and a furious and formidable battle, from the Geraldines; and many of the Earl 
of Essex’s people were slain on that day, and, among the rest, a noble knight 
of great name and honour, 1. e. Sir Henry Norris. The Earl of Essex then pro- 
ceeded to Kilmallock ; and, having remained three nights in that town, he 
directed his course southwards, towards Ceann-Feabhrat’, [a part] of the moun- 
tain of Caoin', the son of Dearg-dualach, with the intention of passing into 
Roche’s country’; and, instead of proceeding to Cork, as it was thought he 
would have done, he directed his course across the ford at the monastery of 
Fermoy", and from thence [he marched with his forces] to Conachail', Magh- 
Tle", and Lismore-Mochuda*. During all this time the Geraldines continued to 
follow, pursue, and press upon them, to shoot at, wound, and slaughter them. 
When the Ear! had arrived in the Desies, the Geraldines returned in exultation 
and high spirits to their territories and houses. On the arrival of the same Ear! 
in Dungarvan, the Earl of Thomond parted from him there, [and proceeded | 
along the seaside to Youghall, and from thence to Cork, and afterwards to Lime- 
rick. The Earl of Essex proceeded from Dungarvan to Waterford, thence into 
the country of the Butlers, and into Leinster. They marched not by a pros- 
perous progress by the roads along which they passed from Waterford to Dublin, 
for the Irish of Leinster were following and pursuing, surrounding and envi- 
roning them, so that they slew and slaughtered great numbers of them in every 
road and way by which they passed. The Gaels of Ireland were wont to say 
that it would have been better for him that he had not gone on this expedition 
from Dublin to Hy-Connell-Gaura, as he returned back after the first conflict 
that was maintained against him, without [having received] submission or re- 


is situated, is a part of the ancient Irish terri- 
tory of Feara Muigh-Feine, the name of which 
is still preserved in that of the barony of Fer- 
moy, which is much smaller than the ancient 
territory.—See Smith’s Natural and Civil His- 
tory of Cork, book ii. ce. vil. 

* Conachuil, now Conna, a village near which 
are the ruins of a castle, in the barony of Kina- 


talloon, in the east of the county of Cork. 

m Magh-Iile, now Moygeely, a townland con- 
taining the ruins of an abbey in the valley of 
the River Bride, in the same barony, and close 
to the boundary of the county of Waterford. 

1 Lismore-Mochuda: i. e. the town of Lismore, 
on the River Blackwater, in the county of 
Waterford, where St. Carthach, or Mochuda, 


2120 ANNaZa RIOshachta €lREANN. [1599. 


aoe 6 sfpalcacanb,7 san aéin cfim bad 1onmaoidim pe a pasbanl ma im- 
cectoib, acc amain Zabail catpac oume hiapccans. 

bai 6 concobain pligig vonnchad mac catcnl og an aon la Mapla op 
erprex ap m pluaigead pin g0 poadh vob on mumam amail po aipnhotman, 
j ace tillead vob pon 6 conallcoib g0 conntae luimnis ba hannpade po 
pecan Ua concobarp pt, 7 00 chuaid hi cconnachtoib hi ccfnn an sobep- 
nona Sip conepp cliponc. Ni bai erm aén bale via bala’ ap cumap ui 
concobain hi cconntae pliccig an tan pin cenmota aén coanpoiall nama vo 
bonleib clone vonnchad cine hoilella, 7 ba hann baipioe pon eochammmlb 
abann moime, Cul maoile a ainmpide. O po bai ua concobain achaid mbicc 
hi ppapnad an sobennopna po arccna do lo 7 vadang Fo painice sup an mbarle 
hi mi Jul vo ponnnad. O vo puacc ua concobain 50 cul maoile cuccad 
ameall vo cfeponb mumncipe Ui vomnaall (bacan an tan pin pecnoin an cfpe, 
san aipiuccad da mumncin plin) 50 hUa cconcobcop sup an mbaule. 

Oc cuap dua vomnanll an ni pm po ba Lamn Laie Ua concobain vo toét don 
vip, ba po lap an do pone dup anzcapplo lap a notinsfine map an can pin 
vo cate pain. Ro poncongaip Ua vomnaill pop a mancyloig Zan anad pn a 
milCoaib tnoigteaca co poipcip an cauplen co na poichfoh la hUa cconcobain 
pacebaal an baile ma pra piopcaip an plog. Oo pénad poupprum imp, ap ni 
lamta uptuapache a bphtpe 1oip. Cocaniapom an mancploig peib ap ofine 
po nuccpact co pangacan an baile,7 tangaccap 1apam an pluag ma Unmain co 
nofnnpac cioncanll booba o10b 1 nomtacmang an otmaid. 6a oangln diotos- 
long) an coupciall hn pin, 7 nin b6 podaings popcomécc fon an ci lap bud 
lain a paccbail, an ba san poccup vo opoibelaib voimtecta an Tionad 1 
ccanpupcain 6. Gaba Ua oomnall lonspopc apn belaib an ploa bat von 
caob ancall oon abainn bai la hun an baile. Ro honpoaiglo lucc poitme 7 
popaine leap m orocib 7 Im lab popp an otnad va Zac let, 7 no bioip opong 
dlonmanna mona oia mancplois pon a neacaib 1pm ppmotaipe 6 Funed nell 
nona co haomavain, na po elaofoh Ua concobain uanaib. Ro Ufch tha na 
pecela pm po epimn.1. Ua concobain pliccig vo bAt 1pm 1omcumse pm az Ua 
noomnaill hi ceml maoile,7 o po clop la hanla op eprex m ni pin no pafo 


formed a religious establishment about the year ° The Clann-Donough: i.e. the Mac Donoughs 
663.—Sce Lanigan’s Heclesiastical History of Ire- of Tirerrill, who were at this time tributary to 
land, vol. ii. pp. 353, 355. O’Conor Sligo. 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2191 


spect from the Geraldines, and without having achieved in his progress any 
exploit worth boasting of, excepting only the taking of Cathair-Duine-Iasgaigh. 

O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge) was along with the Earl 
of Essex on this hosting until their return from Munster, as we have related. 
It was on their return from Connello eastwards, through the county of Limerick, 
that O’Conor parted from them; and he then went to Connaught, to the Gover- 
nor, Sir Conyers Clifford. O’Conor had none of all his castles in the county 
of Sligo in his possession at this time, except only one castle, belonging to the 
Clann-Donough’ of Tirerrill, which was situated on the banks of Abhainn-mhor; 
Culmaoile? was its name. O’Conor, after remaining a short time with the 
Governor, proceeded onwards, both by day and night, until he reached this 
castle, [which he did] in the month of July. On O’Conor’s arrival at Cul- 
maoile, some of the cattle of O’Donnell’s people that were then throughout the 
country were brought to him to the castle, without being noticed by their 
owners. 

When O'Donnell was informed of this, he was glad that O’Conor had come 
into the country, and he was pleased at what he had done, that he might try if 
he could take vengeance on him for his former doings. O’Donnell then ordered 
his cavalry not to wait for his foot-soldiers, but to proceed to the castle before 
O’Conor could have time to leave it. This was done at his bidding, for his 
word durst not be disobeyed’. The cavalry proceeded as quickly as they were 
able, until they arrived at the castle ; the army followed them, and formed 
themselves into extensive circles around the fortress. This castle was an im- 
pregnable stronghold, and it was not easy to watch a person determined to leave 
it, for the place in which it was situated was close to impervious fastnesses. 
O'Donnell pitched his camp before a wood that lay on the other side of the 
river, in front of the castle. He appointed parties to reconnoitre and watch 
by day and night on every side of the fortress; and strong squadrons of his 
cavalry were mounted on their horses on guard from the dusk of the evening 
to day-break, in order that O’Conor might not escape from them. The news 
spread throughout Ireland that O’Conor Sligo was thus blockaded by O’Don- 
nell at Culmaoile, and when the Earl of Essex heard it, he dispatched mes- 


P Culmaoile, now Colooney. states, in his life of this Hugh Roe O’Donnell, 
4 Durst not be disobeyed.—Cucogry O’Clery that ‘‘he was a Cesar in command.” 


L2ro 


2122 GQNNaza RIOSHhachTa EIRECHN. 


[1599. 


cTecTa DO Palsid FZobepnépa corccid connacc,7 po atain ve TocT na Comne 
la oaimide 50 pipanb ceall. Puaip an gobepnoip mon ppoplamn 7 ppoiperccne 
as sabail tne pfpaib cell ag vol 1 noail m iapla an po mapbad pocande mon 
vo vaepecanpluag 7 00 Dagoaoinib uada. Ro bad oibpioe Ripoepo, mac 
uilliam, mic Ripoeno, mic oiluenaip a bunc, oume uapal oo bupcacant cine 
hamalsaid, 7 Do cupead suay a pasbala an an ngobepnoin pin. Ap a aof 
pamice hi ccfnn an lapla, 7 baccan pri pé oa la co na nowchib 1 ppappad 
apoile acc p5puoad a ccomainle. In eacmaing na pee yin po Lice an tianla 
puillead ploig,7 parsoiuipide lap an ngobepnoip, 7 po popcongsaip pain ian 
poccain boule ata luam 06 a pupal an tepdicc na long, mac Ripofipo an 
ianainn, mic emaimn, mic uillicc, an Mupchad na maop, mac vomnanll an 
coceald, mic an gialla owb uf plaicb(pcais, 7 an eipse amac na saillme 
an poonup bid 7 olde, ] a nadme ovénma caipcedil tanaice 6 Sharoib Fo 
saillim, oo bnhit cimcell bud cuaid can cfnnaib cuan, 7 caladpopt so cuan 
Slices, 7 an gobepnoin poeyin co na ule pocpaitce vo coche vo tip tne 
pho oipge sacha poiv 50 poichead 50 cul maoile, 7 Ua concobaip pliceis 
DpUPTaAcT, ] OporMitin ap an ane, ap an ficcfnoanl 1 mbaoi ag Ua vomnaill. 
Ro ponpconsain an cianla bfor an an ngobfpnoin san poo can a ap Fon 
cculaib co po cumoaigce canplen oamsfn oiotoslais1 In Slicceach tarp no 
sebad pri hullcoib vo sper. 

O po sab an sobepnoin vo lam mnpim ule ceilebparp von 1apla 7 v0 
caéo 50 baile ata luain 7 po pmacht pon tepoicc na lons, pop Mupchad 
na maton, 7 FoP mumncip na Zaillme so cciopcaip hi Loms(p pm hen nénenn 
Zac nodinec aman 50 Slicceach. Ni po LAccmoc rom 1 neiplip innpin vain vo 
puaccacan Zan anad, Fan opium so po peolpac a ccoblac lam ofr pm 
cip 50 po sabpac 1pm ceuan pm Slicceach amap. Cnarcc annparde peib po 
h(pbad pma 50 pefpcaoip p5éla an cyplois. Oo caéd vim an Zobepnoin budfin 
50 popr comain, 7 po cleclamad lap na mbaof ma cumang vo sallaib 4 
saoweatab baccap pomamaigce von bainpiosain ina compocpaib. Ro bad 


© Murrough-na-Maer': i.e. Murrough of the 
Stewards. 

’ Donnell-an-chogaidh: i. e. Donnel, or Daniel, 
of the War. 

‘ Directly from the west to Siigo.—This language 
is not to the point, for the people of Galway 


should first sail due west for more than twenty 
miles, and next due north for more than se- 
venty miles, before they could turn from the 
west towards the Bay of Sligo. Therefore the 
phrase 0 nvipec anian is useless. It should 
be, ‘should proceed in ships from Galway 


1599. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2123 


sengers to the Governor of the province of Connaught, commanding him to 
come to meet him on a certain day in Fircall. The Governor encountered 
great toils and difficulties in passing through Fircall on his way to meet the 
Earl; for great numbers of his common soldiers and chieftains were slain, 
among whom was Richard, the son of William, son of Richard, son of Oliver 
Burke, a gentleman of the Burkes of Tirawly; and the Governor himself was 
in danger of being lost. Howbeit, he made his way to the Earl, and they 
remained for a period of two days and nights together in consultation. At the 
expiration of this time the Earl sent additional forces and soldiers with the 
Governor, and he ordered him, when he should reach Athlone, to command 
Theobald-na-Long, the son of Richard-an-Iarainn, son of Edmond, son of Ulick 
[Burke], Murrough-na-Maer’, son of Donnell-an-chogaidh*, son of Gilla-Duv 
O'Flaherty, and the rising out of Galway, to convey [in ships] northwards 
around the headlands and harbours to the harbour of Sligo, the store of viands 
and drink, and the engines for constructing castles, which had arrived from 
England in Galway; while the Governor himself was to proceed by land, 
by the most direct roads, until he should arrive at Cul-Maoile, to relieve and 
release O’Conor Sligo from the constraint and jeopardy in which he was placed 
by O'Donnell. The Earl, moreover, ordered the Governor not to return back 
until he should have erected a strong, impregnable castle in Sligo, as a con- 
stant defence against the Ulstermen. 7 

The Governor having undertaken to execute all these commands, he took 
his leave of the Earl, and proceeded to the town of Athlone; and he com- 
manded Theobald-na-Long, Murrough-na-Maer, and the people of Galway, 
that they should proceed in ships along the coast of Ireland [to Erris head, 
and then] directly from the west to Sligo‘. These did not neglect his orders, 
for they got ready, without waiting or delaying, and sailed with their fleet, 
keeping the land on their right, until they put in at the harbour to the west of 
Sligo. Here they remained", as they had been ordered, until they should 
receive information concerning the army. The Governor himself repaired, in 
the mean time, to Roscommon, and assembled all those under his control, of 
the English and Irish who were obedient to the Queen in its neighbourhood. 


around to Sligo.” here, as was ordered to them, until they should 
“ Here they remained: literally, “‘they remained know the news of the army.” 


LF One 


2124 ANNQGwa RIOShachca Eireann. (1599. 


vibpéin clann rapla clomne roca .1. bap fin oume collin Riocapo 7 tomar, 
6 concobain vonn 1. Cod, mac dianmaca, mic caipppe, Tepoid ofolmuin 4 
Mac puibne na ccuat Maolmuipe mac mupchaid moill, mic Edgain Hig baos 
fon posal, 7 (ppaon 6 Ua noomnaill 1 ppappad an sobepnopa an can pin. 
Oo deacacan 1apam 6 Roppcomamn co cullpce, bacap ona oct mbpactaca 
piclec paigorinpide ace paccbonl an barle pm ooib 1pm Domnac pia Lusnapad 
vo fonpad. Raimce an sobepnoin co na plog pia mfdon laoi an la pm 50 
mamipcip na buille 7 po bui hipude ace parcill an uiptmalla vo pone fo 
ofo1d. 

Oadla Us oomnanll 6 capnic lap an iompulde do Opud J do Olatucchad 
EPP Mm danad 1 mbaof 6 concobarn amanl po ba oaca lap co na Liccte neach 
monn, no ile ipin mbaile, Ro paccaib Niall sanb 6 oomhnaall 1 ccofpseche 
aépa an 1omcomécca, 7 po tioncoipcee 00 Zach ni ba ofp vo gmomh. Cwmo 
pAyin co na pluag co coipppliab na plspa, 7 sabaip Longpopc hipmde ap na 
ciopad an pluay eactpann caipip san patuccad, uain on ccéiopecc po clor 
lap uptmiall an sobepnopa oa paicchd pon popncongpa lapla op erpex 
baof ina pormom 7 ina poicill pr pé oa mio sF0 coicc vece Clugupt 1 naip- 
cionn an bealaig bude pm coipnplab a cuaid. Acc cfna po baccan a plosa 
fon pecaoilead 7 pon eippfoeadh uada 1 monavab eccramla .1. opons o10b 
1 Mompulde Popp an ccaupciall 1 mbaoi O concobcup 7 apall pm hucc 
bnumne cepoicc na long,7 an coblaig pempaicce Apanle oiob ag comlcc 
Fopp na conaimb 6 ca loc cé pu pesaip anoip, 50 loch chichlc pm Segaip 
anan. Ocbentpac a toips,7 a comaiplig la hUa noomnaill nac bot con- 
Zab cata occa amanl po bad tecta 1 nashad gall ucop na baccan a ploig 
m aen maigin leo. Oo padpom fon vail mbice 7 pon niimm puigle na nuayal 


’ For.—The style is here left very imperfect. 
The uaip should be omitted, and the two sen- 
tences remodelled thus: ‘‘As for O’Donnell, 
having, to his satisfaction, succeeded in block- 
ading the castle of Collooney upon O’Conor, so 
as not to suffer himself, or any of his people, to 
pass in or out, he left his relative, Niall Garv 
O'Donnell, with a sufficient number of men, to 
carry on the siege; for he had heard that Sir 
Conyers Clifford, Governor of Connaught, was 


approaching, by order of the Earl of Essex, to 
raise the siege, and, as soon as he was convinced 
that this was the fact, he proceeded, with the 
main body of his forces, to the extremity of the 
pass of Bealach Buidhe, to the north of Coirrsh- 
liabh, and there pitched his camp, to intercept 
the progress of this army of the strangers, and 
remained in readiness to attack them for a pe- 
riod of two months, that is, from the 15th of 
June to the 15th of August.” 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2125 


Of these were the ‘sons of the Earl of Clanrickard, namely, Rickard, Baron of 
Dunkellin, and Thomas; O’Conor Don, i.e. Hugh, the son of Dermot, son of 
Carbry; Theobald Dillon; and Mac Sweeny-na-dTuath (Mulmurry, the son 
of Murrough Mall, son of Owen Oge), who was this time plundering, and in 
revolt from O’Donnell, along with the Governor. They afterwards proceeded 
from Roscommon to Tulsk, and on leaving that town, [which was] precisely on 
the Sunday before Lammas, they had twenty-eight standards of soldiers. The 
Governor arrived with his army at the abbey of Boyle before the noon of that 
day ; and he remained there to prepare for his final march. 

As for O'Donnell, after having to his satisfaction succeeded in closing and 
strengthening the siege of the fortress in which O’Conor was, so as not to suffer 
any one to pass into or out of the castle, he left Niall Garv O’Donnell in com- 
mand of the besiegers, instructing him in everything that was proper to be 
done, [and] proceeded himself with [the main body of] his army to Coirrsh- 
liabh-na-Seaghsa [the Curlieu hills], and there pitched his camp to prevent 
the army of the strangers from passing that way unnoticed. For’, from the 
first time he heard that the Governor was approaching him by order of the 
Earl of Essex, he was in wait and in readiness for him for a period of two 
months (until the 15th of August), at the extremity of Bealach-Buidhe", to 
the north of Coirrshliabh. At this time his forces were dispersed, and away 
from him in various places: one division of them besieging the castle upon 
O’Conor, another watching the motions* of Theobald-na-Long and the fleet 
before mentioned, and others of them placed to guard the passes which are 
situated from Lough Key at the east of [the mountain of] Seaghais to Lough 
Techet’ to the west of Seaghais. The chief of his army and his advisers 
remarked to O’Donnell, that they had not battle engines fit to oppose the Eng- 
lish [and that they should not risk an engagement], because they had not their 


- forces together. But he made little or no account of the words of those gentle- 


to prevent them from landing, or, at least, from 


’ Bealach-Buadhe: i. e. the yellow road or pass, 
going to the relief of Collooney. Theobald Burke 


now Bellaghboy, near Ballinafad, in the barony 


of Tirerrill, and county of Sligo.—See note *, 
under the year 1497, p. 1232, supra. 

* Watching the motions : ‘fronting or breast- 
ing.” A party of O’Donnell’s forces marched 
along the coast, keeping the fleet in view, so as 


arrived in the bay, but was prevented, by O’Don- 
nell’s people, from landing. 

Y Lough Techet, now Lough Gara, situated to 
the west of the town of Boyle.—See note *, 


under the year 1256, p. 357, supra. 


2126 aNNaza RIoshachta €lREGNN. [1599. 


5 acbfnc nap b6 la lion oce bmiypcean cat, ace cecib nfch campipmstp 1 mone 
an combdead 7 biop pon Fin, ap € ap copecnac, 7 bfinfp buaid pop a biodba- 
ohanb. 

bai Ua vomnanll pamlond sup an ccuice vécc oCugurt amatl a oubna- 
man 7 ba hepwde comamm an laof m po paofo Muipe a ppiopac, 7 po aoin 
plum cpfdoan 1 nondin na hi naem muipe amail po bad bép 06, 7 po ceileab- 
pouid oipfMionn oopom, 7 von cplog apclna, 7 po tocait copp cpfort ian 
ccabaine a coibpion 7 1ap naicpicche oiocpa ina plctorb, 7 po fonail pon a 
plosab epnaigce odiocpa go via 1m plaince a nanmann cétuy, 7 ma pnaoad 
on éicc{noail moin po bai pon cind 0616 6 Zallorb. 

Cn sobepnoin tna in apfcc bafde bn ppopp 1 maimnipcip na biille, no 
biod ag baigh 7 ag baccan, ag cataoip, 7 acc cancupal pon an tuaipcent 
sac laoi7 asa seallad go pachad oa namofom canp an pleib bud cuad, 7 
po cmall an la hipin, in ni pm no tingeall vo comallnavd. 

O po ploin O vomnall an ni pin po fopcongain pon a plogaib coct Fo 
haonmaigin via ccalpealbad 7 Oia nopouccad, 7 1an na tcaipelbad cipmnnup 
po pannad laip a mumncin a noé ap a haicle. Ro la a gille Hana ofinm- 
nfoaca, 7 a occbaid ucmall anbraioh, 7 a aép oubpaicte pop Liz co na 
nZonnadabh gucapoa Féppadancaca, co na pploobacaib cailce tomnmine, 7 
co na pposaoaib puilceca poibmsce, co na nule cdmib imteilccte anctna. 
Ro onoas tacipeac tnoova 7 tun consmala cata map aén pu 50 ppoppmacht 
vata popp na hocca dia nopud, 7 oinge, 7 Olutuccad 1 ccfnn an cata oupp- 
eclaig1 7 dlomsun oan a nfipe can bad ullam a nadme oiubnaicce aca. Oo 
pao a uaiple, a ais, 7 a Popup occlans ipin oana Lit 50 cclaiomib oain- 
smb vépaobnaca, 7 50 mbiailib blachpnaoighce bél cana, 50 manaofpib moip- 
leabpa muipneca pm caumipium tnoda 7 cacharp. Oo nome éim tpaszis dia 
mancpluag hi m(pee a milead ap dodampe na conaipe po bat pon a ccionn. 
lap pomn a mumncine amlad pm oUa vomnaill po popal pon an aor orub- 
paicte co pnermciapcap an luct naile gup an plog nectpann pia pra Tiopcair 

* Promising: i. e. boasting. » To hew down and wound, ouppeclaigi 7 d1om- 
“ Shooting parties : i.e. his musketeers and gum.—In the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell the 
archers. The verb oiubpaic signifies, simply, reading is: 
to shoot, or discharge, and may be applied to “ Ounpclaige 7 D’1omsum cap a n-éipe can 


the pelting of stones, as well as the discharging ba hanpuipize a n-aidme oiubnaicze.” 
of musketry, arrows, or javelins, © Veteran soldiers, popapoglac .1, 6gLuc aopoa, 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2127 


men, and said that it was not by numbers of men that a battle is gained, but 
that whoever trusts in the power of the Lord, and is on the side of justice, is 
always triumphant, and gains the victory over his enemies. 

Thus O’Donnell remained until the 15th day of August, as we have stated, 
which was the anniversary of the day on which the Virgin Mary yielded her 
spirit ; and he observed the fast, in honour of the Blessed Virgin, as was his 
wont ; and mass was celebrated for him and the army in general; and he 
received the body of Christ, after making his confession and doing rigid penance 
for his sins. And he ordered his forces to pray fervently to God, first for the 
health of their souls, and [next] to save them from the great peril which hung 
over them from the English. 

While the Governor was at the abbey of Boyle, he was daily in the habit of 
menacing and threatening, reviling and reproaching, the northerns, and pro- 
mising” that he would pass northwards across the mountain in despite of them ; 
and on this day [i.e. the 15th of August] he undertook to perform what he 
had promised. 

When O'Donnell received intelligence of this, he eilored his forces to be 
assembled together, to be reviewed and marshalled ; and after they had been 
reviewed, he then divided them into two parts. In one division he placed his 
swift and energetic youths, and his nimble and athletic men, and his shooting 
parties’, with their high-sounding, straight-shooting guns, with their strong, 
smooth-surfaced bows, and with their bloody, venomous javelins, and other 
missile weapons. Over these soldiers he appointed a fight-directing leader, and 
a battle-sustaining champion, with command to press, urge, and close them to 
the battle, and to hew down and wound? after them, when they should have 
their missile weapons ready. In the second division he placed his nobles, 
chiefs, and veteran soldiers®, with strong, keen-edged swords, with polished, 
thin-edged battle-axes, and with large-headed lances, to maintain the fight and 
battle. He then converted his cavalry into pedestrians among his infantry, m 
consequence of the difficulty of the way that lay before them. When O'Donnell 
had thus arranged his people, he commanded his shooting party® to advance 
before the other division, to meet and engage the foreign army before they 


an aged soldier.—O’ Clery. English, but neither ““musketeers, nor archers” 
4 Shooting party.—This sounds awkward in would express the idea. 


2128 aNNaza RIOSshachtd elRedann. [1599. 


cap 1lomdopaid an tplébe do Tocap PMG, 7 1a noubnaccad 1oIp, 7 50 mbfic- 
yum sup an Spuing ale 1 nencomain cata voib boul m po bad ofpb lap a 
n5abail ucip ba hupaive ppaomead fonpa po ofo1id diamoaoip cnectnaigce 


uaoaibhpium a ccopac. 
No biod eiccm poncoméoaige 6 Ua noomnaill sac laoi imareach pop ino 


an cplébe an na ciopad an plog eactpann taimipp san pacuccad. Oo pala 
dpong o1ob an la pin ann, 7 baccap ace paipccy~) na mammptpec uadarb, 7 na 
poimne po bai mnce. On can bata acc an prpainecy), az ciad an plog as 
sabcnl a napm, ace cunccbal a mfipsto, ag ponm a ccpompad 7 a ccaipm(nt 
cata an chfna. Ro lapac pecéla 50 ofinmnfodac vo paigid Ui vomnaill. lan 
na cloiptect pin d6pom acbent ppippim bpoinmn po opoarg 1 pémtup noe 
conaine co noianapccnadip pmb vo dveabond pip na sallaib prayia cioy- 
cap Tap moichmb an mais pleibe. Coccap 1apam amanl po h(pbad pm co 
naipde aicemd, 7 co mfmmamn milo la Zac naomplp aca s0 pangacap mn an 
cplébe 50 cImepnac map na sallarb. Céiccip O Oomnaill ina noeadad 
50 cobpaid céimpigin sur an ppianlac ppoppaid 7 sup na cpfinpfpab cai- 
ipme plo togupcaip na cimcell 50 mbacan ipin 1onad endalca in po bad ofimin 


leo na soill vo sabanl. 


® Summit, “inn a. cac bapp.”—Cormac’s Glos- 
Sary. 

* Awaited their coming up—O’Sullevan says 
that O’Donnell felled trees to render the passes 
of the mountain more difficult. 

‘**O’Donnellus in ea montis parte que dicitur 
Iter Pallidum (Bealach Buz), arbores hinc inde 
cxdi et in via sterni jubet ut venientibus im- 
pedimento, et resistenti sibi munimento sint: 
nam in eo loco statuit dimicare, citra quem duo- 
bus fere millibus passuum castra collocaverat.” 
—Hist. Cathol., fol. 165. 

Dr. O’Conor, in the Memoirs of the Life and 
Writings of Charles O’ Conor of Belanagare, pp. 
117, 118, has preserved a great part of the 
speech delivered by O'Donnell to his army on 
this occasion; he has translated it from an Irish 
copy of the same, in the handwriting of his 


grandtather. It runs thus: 


Qipipit annem pon a ccionn. 


**O’Donnell, impatient for the moment which, 
he was certain, would be decisive of the fate of 
his country, harangued his men in their native 
language ; he shewed them that the advantage 
of their situation, alone, gave them a decided 
superiority over their opponents. Moreover,” 
added he, ‘‘ were we even deprived of those ad- 
vantages I have enumerated, we should trust 
to the great dispenser of eternal justice, to the 
dreadful avenger of iniquity and oppression, the 
success of our just and righteous cause; he has 
already doomed to destruction those assassins 
who have butchered our wives and our child- 
ren, plundered us of our properties, set fire to 
our habitations, demolished our churches and 
monasteries, and changed the face of Ireland 
into a wild, uncultivated desert. On this day, 
more particularly, I trust to heaven for pro- 
tection ; a day dedicated to the greatest of all 


1599. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2129 


should pass the difficult part of the mountain, and [he told them] that he him- 
self and the other division would come in contact with them at a place where 
he was sure of vanquishing them, for [he knew] that they could be more easily 
defeated in the end, should they be first wounded by them [his first division]. 
O'Donnell had kept watchmen every successive day on the summit* of the 
mountain, that the army of the foreigners might not cross it unnoticed. On 
this day the party of them who were there began to reconnoitre the monastery, 
and the troops that were init. While they were thus reconnoitring, they per- 
ceived the army taking their weapons, raising their standards, and sounding 
their trumpet and other martial instruments. They sent the news speedily to 
O'Donnell. When he heard it, he commanded the troops whom he had ap- 
pointed to take the van in the pass to march rapidly, to engage the English 
before they could pass the rugged parts of the flat mountain. They marched 
as they were commanded, each with the magnanimity and high spirit of a hero; 
and they quickly reached the summit of the mountain, before the English. 
O'Donnell set out after them, steadily and with a slow pace, with the steady 
troops and faithful heroes whom he had selected to accompany him; [and they 
marched] until they arrived at the place by which they were certain the English 


would pass ; and there they awaited their coming up‘. 


saints, whom these enemies, contrary to all 
religion, endeavour to vilify; a day on which 
we have purified our consciences to defend ho- 
nestly the cause of justice against men whose 
hands are reeking with blood, and who, not 
content with driving us from our native plains, 
come to hunt us, like wild beasts, into the 
mountains of Dunaveeragh. But what! I see 
you have not patience to hear a word more! 
Brave Irishmen! you burn for revenge. Scorn- 
ing the advantage of this impregnable situa- 
tion, let us rush down and shew the world, 
that, guided by the lord of life and death, we 
exterminated those oppressors of the human 
race; he who falls will fall gloriously, fighting 
for justice, for liberty, and for his country; 
his name will be remembered while there is an 
Irishman on the face of the earth ; and he who 
survives will be pointed at as the companion 


of O’Donnell, and the defender of his country. 
The congregations shall make way for him at 
the altar, saying, ‘that hero fought at the battle 
of Dunaveeragh.’ ”” 

The speech put into the mouth of O’Donnell, 
by P. O’Sullevan, is far inferior to this, and it 
is to be suspected that Dr. O’Conor has im- 
proved upon the original. O’Sullevan has these 
words in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, 
libesy) esta! 

‘* Maria Deipare Virginis sacrosanct ope 
hostem Hereticum cum anted semper vicimus, 
tum hodié potissimum profligabimus Virginis 
nomine heri ieiunauimus, & hodiernum festum 
celebramus. Ergo eodem nomine fortiter, & 
animose cum Virginis hostibus pugnemus, & 
victoriam obtinebimus.””—Fol. 165, 166. 

According to Cucogry O’Clery, O’Donnell 
spoke much better to the purpose than either 


12 P 


2130 anNaza RIoshachtd elReann. [1599. 


Oala an cploig pemteccad po hopoaigead 1pm copach, gaboute acc 
apecnam na conape hi ccomdal na ccat neaccpann 50 mbaccap uce pm 
O po comporccpigpiot dia pole, vo peillecict na Zaoioil pnoppa pul- 
leaca potaib opogadaib alccaéma umnpionn 7 pate pous(ec ppmbsen a 
plodbacaib pooa phomn(pemana, 7 capparpclta caop cepowtpcc, 7 ubaill- 
meall lamofpce Lucide a Zonnadaib clint oipge caolpadainc. Ro pneccnad 
na pnoipporubpaicte pin La hoccbaid Saran go cclop a ppumanna, 7 a ppnea- 
ccanta,] & pposaptonann 1 ppoitpib, 1 pploobadarb, 1 ccanpciallaib,7 1 ccum- 
vaiscib cloc na ccpfoc ccompoccup. 6a mactnad mon na oiccproip aép 
upm(ca 7 anada pon opemmne 7 oappacc la coiptect ppp na conpm(pcaib 
cata, pp mac alla, 7 py topman an cpenoiubpaicete. Ro cnectnagl 
cunard, 7 po Loic(o Laocnaid aot 7 anall (coppa. Oc b(pcpac a coos tnooa 
J a& noms iomsona FH mumncip ui oomnaill san coppiumh pon roncarb na 
nallmupach, acc a troacmang, 7 a toimcellad ima ccuainc. Capodain po 
iadpat lompa oa Zac Lht perb ac pubnad pnd, 7 Zabocnc asa noiubnaccad 50 
o1an, ofinmnfoac, oicomnincill 50 po Larpioc a niicloa cata mnzib an moon 
la olup 7 ofine na veabta. Cid pl ann cpa, act po dilpispiot na soill po 
des1IdD a NOfomanna ovo tnemplpaibh an cucapeint, 7 po ppaoinld lap an 
uachad popp na hilcéoaib. Ga hoamapmancac po toipnead soll cap a nap 
Do Palsid an ona inmll o ccudcaccap. Ro bai vo timnfnup ceichid ponpa 
co na po pill neach uadab tan a ap pop caém no pop caparce, 7 co na ploa- 


hucc. 


ccan an bed pa an manb po baf aén via po faccaibpiot ma nono 14ap 
ccabaint cil vob o1a mbiodbadaib. Ni tepncnplo ona cid pseolanga o1ob 
munbad uaite a naépa canhs bacap ina lfhmain, an ni po cCumaimgpioc anp- 
leac an neic no Péopaiccip la Lfpoachc 4 la lionmaine na pocaide bacan 


of these writers have told us. He addressed his bound with hempen cords.” 


people in a loud and majestic voice; he exhorted 
them to put their trust in the Trinity, as they 
were on the side of truth and justice, while the 
English were on the side of falsehood and in- 
justice, robbing them of their patrimonies and 
their means of support. ‘‘ Fight bravely now, 
while you have your bodies at liberty and your 
weapons in your hands, for if you lose this day’s 
battle, you shall be deprived of your arms, and 
your bodies shall be confined in dungeons and 


Fynes Moryson, who passes over this battle 
very lightly, says that the English lost only some 
120 men, among whom was the Governor of Con- 
naught, Sir Conyers Clifford, and a worthy cap- 
tain, Sir Alexander Radcliff. But P. O’Sulle- 
van Beare asserts (whi supra), that 1,400 of the 
royalists, or Queen’s forces, perished. 

** Perierunt ex regijs cum Cliffordo prefecto, 
& Henrico Ratcliffo alio nobili Anglo, mille, & 
quadringenti, qui feré Angli, & Midhienses An- 


1599. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2131 


As for the advanced division, which was commanded to take the van, they 
proceeded on their way towards the battalions of the foreigners until they met 
them breast to breast. As they approached each other the Irish discharged at 
them [the enemy] terrible showers of beautiful ash-handled javelins, and 
swarms of sharp arrows, [discharged] from long and strong elastic bows, and 
volleys of red flashing flames, and of hot leaden balls, from perfectly straight 
and straight-shooting guns. These volleys were responded to by the soldiers 
of England, so that their reports, responses, and thundering noise were heard 
throughout the woods, the forests, the castles, and the stone buildings of the 
neighbouring territories. It was a great wonder that the timid and the ser- 
vants did not run panic-stricken® and mad by listening to the blasts of the 
martial music, the loud report of the mighty firing, and the responses of the 
echoes. Champions were wounded and heroes were hacked between them on 
the one side and the other. Their battle leaders and captains commanded 
O’Donnell’s people not to stand fronting the foreigners, but to surround and 
encircle them round about. Upon which they closed around them on every 
side, as they were commanded, and they proceeded to fire on them vehemently, 
rapidly, and unsparingly; so that they drove the wings of their army into their 
centre by the pressure and vehemence of the conflict. Howbeit, the English 
at last turned their backs to the mighty men of the north, and the few routed 
the many! The English were furiously driven back to the fortified place 
from which they had set out ; and such was the precipitateness of their flight, 
after they had once turned their backs to their enemies, that no one of them 
looked behind for relative or friend, and that they did not know whether any 
of those left behind were living or dead. Not one of the fugitives could have 
escaped, were it not that their pursuers and slayers were so few in number, for 
they were not able to cut down those in their power, so numerous and vast was 
the number of them who were flying before them. They did not, however, 


gloibeni erant: nam Connachti propter locorum _fordi nece diuulgata Navalis classe Galueam re- 
peritiam facilius sunt elapsi. Ex Catholicis uehitur. Oconchur sese Odonelli arbitrio per- 
centum quadraginta fuerant vulnerati & deside- mittens ab eo in integrum Sligache principatum 
rati. Capta sunt regiorum omnia feré arma,  restituitur alijs donis cumulatus, & sacramento 
signa, & tympana militaria, impedimenta, & rogatus ipsi deincepsin Protestante fore auxilio.” 
multz vestes. Onellus, qui Odonello auxilio 8 Panic stricken—See Battle of Magh Rath, 
veniebat, duorum dierum itinere aberat. Clif- p. 231, line 22. 


A el 


2132 aNNdta RIOshachTa ElREGNN. 


(1599. 


1paén pfmpa. Cp a aof ni po anpac via trospaim co pangacan monn can 
mupaib na mampcpec apa ccudcactap fia pin. . 

Oo pala O puaine an can pin alla noin von compphab illonsponc pon 
Lot. Tingeallad poe 0OUa domnarill bAt 1 noipell na ngall o1a ppuabaine a 
ccuma caic cecib can bad adailec. Ot cualang prde buinl bficl na ccpom- 
pad, ] na ccapup, tnomtonann, 7] talamcumpecushad an ctpfinoibpoacte 
atnacc ap a longpont co na laocnmd lap, 7 tuapgaibpiot a modna cata 
ponpna,7 nf po anpac via pfimim so pangatan sup an maigm 1 mbacan muinn- 
cip Ui vomnaill ag smiom an 1omaimicc. SHabaiccpium ag clodmfo, 7 acc 
oiubpaccad na ccupad a ccuma caic, 0 no paccbad 1olap cfnd 7 podb lap na 
pinofoaib. Ro mapbad an sobepnoin Sin conepp clipopt go Won oipime ume 
vo Sharanchaib, 7 ofipeannchaib 7 po bad 1 nuptopac na onsale po pance- 
bad paén ina lige popr an yleib, 7 € blo Zaoice, 7 ba hamppior vo na 
héccaib cia po son cétcuyp, acc nama ba peilen vo cod tpfimiz, 7 m capd- 
pac an o1cc aitne pain 50 ccopnacht 6 puaine po ofo1o sup m ainm 1 mbaor 
7 vo b{fpc catne paip sup bo hé an sobennoip bai ann, 7 po ponconsain a 
dicfnoad. Oo pdnad 1anam sun bo caman clpce s(ppta ian mbfin a chinn ve. 

ba mon an cect an ci tToncaip annypin, ba oolig mioiac oimine pap. Nin 
b6 poum la saowelaib corccid mfoba a eccpom, uain ba pip tTiodnancte péd, 
| maoine vob é, 7 ni erbnfoh saor pnia. Ni oaoin Lach vo sabad lap an 
ngobennoin ar mm ngleocpord pin, uaip puccad a Copp va adnacal 50 hoileén 
na tpindicce pon loch cé 1 mbantntacc marge Lluince hn cconntae Ropya 
comain, } puccad a cfnd ianam 50 cul maoile 1 mbanuncachz cine hoilella hi 
cconntae Pliccigh. 

lan ccepnam daép cm madma sup in Mamptip 1ompato mumneip Ur dom- 
nall ina ppMting 50 ccfnoaib, 7 50 ppoobaib a mbiodbad leo 7 tiacchaite 
via pocopas 50 FRaolce moip, 7 50 pubaise, 7 cuccpat alcuccad bude a 
ccopccaip don Combe, 7] don ni naém mune. ba ploh aon slon na pocarwde, 
nac a mont 1omsona po ppaomead pon na sallaib, ace cma mopbuilb an 


mountain. 


To fire on them, literally, ‘“* to sword and to 
shoot the champions like all.” 

i Stretched on the mountain.—The spot where 
Clifford was killed is still pointed out near the 
old road called Bealach-Buidhe, in the town- 
land of Garroo, on the slope of the Coirrshliabh 


A small octagonal tower was built 
to mark the spot by the King [ Lorton } family, 
but this is now nearly destroyed. 

i A ball.— According to P. O’Sullevan Beare, 
and the account of this battle in note’, p. 2134, 
infra, Sir Conyers Clifford was pierced through 


1599.1] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2133 


desist from pursuing them until they [the English] got inside the walls of the 
monastery from which they had previously set out. 

O'Rourke was at this time in a separate camp on the eastern side of Coirr- 
shliabh. He had promised O'Donnell that he would be ready to attack the 
English like the rest, whenever it would be necessary; [and] when he heard the 
sound of the trumpets and tabors, and the loud and earth-shaking reports of 
the mighty firing, he rose up from his camp with his heroes, who put on their 
arms ; and they made no delay, till they arrived at the place where O’Donnell’s 
people were engaged in the conflict. They proceeded, like the others, to cut 
down champions with their swords, and fire on them" [with their guns, arrows, 
and javelins], until the soldiers left behind many heads and weapons. The 
Governor, Sir Conyers Clifford, was slain, together with a countless number of 
English and Irish about him. He was left feebly stretched on the mountain’, 
mortally wounded in the commencement of the conflict. It was not known to 
the soldiers who first wounded him (nothing was known about his death, ex- 
cept only that it was a ball’ that passed through him), and the soldiers did not 
recognise him, until O’Rourke at last came up to the place where he was, and 
recognised that it was the Governor that was there. He ordered him to be 
beheaded, which being done, his body was left a mutilated trunk. The death 
of the person here slain was much lamented. It was grievous that he came to 
this tragic end. The Irish of the province of Meave [Connaught] were not 
pleased at his death; for he had been a bestower of jewels and riches upon 
them; and he had never told them a falsehood. The Governor passed not in 
one direction from this battle ; for his body was conveyed to be interred in the 
Island of the Blessed Trinity in Lough Key, in the barony of Moylurg", in the 
county of Roscommon, and his head was carried to Cul-Maoile, in the barony 
of Tirerrill, in the county of Sligo. 

When the routed party had escaped into the monastery, O’Donnell’s people 
returned back with the heads and arms of their enemies, and proceeded to 
their tents with great exultation and gladness; and they returned thanks to 
God and the Blessed [Virgin] Mary for their victory. The unanimous voice 
of the troops was, that it was not by force of arms they had defeated the Eng- 


the body with a pike. Boyle, in the north-west of the county of Ros- 


* Barony of Moylurg, now the barony of common. 


2134 


QNNaZa RIOshachcd EIREGNN. 


[1599. 


commbdead, 7 the foapsuide ui domnanll co na plos, 1ap ccdcantim slanpuine 
cuinp cpiopt 7 a pola vo 1 nupcorac an laot hipin mveaohaid an tpoipecte 


po aofn vo naem mune an la pam. 


Imtupa na ngallian ppillead uaocib vo mumneip Uf vomnanll po liceple 
hi ccfho tpéva Fo TINNepnac an mfiv po map ofob Fo pangaccap ora ceigib 


po mela, 7 mébanl. 


' Sorrow and disqrace.—The accounts given of 
this battle by Camden and Moryson are very 
unsatisfactory, and the prejudiced historian 
Cox, and even Leland, have made very light of 
it. These writers do not appear to have known 
that any of O’Donnell’s forces were in this en- 
gagement. The best Irish account of this bat- 
tle is that given in the Life of Hugh O’Donnell, 
by Cucogry O’Clery, of which the account in 
the text is an abstract. The most minute and 
satisfactory English account of it was written 
by John Dymmok, who was in Ireland at the 
time, and who wrote this account as he ‘“‘ hard 
it related.” This, which was edited for the 
Trish Archeological Society, in 1843, by the 
Rev. Richard Butler, is as follows: 

‘A brief Relation of the Defeat in the Corleus, 
the 15 of August, 1599. 

**S'. Conyers Clifford, governor of Connaght, 
going to the releefe of O’Connor Sligo, with 1900 
men, vnder 25 ensignes, and about 200 English 
and Irish horse, came to the entrance of the Cor- 
leus, the moste dangerous passage in Connaught 
the 15 of August, about 4 a clocke in the after- 
noone, being then highe tyme to lodge his men 
after a paynefull jorney, where understand- 
ing that the rebells had not possessed that pas- 
sage, he resolved to march thorow the same 
night; whereupon putting his troops in order, 
the vanguard was conducted by S'. Alexander 
Ratcliff; the Lord of Dunkellin sonne to the 
erle of Clanricchard followed with the battell; 
and S". Arthure Savadg brought up the reare 
guarde. The horse (where also the, baggage 
was left,) had directions to stand betweene the 


abbey of Boyle, and the entrance into the pas- 
sage, under the commaund of S'. Griffin Mark- 
ham, until the same should be freed by the foote 
about a quarter of a myle from the mowth of 
the passage, had the rebells traversed the same 
with a barri[ca ]do with doble flancks, in which 
and in other places of advantage thereabouts 
were lodged about 400 of them, contrary to that 
which was advertised to the governor. They 
which possessed the barricadoés, at the ap- 
proach of our vantguard, delivered a small 
volly of shott upon them, abandoninge the 
same allmoste without any force, which the 
governor possessing, made yt passable by open- 
yng the midst, and placed guardes upon the 
same, appoyntinge to the angle of the sinister 
flancke Rogers, lieutenant to S*. Hen. Carye, 
to the angle of y® Dexter flancke, Rafe Con- 
stable (a gentleman very esteemed to the go- 
vernor for his vertu) and not much distant 
from him upon the same flancke, Capt. Water 
Fludd, and Capt. Windsore gevinge to them 
40 men a piece, with comaundement that they 
should not abandon their places untill they 
heard further from himself. Thinges being 
thus ordered, the vantguard, followed by the 
batle and rearguard, advanced in short tyme 
by a narrow waye betwixt 2 large boggs to 
the side of a woode half a myle broade, through 
which lyeth a highe waye so broade as yt geveth 
liberty for 12 men to march in front, the same 
rysinge equally and gently untill yt have passed 
the woode where yt is caryed upon the syde of 
a high hill, which yt leaveth on the left hand 
and y® hill and grownde adjoyninge being 


1599.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2135 


lish, but through the miracles of the Lord, at the intercession of O'Donnel] 
and his army, after having received the pure mystery of the body and blood 
of Christ in the morning, and after the fast which he had kept in honour of 
the Blessed [Virgin] Mary on the day before. 

As for the English, after O’Donnell’s people had departed, they took to 
the road expeditiously, such of them as survived, and arrived at their homes in 


sorrow and disgrace’. 


a mayne bogg, vpon the right hand lyeth a 
thicke woode not more than muskett shott 
from the same, in either of which places, al- 
though the rebell from their contynuall prac- 
tiz, have exceeding advantage of our men, yet 
have they more advantage upon the bogge, 
which they well knowinge made at this tyme 
choice thereof, and even thither were followed 
by St Alex. Ratcliff, who although he were in 
the beginninge of the skirmish shott in the face, 
yet he ever contynewed to spend all his powder 
upon them; and no supply coming unto him, 
prepared to charge them with a small number 
ot such choice pikes as would either voluntary- 
he follow him or were by him called forth by 
name from the body of the vantguard ; but be- 
fore he could come to joyne with them, he had 
the use of a legg taken from him with the 
stroake of a bullet, by which ill fortune he was 
forced to retyre, susteyned upon the armes of 
2 gentlemen, one of which receivinge the lyke 
hurte, died in the place, as did also himselfe, 
soone after, being shott throughe the boddy 
with a bullet. There was with Sir Alex: Rat- 
cliff in the head of the vantguard Capt. Henry 
Cozbye, whome at his goinge to chardge he in- 
vited to accompany him; and perceivynge him 
slacke, ‘well, Cozsby,’ said he, ‘I see I must 
leave thee to thy basenes, but I must tell the 
before my departure, that yt were much better 
for the to dye in my company by the hands of 
thy countrymen, then at my returne to perish 
by my sworde ;’? but Cosby, which is the gene- 
ral] disposition of all tru cowards, yeelding to 


have the terme of his lyfe a while deferred 
upon any condition, stood fyrme with at least 
a third parte of the vantguard, untill he see 
the adversyty of this noble knight, when by 
example of his turninge heade the vanguarde 
fled in such route, that yt discomfited the 
batle, with y® sight of which (not abiding any 
impression), was broken the rearguard, the 
whole forces being almost without any enemyes 
force in a moment put all in confusion, which 
disorder the governor endeavouringe (but in 
vaine) to reforme, whilest he had any strength 
left in him, was after much fruitless travell, 
susteyned breathless upon the armes of S* John 
mac Swine and Capt. Olyver Burke’s lieutenant, 
who perceivinge the disordered flight of the 
whole army (disparing to save their lyves by 
other meanes) perswaded him to retyre him- 
selfe with them; when he reproovinge the 
baseness of his men, replyed Romane lyke, that 
he would not overlyve that daies ignomynye. 
But that affection which moved S" John Me. 
Swyne to vse intreatyes, perswaded him now 
to practiz force, by which they caryed him 
from the pursewing rebells some few paces, 
where enraged with a consideration of the 
vildeness of his men which he often repeated, 
brake from them in a fury, and turning head 
alone, alone made head to the whole troopes of 
pursewers, in the midst of whome, after he was 
stroake through the body with a pyke, he dyed 
fizhting, consecrating by an admyrable resolu- 
cion, the memory of his name to imortallitye, 
and leaving the example of his vertu to be in- 


2136 aQnNNata RIOoshachta e€iREGNN. 1599. 


Poppasizc muimncin Ui oomhnaill ina bpwplb in aghaio pin, 7 po 
adnaicpioc an mfio po manbad uadaib, 7 oc cualaccap poad vo na Fal- 
laib pop cculaib ciagaic 50 caplén cala maole cipm 1 ppanccanbyoc an 
iompuloe pon Ua cconcobain. Oc cualans 6 concobain an catpaémfo pin 
coipppleibe pon Sin conenp chpont 7 @ cuitim ann, pa ovicnfiomeach lair 
imnpin 50 po canpelbad c{nn an sobepnona 06. Oct connaine pum an cfnd po 
bm ceill D1a Compuntact ar an cancain 1 mbaot, 7 applo do pinne tect pon 
emeach Ui vomnaill 7 a oighmap vo tabaint v6. 6a oagaiple od6rom on, 
om oo pad 6 vomnall expium 1 ppoplamup 7 hn cefnoup a Cpiche, 7 00 pioo- 
nact apccada 1omoda deocanb, oinnilib, 7 va Zac nadailece ancfna 06 Fo por 
accpeab a tip ian pin. 

Cepoict na Long ona ot cuap voploe ppaoinead pon na Zallaibh, 7 cwmczim 
an Zobepnona, 7 0 concobain vo cabarnc ap in caiptiall amail po aipnhio- 
pom, ba pfo po chinnpium occa san pmitb(pc pm hUa noomnaill mn ba pim, 
7 Po naiom a capaccpad pip 1apcain, 7 po clomsh Ua vomnarll von lompslp 
pempaite 1ompuoh pon a cculaib sup an ngaallimh ovomovhipe. 

Oaoime vale vo matsZamnachaib a hoipsialloib 50 ccév Do pausompib 
amoille pia vo bAt an poptcad ag Ua ccfnbaill a. ag an ccalbac, mac 
uilliam widin mic FIpPZanainm, 1 neannac na bliaona po, 7 a nionam a tcuapur- 
cail vo éipnfo oo1b Do deachaid 6 cfpbaill co na mumntin ipin o1dce DIA 


his chardge the smaller bone of his right arme 
broken with the stroake of a bullett, and that 
which addeth moste to the commendation of his 
chardge is, that it was presented upon the nar- 
row waye between the two boggs before men- 
cioned, and forced with the losse of some both 
men and horses into the bogg vpon the right 
hand, where the rebells followed eagerly the 
execution of our men, untill the feare they ap- 


tytuled by all honorable posterities. There died 
lykewyse Godred Tirwhit, brother to Mr. Robert 
Tyrwhit of Ketleby, in Lyconshire, fighting by 
the syde of S* Alex. Ratcliff, of whome cannot 
be sayde lesse, then that he hath left behinde 
him an eternall testemony of the noblenes of 
spiritt, which he deryved from an honorable fa- 
mylye. But these went not alone, for they 
were accompanied to the gates of death by dy- 


vers worthy, both lieutenants and ensignes, 
who were followed, (for that they were not fol- 
lowed by them to fight) by 200 base and cow- 
ardlye raskalls. The rest which els had all 
perished were saved by the vertu of S' Griffin 
Markham, who chardginge the pursewers in 
the head of my Lo: Southamptons troope gave 
securitie to this ignominious flight having in 


prehended vpon the sight of our horses, caused 
them to stay their pursuite and to thinke upon 
their owne safetye. 

‘This defeat was geven by O’Rvrke, and mac 
Dermon O’Donnell being there, but came not 
to fight, to whome the governors head was sent 
that night for a present; his bodye was con- 
veyed to a monastery not far from thence, as 


1599. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


O’Donnell’s people remained that night in their tents, and interred all 
those that were slain of their people; and when they heard that the English 
had returned home, they proceeded to the castle of Cul-Maoile, in which they 
had left O’Conor blockaded. When O’Conor had heard of the victory of the 
Curlieus, gained over Sir Conyers Clifford, and of his fall there, he did not 
believe it until the Governor’s head was exhibited to him. When he saw the 
head he gave up the hope of being released from the prison in which he was, 
and what he did was to come forth on the mercy of O'Donnell, and to make full 
submission to him. This was a good resolution for him; for O’Donnell placed 
him in the full power and chieftainship of his territory, and made him many 
presents of horses, cattle, and all other necessaries; so that O’Conor then 


2137 


settled in his territory. 
When Theobald-na-Long was informed that the English had been defeated 


and the Governor slain, and that O’Conor had been let out of the castle, as we 
have related, the resolution he came to was, not to oppose O'Donnell any 
longer. He afterwards confirmed his friendship with him; and O’Donnell 
permitted the aforesaid fleet to go [sail] back again to Galway. 

Some gentlemen of the Mac Mahons of Oriel, with one hundred soldiers, 
were hired by, O’Carroll (Calvagh, the son of William Odhar, son of Ferga- 
nainm ), in the spring of this year; and at the time that their wages should be 
given them, O’Carroll with his people went to them by night and slew them 


appeareth by mac Dermons letter to the consta- 
ble of Boyle, which is censured by S". John 
Harrington (from whom I received a coppy of 
yt) to be barbarous for the Latyn but cyvill for 
the sence. For confirmacion of whose judgment 
the letter yt selfe'is contented by my hand for 
justyfication of his barbarisme to appeare be- 
fore as many as will vouchsafe to read yt. 

*** Conestabulario de Boyle salutem: Scias 
quod ego traduxi corpus gubernatoris ad mo- 
nasteriu Sancte Trinitatis propter ejus di- 
lectionem, et alia de causa, si velitis mihi re- 


dire meos captiuos ex predicto corpore, quod 


paratus sum ad conferendum vobis ipsum ; 
alias, sepultus erit honeste in predicto monas- 
terio et sic vale, scriptu apud Gaywash 15 Aug. 


1599: interim pone bonum linteamen ad pre- 
dictum corpus, et si velitis sepelire omnes alios 


nobiles, non impediam vas erga eos. 
*« *Mac DERMON.’ 


‘“‘By this lettre is too truly interpreted a 
troublesome dreame of the governors, which he 
had about a yeare before this defeat, when, 
being wakened by his wife out of an unquiet 
sleepe, he recounted unto her that he thought 
himselfe to have beene taken prisoner by O’Don- 
ell, and that certen religious men (of compas- 
sion) conveied him into their monastery where 
they concealed him and so indeed as he dreamed 
or rather prophesied the monastery hath his 
boddye, the worlde his fame, and his frends the 


want of his vertu.” 


12*e@ 


QNNQZa RIOshachTaA EIREGNN. [1599. 


2138 


parsid 50 po manbad lap iad apn a noéngadaib covalea, 7 ma crisib opoa. 
Ro cpochad ciod anal o1obh 1p na cpannoib ba commnfpa 06, ac nama cfpna 
lucc barle o10b app oarmdeom wi cfpballl. 

lan mapbad Ppepoenc oa coiccead muman, 7 Zobepnopa coiccid connact 
amcail po aapnhdopiom ma monadaib comadaip, 00 veachaid lapla op erperx, 
5 O nell 1. God mac pipdonca, mic cumn bacarg hi ccomne 7 hn ccomodail 
ye porle 1p na cevlaitib vo mip Sepcemben, 7 ba he cmoc a ccomne pit vo 
naiom (conpa 50 cfnn va miop, 7 a pann pon vo sallaib, 7 00 Zaoidelaib vo 
bit az zach aon aca mn ap(ec pm. O Ro prodagh lapla opp eppex pm 
hUa nell an cuct pm vo cud 50 bale Ata chat, 7 mp bo cian po aamip 
ann an can vo deachaid 50 Saroib ap Scaca plogoa po tapbhn amanl ap 
ondpnais) po taippfin Saranac yam m Epmn. Ro paccarb Ene san pich san 
puaimhn(p, san lupcip, san sobepndip, Fan Ppeprvenp, acc amaimiomchomm(ce 


mA conference.—Camden, Dymmok, and Mory- 
son have given a curious account of this con- 
ference, which took place at Ballyclinch, now 
Anaghclart Bridge, on the River Lagan, be- 
tween the counties of Louth and Monaghan, 
near the chief town of the county of Louth. 
These writers assert that Tyrone made humble 
submission to the Lord Deputy on this occa- 
sion. But this statement cannot be true, for 
O’Neill’s demands, on this occasion, were not 
those of a submissive suppliant, but of a pow- 
erful chief; for among the demands which he 
required to be transmitted to the Queen were, 
that the Catholic worship should be tolerated ; 
that the principal officers of state and the 
judges should be natives of Ireland; that O’Neill, 
O’Donnell, Desmond [1. e. the Desmond created 
by the Prince of Ulster! ], should enjoy the lands 
possessed by their ancestors for the last two 
hundred years, and that one-half of the army 
in Ireland should consist of natives. 

Camden’s account of the meeting between 
these two grandees of towering ambition is ex- 
ceedingly interesting, and sufficiently minute 
for all historical purposes. It runs as follows : 


- 


‘Interim in Anglia supplementum, quod Pro- 
rex petiit, conscribitur, & mittitur; verum pau- 
culis interjectis diebus, aliis literis edocuit, se 
nihil aliud hoc anno amplius prestare posse, 
quam cum MCCC peditibus & CCC equitibus 
Vitonie limites adire. Quo cum pervenisset, 
Tir-Oenius se cum suis in collibus é longinquo 
uno & altero die ostendit, demumque per Haga- 
num” [O’Hagan ejus ministrum ], ‘ colloquium 
cum Prorege orat. Ille abnuit: sin Tir-Oenius 
hoe vellet, die crastino ante principia in acie 
Quo die levi facta 
velitatione, eques é Tir-Oenii turmis alta voce 
exclamat, Comitem pugnare nolle, sed cum Pro- 


colloqui posse, respondet. 


rege colloqui velle, at nullo modo inter acies. 

‘‘ Die insequente Proregi agminatim pergenti 
Haganus obvius nuntiat, Tir-Oenium miseri- 
cordiam Regine & pacem exposcere, &, ut tan- 
tisper exaudiatur, obsecrare ; quod si conce- 
deret, illum cum omni observantia ad vicini 
fluminis vadum (Balla Clinch vocant) expecta- 
turum, haud procul a Loutho primario Comita- 
tur oppido. Eo Prorex quosdam premisit qui 
locum explorarent: ill Tir-Oenium ad vadum 
offendunt: qui docet quamvis flumen intumuis- 


1599.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2139 


on their beds; and in their lodging houses. He hanged some of them from the 
nearest trees. The party of one village, however, made their escape in despite 
of O’Carroll. . 

After the killing of the President of the two provinces of Munster, and of 
the Governor of Connaught, as we have related in their proper places, the 
Earl of Essex and O’Neill (Hugh, the son of Ferdorcha, son of Con Bacagh) 
came to a conference™ in the first days of the month of September, and the 
end of their conference was, that a peace was ratified between them till the 
end of two months, during which time each of them was to have his own part 
of the English and Irish. When the Earl of Essex had concluded a peace with 
O'Neill at this time, he proceeded to Dublin, and he remained not long there 
when he went to England, after having displayed a regal pomp the most 
He left Ireland 
without peace or tranquillity, without Lord Justice, Governor, or President, 


splendid that any Englishman had ever exhibited in Ireland. 


Hine Pro- 
rex, turma equitum in proximo colle disposita, 


set, facile utrinque exaudiri posse. 


solus descendit; Tir-Oenius equo ventre tenus 
in aquas immisso Proregem in ripa magna ob- 
servantia salutat, et multis ultro citroque ver- 
bis, sine arbitris habitis, fere hora est consumpta. 
Post unam & alteram horam Conus filius Tir- 
Oenii nothus Proregem subsefuutus, patris no- 
mine obsecrat ut alterum haberetur colloquium 
ad quod primarii aliquot viri utrinque admitte- 
rentur. Assensit Prorex, modo non sint plures 
quam sex. Die prestituto Tir-Oenius, cum Cor- 
maco fratre, Mac-Gennyso, Mac-Guiro, Evero 
Mac-Cowley” [Mac-Mahon], “* Henrico Ovmg- 
tono, & O-Quino, ad vadum se ostendit. Ad 
eos Prorex cum Comite Southamptonix, Geor- 
gio Bourchiero, Warhamo 8. Legero, Henrico 
Danversio, Edwardo Wingfeldo, & Gulielmo 
Constablo, Equitibus Auratis, descendit. Quos 
singulos magno comitate Comes, & verbis non 
multis collatis, placuit, ut quidam Delegati die 
insequente de pace agerent. Inter quos conve- 
nit ut induciz ab ipso die in singulas sex sep- 
timanas, usque ad Calend. Maii haberentur ita 


12 


tamen ut utrinque liberum sit, post preemoni- 
tionem quatuordecim ante dies factam, bellum 
renovare. Quod si quis Comiti confederatus 
assensum non prebuerit, illum Proregi prose- 
quendum relinqueret.”—Annal. Reg. Elis., A. D. 
1599. 

Of Essex’s journey to the north, on this oc- 
casion, two minute accounts have been printed. 
The first, which was sent by Essex himself, with 
a private letter, to the Queen, was printed in 
the Nuge Antique. The second was written by 
John Dymmok, supposed to have been in at- 
tendance upon Essex, and was printed in the 
second volume of Tracts relating to Ireland, for 
the Irish Archeological Society.—See Shirley’s 
Account of the Territory or Dominion of Farney, 
pp- 107, 109, where large extracts from Essex’s 
own account of it are printed. 

The conference between O’Neill and Essex 
has been made the subject of a vignette design, 
by H. K. Browne, which has been engraved to 
illustrate the frontispiece to the fourth volume 
of Moore’s History of Ireland. The subject has 
been also painted by I. E. Doyle. 


Giz 


2140 aNNaza RIOShachta ElREaNN. (1599. 


Ni pp cpa 


oaon ofinennchoib an vo tect Tap a aIp do MdIPI, No an Danamain Top do 


clooim an ms ag an chancelloun, 7 a5 Sip Robeno Hapnoimep. 


coo an Tianla a hepinn an tan pin. 

Mac mee pubne bagainig a. vomnall mac nell mfipsis vo mapbad le 
Maolmuine, mac bmain oicc, 7 le hod mbuide mac pippfoa mec puibne 4 
laopide ma nofp vo lopccad a ccionmd a mignioma la hUa noomnaill pon 
mullach pte Cloda hn ppradnaipi cee 1 ccoiccimne the coll a peacca. 

O cimné1015 plonn Uaitne mac donnchaid dice mic Cloda mic amlaoib 
o baile uf eachoac 1 nupmumaimn 1octaip 1 cconntae thioppact apann vo écc 
1 mi nouemben 4 6 cimneicti1s DO Farnm don siolla oub ua cinnerdig. 

Magsipcip [O}] mallam Semup, mac oomnaill, mic amlaoib, mic vonr- 
chad uf mallam, pip ciszhe naofoead cotchinn, 7 pao 1 nealadnaib vo écc 
1 mf occobep1 mbarle uf calle 1 mbaptncact chunnche i cconncae an clamp. 

Carplen na mainge v0 sabanl la hiapla ofpmuman pa pamain na bhiadna 
yo ap mumncin na beanmogna, ctma aroilsze capb(pca bit vo bit pop an 
mbanoa. 

Loch sain beop vo sabanl lap an iapla céona pop muinnzip na bam- 
yuosna. 

Ua concobaip Sliccig vonnchad mac catail dice vo bHt 1 munteapup, 7 hi 
ceanacpad Ur somnaill on campip in po maptaod an sobepnom 50 OINID Na 
po. ba hot(ppad ap slan, 7 ba comm pia cert o6pom coct 1pm ceapace- 
paoh pin 6 na pucaintmseallcoib mpigne ectcanbaca, no Zeallea 06 6 bliad- 
am co bliadain 50 pm. O po ba manac Ua concobain oUa vomnaill, vo 
pavprde dua Concobanp vipime do buaib, vo caiphb, 7 va Zac n{pnarl clépa 


7 inne, sanban blop, 7 oa Zach navdilge ole pamice a Up vo aitpeb 7 ve 
» For violating his law.—This is a repetition, P Baile- Ut-Adle, now Ballyally, a townland in 


nearly word for word, of an entry already given, the parish of Templemaley, barony of Upper 


p-. 2092. 

° Baile- Ui-Eachdhach: i. e. O’Haugh’s town, 
now Ballyhough, a townland in the parish of 
Aglishcloghane, about four miles to the north- 
east of Burrisokeane, in the barony of Lower 
Ormond, and county of Tipperary. An old 
castle stood in this townland till the 6th of 
January, 1839, when it was blown down by a 
storm. 


Bunratty, and county of Clare—See note §, 
under the year 1559, p. 1571, supra. 

4 Loch-Gair, near the town of Bruff, in the 
county of Limerick.—See it already mentioned 
under the years 1516 and 1579. The strength 
of this place is described by Sir George Carew, 
about this period, as follows : 

‘The four and twentieth” [of May, 1600], 
‘the Armie encamped at the Brough” [ Bruff ], 


1599.) 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


214] 


excepting only that he delivered up the regal sword to the Lord Chancellor 


and to Sir Robert Gardiner. 


It was not known to any of the Irish at this time 


whether the Earl had gone to England to remain there or return back again. 

Mac Sweeny Banagh, 1.e. Donnell, the son of Niall Meirgeach, was slain 
by Mulmurry, the son of Brian Oge, and Hugh Boy, the son of Ferfeadha Mac 
Sweeny; and both these were hanged by O'Donnell, in the presence of all in 
general, on Mullach-Sithe-Aedha, for violating his law". 

O’Kennedy Finn (Owny, the son of Donough Oge, son of Hugh, son of 
Auliffe), of Baile-Ui-Eachdhach’, in Lower Ormond, in the county of Tip- 
perary, died in the month of November, and Gilla-Duv O’Kennedy was then 


styled the O’Kennedy [Finn]. 


Master O’Nialain (James, the son of Donnell, son of Auliffe, son of Donough 
(’Niallain), a man who kept an open house of hospitality, died in the month 
of October at Baile-Ui-Aulle’, in the barony of Quin, in the county of Clare. 

About the Ist of November this year Castlemaine was taken by the Earl of 
Desmond from the Queen’s people, in consequence of the warders wanting the 


necessary food. 


Loch-Gair* was also taken by the same Earl from the Queen’s people. 
O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge) continued in friendship 
and amity with O’Donnell from the time that the Governor was slain to the 


end of this year. 


It was a change for the better, and a shelter for him, to come 


over to this friendship from the cold, slow, and unprofitable promises made 


him [by the English] from year to year. 


When O’Conor became obedient to 


O'Donnell, he gave O’Conor a countless deal of cows, horses, and every other 
description of herds and flocks, as also of corn and of other necessaries, to 


‘where the President left a Warde, partly to 
otfend the Rebels of Loghguire, three miles dis- 
tant from thence, and partly to open the way 
betwixt Kilmallocke and Limerick, which, for 
two yeares space, had been impassible for any 
subject. The five and twentieth, the army pas- 
sing neere Loghguire, which was as yet held by 
the Rebels, the President, attended with a Troope 
of Horse, rode to take a particular view of the 
strength thereof, as also by what way he might 
most conveniently bring the Cannon to annoy 


the same. Hee found it to bee a place o& ex- 
ceeding strength, by reason that it was an Iland, 
encompassed with a deep Lough, the breadth 
thereof being, in the narrowest place, a caliever’s 
shot over; upon one side thereof standeth a very 
strong Castle, which, at this time, was manned 
with a good Garrison, for there was within the 
Tland John Fitz-Thomas, with two hundred men 
at the least, which shewed themselves prepared 
to defend the place.”—Pacata Hibernia, book 1. 


c. V1. 


2142 ANNGZa RIOsShachta ErREGNN. [1600. 


gatiuccad a thine, 1ap na bach ma papach gan 1onacacht Zan aiciacchad 
pm hachod mchlin go pin. 

Ua ovomnaill vo dul vo producchad eitip clomn william ma nfpaonta .1. 
eicip Mac mlliam, ceboicc mac uaceip crotats, 7 teboicc na long mac Rip- 
lan noenam a proda 06, Ro tmall vo vol 
hi cclomn Riocaapo, Ap a aof ni veachaid cap uanan mop ipcec von chun 
pin. 
saillme. Oo pavad cpfch cuicce o Spaippe an barle msip 7 se do bai a 
oman,7 a imlccla hi ccoizcimne cappide co Lim concculaimn ni ofingene nach 


ofipod an iapainn 1 mip vecemben. 


bat copa hadce hr ccampa 1 mompoccup an machaipe prabangs, 7 na 


ni act poad can a cap don cup yon 1 nulcanb. 

Coiccead ulad ma linn lain, ina topan cecht 7 ma tun ceccle pin 
mbliadain pr Zan Zuaip cata na cneice, Zona, na Zabala ponna a hencaoib 
vepimn 7 a@ neccla pom pon sac em cip 1oip. 


QO1S CRIOS[C], 1600. 
Cloip Cyiopz, mie, Se céo. 


Cin cianla op epper (.1. Rob(po) a oubpamap vo tocz 1 nepmnn 1 mbeltame 
na bhaona po 00 cumd Tonaimn, 7 vo dol in Saraib po pamain na bhiadna 
ceona. 6a hatcopanac, mmbdf{pectac, promach, popspuamda an piaduccad 
puaip 6 comaiple Sharan 1ap ctocc 06 Dia pagio. Ro cubad pmp ceccup 
tlaite, ] TIME a Posnama oon baimprogam an ccfin bat 1 nepinn, 7 na bat 
cadilece nit porp po bad lain lap vo cum coccard 7 catarpce. Cparll ele 
ona plo tubad ppipy, a dol Zan clo Zan ceilebpad oon comaiple Toip no abup 
50 Saroib von chun pin. Jap na pad pm ppp, 7 1ap ccop val momoa na Lit 
v64b, No Ponconsad poaupn veiliugad pe Zach oignice, pie Fac Founm, 7 pe Zach 
onoip baof occa on mbampiosain, 7 po pupal pon a aop 1omcomm(cca psiall, 
7] elope na ciinte, a congbail aca budfin go po piotlaiolo pice an pponnypa 


" Gate. —The Spaippe is now pronounced Council, or without taking his leave of the 


rpapna, and still applied to a military gate, at 
Athenry, Galway, and Limerick, as the Editor 
has ascertained by inquiry among the old Irish 
people dwelling in and near those towns. 

’ Taking his leave of:—This should be : ** with- 
out the permission of the English or Irish Privy 


latter.”’ 

* The sovereign’s anger.—In Harington’s Nuge 
Antique (printed in 1804), vol. i. p. 302, et seq., 
there is a very curious account, of Essex’s in- 
sane conspiracy. Harington says, that as he 
knelt at her feet, and sought to excuse his 


1600.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2143 


replant and inhabit his territory, after it had been a wilderness, without habi- 
tation or abode, for a long time till then. 

In the month of December O’Donnéll went to make peace between the Mac 
Williams, i. e. between the Mac William (Theobald, the son of Walter Kittagh) 
and Théobald-na-Long, son of Richard-an-Iarainn. After having made peace 
between them, he set out to go into Clanrickard; but, however, he did not pro- 
ceed beyond Oranmore on that occasion. He remained three nights encamped 
in the neighbourhood of Machaire-riabhach, and of Galway ; and a prey was 
brought to him from the very gate’ of the great town; and although a fear and 
dread of him was spread from thence to Leim-Chonchulainn, he achieved 
nothing further on this occasion, but returned into Ulster. 

In this year the province of Ulster was a still pool, a gentle spring, and a 
reposing wave, without the fear of battle or incursion, injury or attack, from any 
other part of Ireland; while every other territory was in awe of them (i.e. of the 
people of Ulster). 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1600. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand sia hundred. 


The Earl of Essex (1. e. Robert), of whom we have spoken in the preceding 
year as having arrived in Ireland in the month of May, and as having gone to 
England about the first of November, met with a repulsive, reproachful, sharp, 
and sullen reception from the Council of England, when he appeared before 
them. It was objected to him that his service for the Queen, while in 
Ireland, had been feeble and dastardly, while he wanted nothing which he 
deemed necessary for war or battle. Another thing objected to him was, his 
having come to England on that occasion without the permission of, or taking 
his leave of,* the English or Irish Council. After these were stated to him, and 
many other accusations were laid to his charge, he was commanded to relin- 
quish every dignity, title, and honour, which he held from the Queen; and the 
keepers of the hostages and pledges of the court were ordered to detain him in 
.their custody until the Sovereign’s anger’ against him should be appeased. 


unfortunate master, she catched at his girdle Harington a journal which he had been ordered 
and swore ‘‘by God’s son, I am no Queen: that to keep of the transactions in Ireland; and on 
man is above me.” ‘Then she demanded of reading it, she said fiercely: ‘‘ By God’s son ye 


2144 ANNdGZa RIOsShachTaA EIREANNK. (1600. 
Emp. lap pin cpa po cimnfo leo cat(ppac oippiceach, 7 apmala vo lcci 1 


n€pimn a. Sip Seplup Slunc Copd mounciop ina lupeip, uarp mi bat luptip 1 
n€pinn pm pé oa bliadam gZup an can pin, Sin Sopp cany ina Ppeproenr or 
c{hd va coiccead muman. Ro hullmaigead coblach 1 mbacan lion bad lia 
oloac pe mile pf napmac co na ceongaib tecta vo tocht ap aon lap na 
hoippicceacaib pin 50 hepinn 7 1aoyroe ule 00 Tocc do mMup, 7 vO Tin 50 
coiccead ulad an tpamme. 6aim péil Paccpaice ona vo ponad na cinnce 
pin la comaiple Sharan. 

Ouime uapal vo TIZh ui concobaup oun «1. Di1apmait, mac an oubalcans, 
mic tuacanl, bat poe hi ccMoup ap Opus mom vo parsoiumipib Faordealaca 
bacap1 nampaime ace 1apla ofpmuman,ipm mumain pp pé na bliadna po anall. 
Oo taéd D1lapmait 1 noveipead na bhiadna céona a ttoopac mip vecemben pon 
cuaine 1. cefnn Ui neill, 7 pucip pailce occa. Jan ccprocnuccad a ceilde 06 
amenl po bad Lain lap, po cfoars 0Ua nell poad Ina pmiting a cTTOpac my 
lanuapy na blhadna po,7 dol 1pm mumain. Ro ponal Ua nell pain a apf 
ip na TiIMb1 pagavd Fo mbaoi pin co na plogaib ina o1t1d Opiop mide, Larstn, 
muman, 7 an caoibe ba ofp ofipinn, coup cia v10b bat hi ccannome. no 
ppmcbihc pir. 


sarvelais capt(p muman, Ro cmall 1 naitgioppa saca conaine oo dol Zo 


lap poctain do diIanmalt co na oponsbuidm 50 haencaio 


napla ofpmuman, 7 vo bac a aghad ap ucatnib,7 ap clomn Ulam bhucach 
na Sionna. 

Oc cualad baptin caayplem uf conamns Ripofpo, mac tepoicc, mic william, 
mic emcainn a bupc, cianmant vo tocc an 0 pin, Ro cnumnigh pide 7 a 


are all idle knaves and the Lord Deputy worse.” nize ductor Tir-Oenio intimus, & Essexio devo- 


During this foolish conspiracy was executed 
Captain Thomas Lee, who wrote, in the year 


1594; “A brief Declaration of the Government 


of Ireland, opening many Corruptions in the' 


same, discovering the Discontentments of the 
Irishry, and the Causes moving those expected 
Troubles.”—See p. 1696, supra. Camden gives 
the following account of his conduct and death 
in his Annal. Reg. Elis., A. D. 1601 : 


coe duodecimo Thom. 


Henrici Lewi Georgiani ordinis equitis preclari 


Februarii Lexus, 


agnatus, notissime audacie, militum in Hiber- 


tus, qui eadem nocte, qua Essexius Consiliarios 
adire recusaraverat, operam suam ad Essexium 
intercipiendum aut perimendum obtulerat, Ro- 
berto Crosso ductori classiario, gloriosum esse, 
innuit, si sex viri animosi Reginam simul adi- 
rent, eamque vi adigerent, ut Essexium, South- 
amptonium «& reliquos, custodia emitteret. Hac 
mox Consialiariis Crossus detulit, Lezusque 
quesitus, primis tenebris juxta ostium sanc- 
tioris cubiculi Regii deprehensus est, cogita- 
bundus pallens, sudore diffluens, & sepius per- 
cunctans, an Regina jam ccenatura, an consiliarii 


\ 


1600. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2145 


After this they came to the resolution of sending a different officer to Ireland, 
with an army, namely, Sir Charles Blunt; Lord Mountjoy", as Lord Justice (for 
there had not been a Lord Justice in it for two years before that time); and Sir 
George Cary [Carew], as President over the two provinces of Munster. There 
was a fleet fitted out, in which there was senta force of upwards of six thousand 
armed men, with befitting warlike engines, to accompany these officers to Ireland; 
and all these were to proceed by sea to the province of Ulster in particular. 
These resolutions were made by the English Council about Patrick’s Day. 

A gentleman of the house of O’Conor Don (Dermot, the son of Dubhaltach, 
son of Tuathal) was in command over a large party of Irish soldiers who were 
in the service of the Earl of Desmond, in Munster, during the last year. This 
Dermot went, towards the end of the same year, in the beginning of the month 
of December, on a visit to O'Neill, and received welcome from him. Having 
finished his visit to his satisfaction, he asked permission of O’Neill to return 
back in the beginning of January in this year, and proceeded into Munster. 
O'Neill desired him to mention it in the territories through which he should 
pass, that he [O'Neill] himself, with his forces, was marching after him to visit 
Meath, Leinster, Munster, and the southern side of Ireland, to know which of 
them were in friendship and which in opposition to him. When Dermot 
arrived with his force among the Irish confederates of the east of Munster, 
[and told them that O’Neill was on his march to visit them], he proceeded by 
the shortest ways to go to the Earl of Desmond ; and he directed his course 
by Uaithne” and Clanwilliam*, on the borders of the Shannon. 

When the Baron of Castleconnell (Richard, the son of Theobald, son of 
William, son of Edmond Burke) heard of Dermot’s arrival there, he and his 


adessent : inter hec captus & examinatus, pos- Sir George Carew staid at Dublin for 


(1600). 


tero die in judicium raptus, ex testimonio Crossi 
& sua confessione damnatus, ad furcas Tiburnas 
trahitur: ubi confessus, se hominem fuisse no- 
centissimum, in hac autem causa innocentem : 
& nihil contra Reginam vel cogitasse protestatus, 
supplicio afficitur. Et pro temporum ratione 
salutaris hee visa est severitas.”’ 

u Lord Mountjoy, §c.—They landed at the 


hill of Howth on the 24th of Febrvary, 1599 


some time to get his commission and instruc- 
tions, and to learn the state of the kingdom, 
and on the 7th of April, 1600, went to his pro- 
vince.—See Pacata Hibernia, book 1. chap. 1. 

“ Uaithne, now Owny, forming two baronies, 
one in the county of Limerick, and the other in 
that of Tipperary.—See note ", p. 979, supra. 

* Clanwilliam, \a barony in the north-east of 
the county of Limerick. 


12 R Py 


2146 GQNNata RIOSshachta elREaNN. 


(1600. 


ofpbpatain tomap an lon ap la po peopat oo mapcacaib 7 tpogteacaib 
ola mumncip Poin, 7 do muimncip na baunmiogna, 7 po sabpac acc o1ubpaccad 
dianmaca co na mumntin 6 ta mammpcin Ucntne 50 opoiclc bunbmpce In 
cconntae Luimmg 50 po dfotaisead monan oa DasZoaoimb, 7 da daopccap- 
pluas m apfcc pm. Os ool do Dlapmaic co na mum cap an oporcle 
pempaice ba hann po blospac an oa mac pin teporte a bunpc «1. an bantn, 7 
comar la huabap,7] anoapache a huct a muincipe phn, 1 ccmoplach spoms- 
buidne ovianpmava. Ni pamicc leopom poad ylan can a nap an can po 
hiadad mmpa, 7 po tpapccnaiz, 7 po claidmic Zan corsill la a mbiodbadanb. 
ba vamna eccaoine a noeapnad la diIanmait co na muimntip don cup pin 41. 
manbad an bantin 7 comap, sen bo hoce an aof naoipe 1aopde popcap 
pippoa ap aof nanma, 7 noipb(pcaipp. 

Sloiccead la hua nell 1. God mac pipoopcha, mic cumn bacais, a mi 
lanuany na bliadna po vo dol ap in caoib bu ofp ofipimn vo clnsal a capacc- 
pad le a compann coccad, 7 oaite a anppolad an a eappecaiporb. lan 
pRaccbenl corccrd ulad oUa neill appl vo Lud hn ccoicepich mide, 7 bnerpne 
‘7 vo dealbna mon 0 nofpna oiogbala mona ap fud an Tipe, 50 cTcoapate 
bapin velbna 2. Cmoptoin, mac Ripofipo, mic cmopcopa a pian pin 
oUa nell. Ro lanmillead lar macaine cuipcne, 7 Zac ni oan bh le ceporce 
oiolmum man an ccéona. Oo taéo 1apam o néill 50 vopup bale aca Luam 
bai 


yloe nao novoce In Lonspont ipm tip hipm, 7 00 baccap pip ceall, uaccam 


von caoib t{p oo clomn colmam, vo cenel piachach hi ppfpaib cealt. 


lagtn, 7 1aptaip mide dia o1spfin, 7 acc nalom a ccapaccpad ppipp. 

(cc paccbanl na cine pm 0Ua néill appfo lmd tap muinchinn plebe bladoma 
plan, 7 po lace tm pecermelcai naén L6 po ouchans Ele an og a brodbanaip 
pe hUa cce(pbaall tigeapna Ele 1. an Calbac mac wlham wdip, mic pip san 
cam a norozail an oumemapbeta vaopnclanoa, 7 na ofpccmancpa oiopulaing po 


¥ Uaithne, now Abbington, a townland in a 
parish of the same name, in the barony of 
Owneybeg, in the north-east of the county of 
Limerick. 

* Bun-briste, now Bunbristy bridge, near 
Grange, about eight miles to the south of the 
city of Limerick. 

* Delvin-More : i. e. the barony of Delvin, in 


the county of Westmeath. 

» Machaire-Cuircne, now the barony of Kil- 
kenny west, in the county of Westmeath. 

°* Clann- Colman, now the barony of Clonlonan, 
in the county of Westmeath. 

4 Kinel-Fiachach, now the barony of Moy- 
cashel, in Westmeath. 


© Fireall, a territory comprising the baronies 


1600. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2147 


brother, Thomas, mustered all the forces they were able, both horse and foot, 
of his own and the Queen’s people ; and they continued to fire on Dermot and 
his people [while they were passing] from the monastery of Uaithne’ to the 
bridge of Bun-briste’, in the county of Limerick ; and many of his officers and 
common soldiers were slain during this time. As Dermot and his people were 
crossing the aforesaid bridge, these two sons of Theobald Burke, i. e. the Baron 
and Thomas, advanced with pride and boldness in front of their own forces, 
and towards the borders of Dermot’s party. But they were not able to return 
back safe, for they were surrounded, prostrated, and unsparingly put to the 
sword by their enemies. What Dermot and his people committed on this occa- 
sion was the cause of lamentation, namely, the killing of the Baron and Thomas; 
for, though they were young in age, they were manly in renown and noble 
deeds. 

A hosting was made by O’Neill (Hugh, the son of Ferdorcha, son of Con 
Bacagh) in the month of January in this year, and he proceeded to the south 
of Ireland, to confirm his friendship with his alles in the war, and to wreak 
his vengeance upon his enemies. When O'Neill left the province of Ulster, he 
passed along the borders of Meath and Breifny, and through Delvin-More’, and 
did great injuries throughout the territory, [and continued to waste it], until 
the Baron of Delvin (Christopher, the son of Richard, son of Christopher ) came 
and submitted to O'Neill on his terms. He [also] totally spoiled Machaire- 
Cuirene’, and all the possessions of Theobald Dillon. O/’Neill afterwards 
marched to the gates of Athlone, and along the southern side of Clann-Colman*, 
and through Kinel-Fiachach’, into Fircall®. In this country he remained en- 
camped nine nights; and the people of Fircall, of Upper Leinster, and West- 
meath, made full submission to him, and formed a league of friendship with 
him. 

On leaving this country, O’Neill passed over the upper part’ of Sheve Bloom 
westwards, and sent forth three parties in one day to ravage Ely, because of 
the enmity he bore O’Carroll, Lord of Ely, i.e. Calvagh, the son of Wilham 
Odhar, son of Ferganainm, and in revenge of the base murder and intolerable 
massacre which he had committed upon the gentlemen of the Mac Mahons of 


of Ballycowan, Ballyboy, and Eglish or Fircall, Upper part, muinnémn «1. uaécap.— O’ Clery, 
in the King’s County. in Leabhar Gabhala, p. 3. 
12 R2 


2148 GNNaZa RIOShachTa EIREGNN. [1600. 


mip pé an na oaoimb uaiple voinsiallaib mes matgamna bacan ap a roncarb, 
7 ap a popoad amearl po aipnfiomap ipin mbliadain pemaimn. Ro bin opocoiac 
an mgnoma fpin vo duchaig Ele von chun yin, uaip puccad eipte a hule 
pealba posluaipce a maoine, 7] a mop mant(p co nap paccbad mnte acc 
luaitpead 1 monao a hapba 7 aoible 1 monad a haashce. Oo pavads 
notaiplige Ecca, 7 o1ofoa oponga o(nmana oa pefpanb, oa mnaib, oa macarb, 
7 oa mngfnarb. Ro paccbad blop oaome uaiple oa pine pfin, 7 va praluy 
1 pppcpabpa pmpp 6 cefpbaall pin cin. 

Oo taéd 1anam Ua neill peme 50 bnucicimlib bealais map mange oala, 
vo Ropr cpé, vo ub caipin, 00 conco tfinflod on pporlonspont so a céle 06 
amlad pm §o paimicc $0 vopup moampepe na cnoiche naom. Nin bo cian 
voib hipulde an Tan TUccad an cpoc naom Cuca DIA CcoMmda 7 DIG Ccomafice, 
7 vo b{ptpat na Zao coinbeanta thoma, almpana, 7 opppala 1omoa oa 
maoparb, 7 oa mancoib 1 nondip m commde na notla. Cuccpat tna tfpmonn, 
7 tammipect Don Maimpcip co na mupaib, 7 co na peanonnaib posnama, 4 
ona via huile cascpeabcachonb ap cna. 

Qimpid om Ua néill atcha oo mi febpu haimpine po mm imlib Ele ofip- 
ceantaise, 1aptain buicilénac, coipp Siuipe, 7 colle na manach. 

bai lapla upmuman 1. comap mac Semup, mic Prapop buiilep, lapla 
cille vapa 1. Feapoicc, mac eduaipo, mic Feanoice, 7 bapun velbna 1. Cpiop- 
coin, mac Ripveipo mic cpioptopa co na mbaoi a pposnam 7 1 numla ag an 
mbampiogain 6 ta pm go bale ata chat ag baccap ammayp 7 1onnpargio 
vo tabaint an Ua neill Zac nowwce, | Fe po coccaippiot mm ni pm, ni po cproc- 
naizead leo he. 

Oo deachaid O neillian yin 50 vopup Canpil. Tame ora parsid sup an 
maigin pin, an cianla ofpmuman po hoiponead pon a poncongpapom 7 ap a 
usoapnap budfin in aghaid pracuicé an pmonnpa pome pin 1. Semup mac 
comanp pucid, mic Semaup, mic Sain, 7 bacan paoilio cach o1ob pyr a porte. 
Ro apcecnacan pfmpa iapam can Sip prap, vo Cnamhcorll vo pleib murce, 


8 Bealach-mor-Muighe-dala, now Ballaghmore, ' From one encampment: i.e. pitching his 


near Borris-in-Ossory.—See note ®, 1750, supra. 
4 Oorca- Teineadh.—This was the ancient name 


of the parish of Templemore, in the north-east 
a 


of the county of Tipperary.—See note *, under 


the year 1580, p. 1749, supra. 


camp wherever he stopped. 

 Tts houses. —The abbey church of the Holy 
Cross still remains in good preservation, as do 
some of the murs, or houses, but particularly 
the abbot’s mur, or stone house. 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2149 


Oriel, whom he had under his protection and in his service, as we have related, 
in the preceding year. The evil destiny deserved by that wicked deed befel 
the territory of Ely on this occasion, for all its moveable possessions, wealth, 
and riches were carried away, and nothing left in it but ashes instead of its 
corn, and embers in place of its mansions. Great numbers of their men, 
women, sons, and daughters were left in a dying and expiring state ; and some 
gentlemen of his own tribe and kindred were left in opposition to O’Carroll in 
the territory. 

After this O’Neill moved onwards to the borders of Bealach-mor-Muighe- 
dala®, to Roscrea, to Ikerrin, and to Corco-Teineadh", from one encampment to 
another, until he arrived at the gate of the monastery of the Holy Cross. They 
had not been long here when the Holy Cross was brought out to shelter and 
protect them; and the Irish presented great gifts, alms, and many offerings, to 
its keepers and the monks, in honour of the Lord of the Elements. They gave 
protection to the monastery and steward in respect to its houses* and glebe- 
Jands, and to all1ts inhabitants. 

O’Neill remained for some time in the month of February on the borders 
of Southern Ely', [also] in the west of the country of the Butlers, in Cois- 
Siuire™, and in Kilnamanagh’”. 

The Earl of Ormond, i. e. Thomas, the son of James, son of Pierce Butler; 
the Earl of Kildare, i.e. Garret, the son of Edward, son of Garret; and the 
Baron of Delvin, i. e. Christopher, the son of Richard, son of Christopher, with 
all those who were in the service of, or in obedience to the Queen, from thence 
to Dublin, threatened every night to attack and assault O'Neill; but, though 
they meditated doing so, they did not accomplish it. 

O’Neill afterwards proceeded to the gates of Cashel, and there came to him 
to that place the Earl of Desmond, who had been previously appointed by his 
own command, and on his authority, contrary to the statute of the Sovereign, 
James the son of Thomas Roe, son of James, son of John, and they were re- 
joiced to see each other. They afterwards proceeded westwards, across the 


' Southern Ely : i.e. Hile-Ui-Thogartaigh, now River Suir, to the west of Cashel, in the county 
Eliogarty. of Tipperary. 

™ Cois-Siuire, a district belonging to a sept "Kilnamanagh, the country of the O’Dwyers, 
of the Burkes, situated on the west side of the a barony in the county of Tipperary. 


2150 QNNd2La RIOSshachTd ElREGNN. (1600. 


oompc(n plébe claipe, oon bfinas ofincc, vo Clomn s1obin, vo cpich Roipcec, 
7 00 duchags an banners mop. Ni po loicCoh 7 ni po lanmillead la hUa néilt 
ni ip na cipib 1 ccadl(> sen mo ca an Luct no pilot cTalmpead pip 1 mbiov- 
banup bunaid vo spép. Oo deacaid 1apam 50 vacharg an bappars vain ba 
oaomn Let lap an mbamniogain no biod vo bunad. Apé pa bappach ann an can 
ym, Oamo, mac Semuip, mic Ripofipo, me comaip mic emamn. Copyproh 
Ua neill ipin tip: co po cpfchloipccead, 7 50 po cuantas(d lar hi 6 cil 50 
cull etm Mas, 7 mocap, ecip min, 7 aimmin co na baot pint na paolechtain 


aon oulne ppl a haictiuccad, no pm a hartcpeabad 50 harmypip imchfin. 


Oo cow tha 6 néll can concars,7 cap laof (1. abann) ba ofp 50 po puid- 
ish(o longpone lair ecip tao, 7 bannoam (.1. abann) 1 ctcOpann mupccpaise 


° Cnamhchoill, now Cneamhchoill, a short dis- 
tance to the east of the town of Tipperary.— 
See the exact situation of this place already 
pointed out and proved in note *%, under the 
year 1560, p. 1578, supra. 

P Sliabh-Muice, 
anglice Slievenamuck, a low mountain on the 
north side of the glen of Aharlagh, in the ba- 
rony of Clanwilliam, and about four miles to 
the south of the town of Tipperary. It extends 
from Bansha to Corderry, within a mile of the 
village of Galbally. 

9 Sliabh-Claire, a considerable hill, on which 
stands a remarkable cromlech, the tomb of 
Oilioll Olum, King of Munster in the third 
century, situated a short distance to the east of 
the church of Duntryleague, in the barony of 


now Sliabh-na-muice, and 


Coshlea, and county of Limerick, and about 
three miles to the north-west of the village of 
Galbally. 

¥ Bearna-dhearg : i.e. the Red Gap or Chasm, 
a celebrated gap in the mountain of Shabh 
Caoin, now Slieve Reagh, about one mile to the 
south of Kilflin church, on the borders of the 
counties of Limerick and Cork. This gap is 
well known to the readers of ancient Irish his- 
tory, as the place where Mahon, the brother of 
Brian Borumha, King of Munster, was mur- 


dered in cold blood by the ancestors of the 
O’Mahonys and O’Donovans, in the year 976. 
It lies between the hills of Kilcruaig and Bearna- 
dhearg, anglice Red Chair, the former on its 
east, and the latter on its west side. 

S Loyal to the Queen.—The Lord Barry, al- 
though he had been an accomplice in Desmond’s 
rebellion, had now become a staunch partisan 
of the Queen. In a letter, which O’Neill ad- 
dressed to him, he says: 

“You are the cause why all the nobility of 
the south, with each of whom you are linked, 
either in affinity or consanguinity, have not 


-joined together to shake off the yoke of heresy 


and tyranny, with which our souls and bodies 
are opprest.”” 

In answer to this letter Lord Barry declares, 
“that her Highness had never distrained him 
for matters of religion ;” and adds: ‘though 
ye, by some overweening imaginations, have de- 
clined from your dutiful allegiance unto her 
Highness, yet I have settled myself never to 
forsake her.”—Pacata Hibernia, book i. ¢. 1. 

* Extremity: literally, ‘from corner to cor- 
ner.” 

u Lee.—This river has its source in Iveleary, 
in the mountain range which separates the 
counties of Cork and Kerry, and issuing from 


1600. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2151 


Suir, by the route of Cnamhchoill’, Shabh-Muice?, by the east of Shabh-Claire’, 
and Bearna-dhearg", through Clann-Gibbon, through the country of the Roches, 
and through the territory of Barry More. O'Neill did not injure or waste any 
in these territories through which he passed, excepting those whom he found 
always opposed to him in inveterate enmity. He afterwards marched into the 
country of Barry More, who was always on the side of the Queen. The Barry 
at this time was David, the son of James, son of Richard, son of Thomas, son 
of Edmond; and, as he was loyal to the Queen*, O'Neill remained in the terri- 
tory until he traversed, plundered, and burned it, from one extremity‘ to the 
other, both plain and wood, both level and rugged, so that no one hoped or 
expected that it could be inhabited for a long time afterwards. 

O'Neill then proceeded southward, across the River Lee, and pitched his 
camp between the Rivers Lee" and Bandon", on the confines of Muskerry and 
Carbery. To this camp all the Mac Carthys, both southern and northern, came 


the romantic lake of Gougane Barra, after a 
course of about forty miles, divides itself into 
two unequal branches, one mile above the city 
of Cork, and again meeting after a separation 
of nearly two miles, discharges itself into the 
ocean below Cove. 

“ Bandon, a river flowing through the towns 
of Bandon, or Bandonbridge, and Inishannon, 
and discharging itself into the harbour of Kin- 
sale, in the county of Cork.—See it already 
mentioned under the year 1560. It appears 
from a letter to Donough Moyle Mac Carthy, 
dated March 2nd, 1599, signed by Florence Mac 
Carthy, Owen Mac Egan, and Donnell O’Do- 
novan, and published in the Pacata Hibernia, 
book ii. ch. 6, that O’Neill was encamped at 
this time at Iniscare [Inishcarra]. This letter 
runs as follows : 

‘** Cousin Donogh, wee haue us commended to 
your selfe, and to your brother Florence: I haue 
(I assure you) taken the paines to come hither to 
Tyrone, not so much for any danger of my owne, 
as to saue the countrey of Carberry from danger 
and destruction, which, if it bee once destroyed, 
your living” [i.e. food] ‘ (in my opinion) will 


growe very scarce. ‘hese two Gentlemen, your 
Brother” [in law], ‘‘ Odonevan, and Owen Mac 
Eggan, are verie careful with mee of your good. 
Therefore, if ever you will bee ruled by us, or 
tender the wealth of your selfe and your Coun- 
trey, wee are heereby earnestly to request you 
to come and meete us to morrowe at Cloudghe ; 
and so requesting you not to fayle heereof in 
any wise, to God’s keeping I commit you. 
“Your very loving Friends, 


‘¢ FLORENCE Mac CaRTIE. 
OwEN Mac EGGAN. 
DONNELL ODONEVAN. 


‘** 0’ Neale’s Campe at Iniscare, 
Martij 2, 1599.” 


This Donnell O’Donovan was chief of his 
name, and the eldest legitimate son of Donnell- 
na-gCroiceann O’Donovan, son of Teige, son ot 
Dermot.—See note ‘, under the year 1581, 
p- 1762, supra. 

John Collins of Myross, in his pedigree of the 
late General Richard O’ Donovan, of Bawnlahan, 
who was the lineal descendant of this Donnell 
O’Donovan, asserts that O’Donovan was never 


2152 


7 campbneac. 
m ppoplonsponc pin. 


implicated in the rebellion of the Earl of Des- 
mond, or in that of O'Neill. But this is not 
true; for, that Donnell-na-gcroiceann, the O’Do- 
novan who died in 1584, was implicated in the 
rebellion of the Earl of Desmond, is quite evi- 
dent from P. O’Sullevan Beare’s Hist. Cathol. 
Tber., tom. 3, lib. 1, c. 1. p.115, where “‘ Odonno- 
bhanus” is set down among the ‘“‘Veteres [berni, 
gui pro fide Catholica pugnaverunt ;’’ and that his 
eldest legitimate son, this Donnell O’ Donovan, 
who succeeded as chief of his name in 1584, ana 
who submitted to O’ Neill on this occasion, had 
been a rebel so early as 1585, when he burned 
to the ground the house of the Lord Bishop 
of Ross, which had been a short time before 
built by William Lyon, Bishop of Cloyne, is 
quite obvious from the manuscript entitled 
Carbrie Notitia, and Harris’s edition of Ware’s 
Bishops, p. 565, where Harris quotes a Visita- 
tion Book of 1613, stating ‘ that William Lyon 
built a House at Ross [in 1582], which cost him 
at least three hundred pounds, which, in little 
more than three years after, was burnt down by 
the Rebel O’ Donovan.”’ 

It also appears, from the Pacata Hibernia, book 
2, c. vu. that of the twelve thousand pounds di- 
vided among the rebels of Munster by Dr. Owen 
Mac Egan, the Pope’s Bishop of Ross, this 0’ Do- 
novan obtained £200. P. O’Sullevan Beare also 
states that O’Donovan joined O’Driscoll More 
and two knights of the Mac Carthy family, to 
assist the Spanish Admiral Zubiaur, when he 
landed at Castlehaven. 

‘* Adfuit etiam Odriscol Magnus cum Cornelio 
filio, et aliis, Odonnobhanus & equites Maccarrhe. 
Quorum aduentu Anglus territus se nauibus 
continet, & Zubiaur letus, & confirmatus tor- 
mentis ex nauibus expositis Anglicam classem 
biduum acerrimé oppugnat.”—Zist. Cathol. &c., 
tom. 3, lib. 6, c. viii. 


ANNAZa RIOSHachTA EIREGNN. 


(1600. 


Canszacan prol ccaptas wle clp 7 cuaid vo HF i néll an 
Canaice ann oin diap bai1 nfpaonta, 7 1 pppicb(nz 


But we learn from a letter of the Lord Deputy 
and Council, written on the 20th of March, the 
last day of the year 1601, to the Lords in Eng- 
land, that Sir Florence O’ Driscoll, O’ Donovan, 
and the two sons of Sir Owen Mac Carthy, who 
were O’Donovan’s brothers-in-law, had joined 
the English. His Lordship writes: 

** As for Sir Finnin Odrischall, Odonnevan, 
and the two Sonnes of Sir Owen Mac Cartie, 
they and their Followers, since their comming 
wn, are growne very odious to the Rebels of 
those parts, and are so well divided in factions 
amongst themselves, as they are fallen to prey- 
ing and killing one another, which we con- 
ceiue will much availe to the quieting of these 
parts.”—Pacata Hibernia, book 2, ¢. xxx. 

This explains the words of P. O’Sullevan 
Beare, tom. 3, lib. 7, c. i., where he says : 

** Osulleuanus Gulielmo Burko, Richardo Ti- 
rello, & aliis conductis, oberatorum delectu con- 
scripto & sociorum auxiliis millia militum cir- 
Quibus 
ea hyeme Torrentirupem (Carraig an neasaig) 


citer duo iuuentutis elects comparat. 


arcem quam solam in Beantria tenebat Eugenius 
Osulleuanus semper Regine partes secutus, par- 
tem aggere, turribus, vineis, musculis, pluteis 
oppugnatam, partim eneis tormentis quassatam 
in suam potestatem redegit. Odonnobhanum ad 
Anglos reuersum, & alios Anglorum auxiliares 
depredatur. Regias copias, que in Momonijs 
erant, terrore perculsas in oppida munita, & 
arces compellit.” 

Again, it appears from the following passage 
in the instructions given to the Earl of Tho- 
mond, on the 9th of March, 1601, that O’Do- 
novan, and his Irish neighbours, were under 
protection : 

‘The service you are to perform is, to doe all _ 
your endeavours to burne the rebels Corne in 
Carbery, Beare, and Bantry, take their Cowes, 


1600. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2153 


into the house of O’Neill in this camp [1. e. submitted to him]. Thither repaired 
two who were at strife with each other concerning the Lordship of Desmond, 


and to use all hostile. prosecution upon the per- 
sons of the people, as in such cases of rebellion 
is accustomed. 

“« Those that are in subjection, or lately pro- 
tected (as Odrischall, Odonevan, and Sir Owen 
Mac Cartie’s sonnes), to afford them all kind 
and mild vsage.”—Pacata Hibernia, book 3, c. 11. 

By these authorities the Editor is satisfied 
that Collins is wrong in asserting that this fa- 
mily never joined in either of the great rebel- 
lions of Desmond or O’Neill. 

According to a pedigree of O’ Donovan of Car- 
bery, preserved in a manuscript at Lambeth 
Palace, Carew Collection, No. 635, fol. 151, this 
Donnell O’Donovan, who submitted to O’Neill 
at Inishearra, and afterwards relapsed to the 
English who pardoned and protected him, mar- 
ried the daughter of Sir Owen Mac Carthy 
Reagh. He had eleven sons, two of whom, 
Donnell and Conogher, are given in this docu- 
ment by name, but the others are marked, “ nine 
sons more, all children,” which shews that 
this pedigree was penned during the life-time 
of this Donnell O’Donovan, who lived to a 
great age. It appears-by a Chancery record, 
signed by Adam Loftus, Lord Chancellor of 
Treland, in February, 1592, that this Don- 
nell O’Donovan became chief of his name on 
the death of his father, in 1584, and that he 
had married, some time before 1592, the daugh- 
ter of the “‘ great and potent” Sir Owen Mac 
Carthy Reagh. But there remains sufficient 
evidence to shew that he had been previously 
married to Helena Barry, daughter of William 
Barry, of Lislee, in the barony of Barryroe, the 
son of James fitz Richard Barry, Viscount But- 
tevant, and that she was the mother of his son 
and heir, Daniel O’Donovan, and probably of 
three others of his sons. This appears from an 
ode addressed to his eldest son on his succession 


to the chieftainship of Clancahill in 1639, by 
Muldowny O’Morrison. Of his eleven sons the 
names of only eight have been ascertained from 
contemporaneous documents, viz. : 

1. Donell or Daniel O’Donovan, Chief of 
Clancahill. He accompanied Lord Castlehaven 
at the taking of Mallow, Doneraile, Milton, 
Connagh, and Rostellan, but he submitted 
to the peace of Ormond, in 1648, and after- 
wards raised, at his own expense, two com- 
panies of foot to serve His Majesty, by com- 
mission from the Duke of Ormond. It appears, 
from the King’s letter in his favour, that, in 
1649, he was reduced to great extremities by 
Cromwell’s forces, ‘‘ who seized upon all his 
estate, burning, killing, and destroying all that 
came in their way; and blew up with powder 
two of his, the said Donnell’s, castles.” 

It further appears, from the family papers at 
Bawnlahan and Montpellier, that this O’ Dono- 
van surrendered his castles to the Common- 
wealth, Colonel Robert Phaier (Governor of 
Cork for the Parliament in 1649 and till 1660), 
having engaged to him ‘‘some satisfaction.” This 
Daniel had four sons, the eldest of whom was the 
Right Honourable Daniel O’ Donovan, M. P. for 
Baltimore, and a colonel of thirteen companies 
of foot, in the service of James II, and who 
was put on his trial for high treason at the Cork 
assizes of 1684. This appears from various do- 
cuments, and particularly from his petition to 
James II. in 1689, in which he states that 
“his father raised two companies of foote, 
commanded by Petitioner’s uncles, who were 
both slain in his late Majesty’s service. That, 
by his late Majesty’s letter, Petitioner was to 
be restored to an ancient estate, worth about 
£2000 per annum, but, by the partiality of the 
late Government, was deprived of it. That Pe- 
titioner suffered long imprisonment by the op- 


12s 


2154 


GQNNdG2a RIOshachta eiReadNn. 


[1600. 


pe pole 1m tigeannup ofpmuman 1. mac més cantons prabangs ping, mac 
vonnchaid, mc oomnaill, mic fingin, 7 mac més captors moip .1. oomnanll, 


pression of the late Earl of Orrerie, and was 
tried for his life before Lord Chief Justice Keat- 
ing and Sir Richard Reynalls, upon account of the 
late pretended plot. That Petitioner, by Com- 
mission, raised, about Christmas, a Regiment of 
foot, and ever since kept them without any sub- 
sistence from your Majestie, whereby Petitioner 
is exposed to censure, &c., &c. That Petitioner’s 
habitation and estate are exposed to the sea, and 
pirates frequently annoying the inhabitants, so 
that it is requisite to have still men in arms 
thereabouts.” 

The descendants of this Colonel Daniel, the 
eldest son of the O’Donovan who submitted to 
O’ Neill, became extinct, in the senior line, in the 
late General Richard O’ Donovan, of Bawnlahan 
(the son of Daniel, son of Richard, son of Colonel 
Daniel O’Donovan, M.P.), in the year 1829, and 
in the next and only surviving line, in 1841, in 
Captain Cornelius O’ Donovan, who died without 
issue at Dingle in that year. 

2. The second son of the O’Donovan who sub- 
mitted to O’Neill was Teige, who died in 1639, 
and who is now represented by O’Donovan of 
Montpellier, near Cork, who is the present 
chief of the O’Donovans, according to the Eng- 
lish law of primogeniture, which has been ob- 
served by this family since the year 1584, but 
scarcely ever before that year; for it appears 
from a Chancery record, already quoted, that, 
previously to that year, ‘‘the best and wor- 
thiest of the blood of the O’Donovans”’ was 
elected to be chief, according to the law of 
On the nature of this suc- 
cession the celebrated Jesuit, Edmund Campion, 


tanistic succession. 


wrote the following remark, in 1571, in his Hs- 
torve of Ireland, cap. vi. : 

‘** The inheritance descendeth not to the sonne, 
but to the brother, nephew, or cousin-germaine, 
eldest and most valiant: for the Childe being 


oftentimes left in nonage, or otherwise young 
and unskillfull, were never able to defend his 
patrimonie, being his no longer than he can 
hold it by force of armes. But by that time 
he grow to a competent age, and have buryed 
an Uncle or two, he also taketh his turne, and 
leaveth it, in like order, to his posterity. This 
custome breedeth among them continual] Warres 
and treasons.” 

3. The third son of the O’Donovan who sub- 
mitted to O’Neill was Captain Morogh O’Dono- 
van, who had command of one of his brother’s 
companies of foot, and was killed in His Ma- 
jesty’s service, at Rathmines, during the siege 
of Dublin, in 1649. This Morogh had one daugh- 
ter, Joan, who was living in 1629, as appears by 
her grandfather’s will, made in that year, but 
no son of his is anywhere mentioned. 

4. The fourth son of the O’ Donovan who sub- 
mitted to O’Neill was Donough or Denis O’ Do- 
novan, who was his son by Joan, or Juanna Mac 
Carthy, as appears from an Irish poem addressed 
to him in his mother’s lifetime. This Donough 
had a son, Captain Daniel O’ Donovan, who took 
Castletownshend on the 9th of March, 1688-9, 
and who is the ancestor of the present James 
O’Donovan, of Cooldurragha, who is believed, 
among the peasantry of Carbery, to be the 
O’ Donovan, since the death of Captain Corne- 
lius O’Donovan, of Dingle, in 1841. 

5. The fifth son of the O’Donovan who sub- 
mitted to O’Neill was Dermot, or Jeremias, 
who was wounded at Prague in 1648, where he 
was highly commended for his dexterity and 
bravery, as appears from Carve’s Lyra, pp. 332, 
333, in which the following notice of him is 
given : 

‘“‘ Ferdinandus Tertius Romanorum Imperator 
cum Pontificia dispensatione Mariam Leopoldi- 


nam Lincii sibi copulavit. 26 Mensis Quintilis 


1600.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2155 


*namely, the son of Mac Carthy Reagh, i.e. Fineen, the son of Donough, son of 
Donnell, son of Fineen, and Mac Carthy More, i.e. Donnell, son of Donnell, 


Konigsmarchius arcem Pragensem cum parva 
parte ex improviso per stratagema occupavit, 
ubi preter ingentem thesaurum, & spolia Car- 
dinalem ab Harach, cum variis Regni proce- 
ribus intercepit: nihilominis nova & antiqua 
civitate potiri non potuit, quare postmodum 
Carolus Pfaltzgravius Suecorum Supremus 
Bellidux cum nonnullis copiis illuc advenit, 
ubi sine intermissione ambas civitates tormen- 


x 


tis bellicis quatere cepit: tamen a Cesarianis 
strenué resistentibus, perditis aliquot millibus, 
repulsus fuit. Inter hos quidem Hiberni forti- 
ter dimicarunt, quorum duces Jeremias Dono- 
van, & Joannes Murrian [Mulrian?] é€ quibus 
Donovan in Leva globulo trajectus fuit, unde 
ob suam dexteritatem, ac magnanimitatem a 
supremis Ducibus Civitatis apud suam Cesaream 
Majestatem plurimtim recommendatus fuit.”’ 

6. The sixth son of this O’ Donovan, was Cap- 
tain Richard, who, as stated in the King’s letter 
already quoted, “had command of one of his bro- 
ther’s companies of foote, and retired himselfe 
and company into forraigne partes, and there 
was also killed in our service, when he had 
first, as Captaine of the other foote company 
in Collonell O’Driscoll’s Regiment, contributed 
his best endeavours for the furtherance of our 
service, till the late usurped power became 
prevalent in our said kingdome of Ireland.” This 
Richard had a son, Richard, who was edu- 
cated in the University of Toulouse, where he 
obtained the degree of Doctor of both Laws, and 
afterwards studied the Canon Law in England, 
and was appointed Judge of the High Court of 
Admiralty in Ireland by James II. This Dr. 
Richard O’Donovan was elected Member of 
Parliament for Baltimore in April, 1689, but 
he resigned to Jeremie O’ Donovan, head of the 
sept of Clanloughlin. This Dr. Richard O’Do- 
novan left four sons, and some of his race, many 


12 


of whom served in the English navy, are still 
extant, but the Editor has not been able to 
learn where they are. 

7. The seventh son of the O’Donovan who 
submitted to O’Neill was Keadagh O’Donovan, 
who is mentioned, in his father’s will, as a boy 
in 1629, and who was living in 1689, when he 
is referred to as one of the burgesses of Bal- 
timore. He had two sons: 1. Daniel, the an- 
cestor of Richard Donovan, Esq., of Lisheens 
House, Ballincollig; and 2. Richard, the ances- 
tor of Timothy O’Donovan, Esq., of Ardahill, 
near Bantry, who is married to a niece of the 
late Daniel O’Connell, Esq., M. P. 

No reference to the Conogher mentioned in 
the Lambeth pedigree, or to the other three 
sons, who were children when that pedigree 
was written (circ. 1610), has been found in 
the family documents at Bawnlahan or Mont- 
pellier. They probably died young or left their 
native territory. According to the vivid tradi- 
tion among that sept of the O’ Donovans to which 
the Editor belongs, his ancestor, whose name 
was Edmond O’Donovan, removed from Bawn- 
lahan, in the county of Cork, to Gaulstown, in 
the south of the county of Kilkenny, some time 
previously to 1643; and the Editor has been 
long of opinion that he was one of the sons of 
this O’Donovan, who succeeded in 1584, by his 
first wife, Helena Barry. 

The Editor has carefully examined all the 
tombstones, parish registries, and old persons 
of the race of this Edmond recently, and had 
questioned others, now many years dead, on the 
exact nature of this tradition, and found that 
the tradition is simply as follows: Edmond, the 
son of O’ Donovan of Bawnlahan, in the county of 
Cork, killed the eldest son of O’Sullivan Beare 
[qguere Dermot, son of Sir Owen, etatis 20, A. D. 
1616?] ina dispute about the boundary between 

s 2 


2156 


QNNAZa RIOshAacNTA EIREGNN. 


[1600. 


mac oomhnaill, mic vomnaill mc conbmaic ladpas. Cangacan ann mec * 


pos ealta. 


their estates, which adjoined each other, and, 
fearing the vengeance of the O’Sullivans, fled to 
the county of Kilkenny, where he took shelter 
with William, son of Walter Bourke, commonly 
called ‘the Gaul Bourke,”’ whose daughter, Ca- 
therine, he married. His father having disco- 
vered where he was, came to Gaulstown, accom- 
panied by several gentlemen, to bring him home. 
The fugitive, Edmond, apprehensive that his 
father, who dreaded the English Government, 
might wish to coax him home to have him put 
on his trial, according to the English laws, for 
the killing of O’Sullivan’s son, hesitated, for 
some time, before he would make his appear- 
ance; but at length, by advice of the Gaul, 
he consented to come to an interview with his 
father, but with such a guard as to prevent him 
and his attendants from seizing his person. 
They parleyed near the gate of the castle of 
Gaulstown. The father earnestly entreated him 
to return home, saying that it was the belief 
among the septs of Carbery that the death of 
O’Sullivan’s son was accidental, and that no 
enmity then existed between the two families on 
account of it, and that both wished the fugitive 
to return home. Edmond replied, that he had 
no wish to return home; that he was married, 
and dwelt at a place called Ballinlaw; that his 
posterity might return to Bawnlahan ; but for 
himself, ifhe got the whole of Carbery, he would 
not think his life safe, and would not live there. 
His father returned home in anger, and Edmond 
was soon after slain, together with his father- 
in-law, the Gaul Bourke, at Ballinvegga (March 
18, 1642-3), where a spirited battle was fought 
between General Preston and the Duke of Or- 
mond, in which a great slaughter was made of 
the county of Kilkenny gentlemen. The descen- 
dants of this Edmond, as carefully traced by the 
Editor, were as follows : 


Cangaccan ann ui vonnchuoa, ui vonnabain, 7 uf matgamna. 


I. Epmonp left two infant sons, viz.: Richard, 
who grew up a fierce freebooter, and lived at 
Ballinlaw, one of Gaul Bourke’s castles, out of 
which, according to tradition, he shot many per- 
sons; but he was finally shot himself, at Snow 
Hill, on the brink of the River Suir. He 
had led a party of men across the Suir, who 
seized on a prey of cattle in Gaultier, in the 
county of Waterford, but, being overtaken by 
a strong force, he was deprived of the booty, 
and obliged to cross the river by swimming. 
The Gaultier men pursued him in boats, and 
shot him dead, with his own gun, on the op- 
posite strand, near Snowhill. This is said to 
have been the last creach, or prey, attempted 
in this part of Ireland. This Richard left one 
daughter, but no son. 

II. ConcHopHar, or Cornetius, the second 
son of Edmond, who lived with his mother at 
Ballymountain, near Gaulstown, where the 
ruins of his house were shewn when the Editor 
was a child. He lived an honest man, and 
married Rose Kavanagh, of the family of Bal- 
lyleigh, in the county of Carlow, the aunt of 
the “renowned warrior,” Brian-na-Stroicé Ka- 
vanagh, who fought with great bravery at the 
Boyne and Aughrim, in the service of James II. 
He had by her three sons, viz.: John Donovan 
of Ballynearl, William of Drumdowney, the 
Editor’s great grandfather, and Edmond, who 
went to France. John of Ballynearl, who was 
usually called Shane-na-gerann, i.e. John of 
the Trees, from the number of trees which 
he planted, and Shane @ phudair, from pow- 
dering his wig, was a very respectable gen- 
He was born in 1672, and died in 
1735, aged sixty-three years, as appears from 
his tombstone in the churchyard of Dunkitt. 
He lived at Ballynearl, near Kilmacow, in the 
barony of Iverk, and county of Kilkenny, where 


tleman. 


1600.1 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2157 


son of Donnell, son of Cormac Ladhrach. Thither repaired the sons of the chiefs 
of Allow. Thither repaired the O’Donohoes, O’Donovans, and O’Mahonys, 


he acquired a considerable property by marriage 
and otherwise. His hatred of the Cromwellian 
settlers amounted almost to insanity, and, in one 
of his angry moods, he let drop words about the 
glaring injustice of the Act of Settlement, on ac- 
count of which he was committed for Treason, on 
the evidence of one of those settlers. He was tried 
at Kilkenny; but his neighbour, John Bishopp, 
Esq., of Bishopp’s Hall, alias Gaulskill, made the 
most strenuous exertions to defeat his accuser, 
and succeeded, amid the rage of party feelings, 
in procuring an acquittal. His relatives, the 
Fitzpatricks of Upper Ossory, and the Kavanaghs 
of the mountains of Carlow, are said to have 
flocked into the town of Kilkenny on the day ot 
his trial, determined to rescue him in case of his 
being condemned, and twenty-four beardless 
youths entered the court-house, dressed in 
their sisters’ clothes, having swords concealed 
under their mantles! No riot, however, took 
place, for, on John’s acquittal, they left the 
town quietly, very grateful to Mr. Bishopp for 
the high testimony he bore to their cousin’s 
character. This John had many sons, of whom 
three went to France, but the Editor has not 
Four of his 


sons remained in Ireland, of whom three were 


been able to learn their names. 


buried in the churchyard of Dunkitt, as ap- 
pears from a large tombstone near the south 
wall of the old church, viz.: the Rev. Edmond 
Donovan, P. P. of Kilmacow ; Dominick Dono- 
van of the Ferrybank, Waterford ; and Wil- 
liam Donovan, a youth of gigantic size and 
strength, who died of the small-pox in the 
He had another 
son, Cornelius Donovan of Graigoving (6pa5 


twentieth year of his age. 


O’prinn), whose only son, Thomas, died at Illud, 
a few years since, without issue. The race of 
this John are now extinct in Ireland. 


Edmond, the third son of Cornelius, went into 


the French service. The last account ever heard 
of him by his family was his having been taken 
prisoner at Waterford in 1739, whither he had 
come over to enlist men, alias ‘‘ Wild Geese,” 
for the French service. The Editor’s grand- 
father saw him in the hands of the authorities, 
and conveyed to the old gaol of Waterford, 
but was not able to get in to speak to him; 
but, in about a week afterwards, the prisoner 
sent a messenger from the village of Passage, 
to his brother William, who was then living 
at Aughmore (a part of Drumdowney), stat- 
ing that he had been set at liberty, and that 
he was ready to set sail for France. His family 
never afterwards heard from or of him. He had 
gone into the French service with several of his 
relatives, the Kavanaghs of the county of Car- 
low, who were all killed in the wars except 
Morgan More, who was considered to be the 
largest man in Europe in his time, and who re- 
turned to Ireland, after various romantic adven- 
tures, and died at an advanced age at Graigue- 
namanagh about the year 1780. 

II]. Wititiam KavanacH O’Donovany, the se- 
cond son of Cornelius of Ballymountain, son of 
Edmond of Bawnlahan. 
remembered him, when the Editor was young, 


The old people who 


were wont to describe him as immoderately vain 
of his descent from the Kavanaghs of Ballyleigh 
and the Burkes of Gaulstown, who stated in their 
family epitaph, that they were descended from 
Sir William de Burgo, who was “ Vice-chamber- 
laine to Kinge Edward the Third.” 
asserted that his grandfather, Edmond, was the 


He always 


eldest son of O’Donovan of Bawnlahan, in the 
county of Cork (an assertion which the Editor 
has not been yet able either to substantiate, or 
entirely to refute), but he knew little or nothing 
of the history of his paternal ancestors beyond 
a vague idea of their being descended from the 


2158 


GQNNaZa RIOSshachTa EIREGNN. 


[1600. 


CTangacap ann upmon sall, 7 Zao1vel Oa corccid muman (ina mbaof o baile 
mon amac) 50 numla 7 sonuppamm oUa nell, 7 an ci lap na mace poccain 


kings of Munster, and possessed of very exten- 
sive estates till deprived of the greater part of 
them by Cromwell and William III. Though 
proud, almost to lunacy, of his Irish and Anglo- 
Norman lineage, and imbued with irremoveable 
prejudices against the Cromwellian settlers,— 
to whom he was wont to say, without reserve, 
that they were descended from “English pick- 
pockets,”’—he was induced to marry the daugh- 
ter of one of those settlers, namely, Mary, the 
daughter of Richard Oberlin or Hoberlin, who 
came over with his father, Richard Hoberlin, in 
Cromwell’s army, in 1649. This woman, who had 
been brought up in all the puritanical prejudices 
of her time, fellin love with William, though she 
detested his race and his religion! Laws, and 
even religious prejudices, sometimes prove but 
insignificant barriers against the propensities of 
humanity, and the powerful affection of the 
sexes. In this instance a plebeian Puritanical 
heiress married a proud but poor Papist; there- 
by so horrified her grandmother that she re- 
turned to England ; and in course of time, be- 
ing far removed from puritanical preachers, 
gradually submitted to all the ceremonies of the 
Church of Rome ; permitted all her children to 
go to Mass, who, strange to say, learned to hate 
and despise the Cromwellian settlers. By Mary 
Hoberlin, William had five sons and eight daugh- 
ters, whose progeny have since contributed 
largely to the population of Newfoundland, 
Canada, and the United States of America; 
but the Editor has not been able to trace their 
exact localities. The sons were: 1. Richard, 
bornin 1718; he was a man of powerful strength 
of body, but of a ferocious and murderous dis- 
position, inheriting the pride, vanity, and folly 
of his father, and the iron constitution, stature, 
and recklessness of his Cromwellian grandfa- 


ther. After he had grown up to man’s estate, 


perceiving the power which the laws allowed 
him to obtain over his father, he quarrelled with 
him about certain lands which were obtained in 
right of his mother, but the father not acceding 
to his demands, he conformed to the established 
religion of the State with a view to dispossess 
his father and mother ; but not succeeding at 
all to his satisfaction, he left his father, and the 
last account heard of him was his having com- 
mitted suicide on board an English man-of-war. 
The second son was Edmond, the Editor’s grand- 
father ; 3. Cornelius of Ballyfasy ; 4. John of 
Rochestown ; and 5. William of Attateemore. 
When this William, the fifth son of William, was 
a child, there was no Roman Catholic school in 
the barony of Ida, and he remained illiterate till 
he was about thirty-five years old, when, fired 
with the love of learning, he went to school along 
with his own children, and, amidst the ridicule 
of his neighbours, learned to read and write! 
It is painful to allude to the laws which, at this 
period, brought the enthusiastic people of Ire- 
land to this level. The descendants of the proud 
and improvident ancient Irish chieftains multi- 
plied, about this period (from 1704 to 1789), in 
obscurity and poverty, as if destined, in future 
ages, to send forth swarms to people the back 
woods of America. 

~ William, No. III., held the lands of Drumdow- 
ney on lease, and he possessed, in fee, the town- 
lands of Ballyvrougham, Ballybrahy, and Knock- 
brack, in the barony of Ida, and county of Kil- 
kenny; and, with a view to carry on trade as a 
merchant, he built a store-house at the Ferry- 
bank, Waterford, which was burned to the 
ground, about the year 1748, by an accidental 
fire, which involved him in such difficulties and 
anxieties as hastened his death, which took 
place in the year 1749, as appears from his 
tombstone. 


1600.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2159 


and the greater number of the English and Irish of the two provinces of 
Munster (except those in the great towns), to submit and pay their homage 


IV. Epmonp, son oF WitiraAM. He was born 
in the year 1720, and married, in 1750, Mary 
Archdeacon, daughter of John, son of Patrick, 
son of Pierce Archdeacon, of Ercke, in the 
county of Kilkenny, who was commonly called 
“Sir Pierce Mac Oda.’’—See note ‘, under the 
year 1544, p. 1488, supra; and who was also 
descended from Edmond Denn the Tory (who 
was believed to be the representative of William 
Denn, Lord Justice of Ireland in 1260), from 
whom Sliabh-Ua-gCruinn, in the south of the 
county of Kilkenny, was called Tory Hill: 

This Edmond took the lands of Attateemore, 
alias Putney’s Part, in the parish of Kilcolumb, 
barony of Ida, and county of Kilkenny, from 
Colonel Dyas of Melville, in 1763, where he 
settled, with his wife and family. He had five 
sons: 1. William (born in 1752, died in 1802), 
whose descendants have settled in various parts 
of the United States of America; 2. Patrick, 
born in 1754, This Patrick was a good scholar, 
and travelled much in his youth, and, after 
varieties of strange and romantic adventures 
by sea and land, he returned to Ireland about 
the year 1784. 
of strong powers of intellect, good memory, 


He was a very sensible man, 
and much experience. He was the living re- 
pertory of the traditions of the counties of Kil- 
kenny, Carlow, and Wexford. The Editor spent 
much of his time with him in the years 1821, 
1822, and i823, and from him he first caught 
that love for ancient Irish and Anglo-Ivish his- 
tory and traditions which have since afforded 
He died in Novem- 
ber, 1831, and was interred at Dunkitt, leaving 


him so much amusement. 


several sons who are still living. 3. John, born 
in 1758, died in 1837, leaving three sons still, 
or lately, living near Waterford; 4. Edmond, the 
Editor’s father, of whom presently; 5. Michael, 
still living in the eighty-fourth year of his age, 


who has several sons living ; and 6. Cornelius, 
who died young. This Edmond, son of William, 
died on the 26th December, 1798, aged seventy- 
After his death Nicholas the Keener, 
the local dirge-composer, the last of his profes- 


eight. 


sion in this part of Ireland, came to the Editor’s 
father, offering to sing the pedigree of the de- 
ceased, and praise all his relations, widely dif- 
fused throughout the region extending from 
Mount Leinster to Waterford, and from Water- 
ford to Carrick-on-Suir ; but the latter would 
not allow him to proceed, as he knew that Ni- 
cholas would sing much hollow flattery about 
the glories of the Kavanaghs, &. ; he turned 
the Keener out of his house, which was consi- 
dered a daring violation of ancient custom ; 
and the traditions remained unsung ever since. 
But a few years before, on the death of his 
nephew, John, son of William, son of William, 
son of Cornelius, son of Edmond of Bawnla- 
han, the traditions were, for the last time, sung 
in the most sincere and enthusiastic strain of 
natural eloquence by his nurse, Bridget Dwyer, 
who repeated his pedigree and recounted many 
members of the Kavanaghs, his relatives, and 
various other families whom the Editor has not 
been able to identify. 

V. Epmonp OGe, son of SEAN-Epmonp. He 
was born, in the year 1760, at Kilcolumb, in 
the barony of Ida, and county of Kilkenny, but 
removed to Attateemore, alias Putney’s Part, in 
1763, with his father, mother, and grandmother. 
His elder brothers, William, Patrick, and John, 
did not remain with their father after they had 
grown up, but went to seek their fortunes to 
The Editor’s fa- 
ther, Edmond, alone remained in Ireland, and 


different parts of the world. 


took a lease, in his own name, of the lands of 
Attateemore some time about the year 1791, 
and, being an industrious man, he was pretty 


2160 ANNAdzZa RIOShAChtTa ElREGNN. (1600. 


ma vocom viob, poamic comanoa umla, 7 pedio uada oid pars cen- 
mota an bapnac mon pémpaice, 7 cTicc(pna mupccnaige «1. Conbmac mac 
vlapmaca, 7 6 Suillebcon binpe «1. oomnall, mac oomnall, mic dianmaca. 
Cappad O néill occ mbpaigve Ecc DO maitb muman ap in ppoplonsponc 
pin, bat pi pé prec La ag cpbd clpc, 7 cansgM plp muman, 7 acca producchad 
Fon pm anole na nfpaonca. 

Maguoip 1. God mac conconnacc bape 1 Ppappad ft nell an can pin. 
Carte naén (a mip manca na bliadna po, san bec pia ppeil Pacpaicc) ora 
noeachaid pide oionma mancyplos, 7 anall oo tnoigtecoib vo Con cuanta 
na noipfp 1 mmeccain an lonspuint,7 m po hampeao lap 50 pamice 50 
oopup chinn cpale,7 approe 50 pinn Chonnam a. baile an bappongs dice In 
ecenel Coda. Soard 1apam co naincenib 7 co névalonb, co lon praob 7 
preolmais. O popoan pecitigh oifolaot ap ccian apcan la hadble a 
nainccne 7 a névala, ba pl vo ponpac munnclp meswmdip camp apm mansin 
ba coimnf(pa vob vo Comoa a ccneach 7 a nevala, 7 Ro cmall Magwuoin 
Cn 
can po paccaib MagZuioin an poplonsponc copac an laoi pin phn vo dbeachad 
p5ela 50 Concas vo pagio Sin Uanam ypalenoen (ph ronmao Ppemvenp oa 
coiccid muman) dia capnip 06 Magumoin ovo ool ap an longpopt 1 nuachad 
ploig amanl vo cord, an Lich 1 nveachand. Ni cand Sip Uanam 1 pratt in ni pin, 
acct po tleclamad laip Zappad 00 mancploig mMpoa fo cedoip, aciad anmda 


Zan anad Zan aipiplom vo VEnamM Ho poctain 06 50 lonsponc uf néill. 


eloigce, 7 po slump a Concanrg amach vo pargid (rang 1omcumenns mn nob 
epoalca laip Maguidin 0o poccamn dia parsio acc poad 06 Tap a aap. Cran, 


affluent during Napoleon’s wars. He was mar- 
ried on the 6th of October, 1788, to Eleanor 
Hoberlin, of Rochestown, by the Rev. Dr. Ste- 
phen Louer, Vicar-General and Protonotary 
Apostolic of the see of Ossory. He had by her, 
Michael, who died in May, 1840, leaving one 
son, Edmond, now living; 2. Patrick, who died 
young; 3. William, still living in America; 4. 
John, the Editor of these Annals, who was bap- 
tized by the Rev. John Fitzpatrick, P. P. of 
Slieveroe, on the 26th of July, 1809, ‘* Ed- 
mundo Wall & Eleanora Neill sponsoribus.”— 
Regist. Par. Slieveroe : and 5. Patrick, still living. 
This Edmond, who was a man of great strength, 


courage, and illibata fides, died on the 29th of 
July, 1817, desiring his eldest son, who sat 
by his bedside till he expired, to remember his 
descent, which he repeated to him emphatically 
several times over, in the Editor’s hearing, and 
not to allow his children to disperse, if pos- 
sible! He requested that his body should be 
buried ‘along with the good men at Dunkitt, 
but not under the large tombstone.” This 
was complied with, and the Editor, in twenty- 
four years afterwards, remembering his dying 
request, caused the following epitaph to be 
inscribed to the memory of him and his an- 
cestors : 


\ 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2161 


to O’Neill ; and such of them as were not able to come to him sent him tokens 
of submission and presents, except Barry, before mentioned, and the Lord of 
Muskerry, i. e. Cormac, the son of Dermot [Mac Carthy], and O’Sullivan 
Beare, i.e. Donnell, the son of Donnell, son of Dermot. O’Neill obtained 
eighteen hostages of the chieftains of Munster at that camp ; and he remained 
twenty days examining the disputes and covenants of the men of Munster, and 
reconciling them to each other in their contentions. 

Maguire, 1. e. Hugh, the son of Cuconnaught, was along with O’Neill at this 
time. One day in the month of March of this year, a short time before the 
festival of St. Patrick, he sent out a troop of cavalry, and another of infantry, to 
scour the districts in the neighbourhood of the camp; and he did not halt till 
he arrived at the gates of Kinsale, and from thence [he went] to Rinn-Corrain*, 
the castle of Barry Oge, in Cinel-Aedha’. He afterwards returned back with 
preys and spoils, with a deal of accoutrements and flesh meat. As Maguire’s 
people were fatigued at the end of the day, after a long Journey, on account of 
the vastness of their plunders and spoils, they halted and encamped at the 
nearest [convenient] place, to protect their preys and spoils ; but Maguire set 
out, [resolved] to make no stay or delay until he should arrive at O’Neill’s 
camp. When Maguire had left the camp in the morning of that day, a message 
was sent to Cork to Sir Warham Salender’, deputy of the Governor of the two 
provinces of Munster, acquainting him that Maguire had gone forth from the 
camp with a small force, as indeed he had, and [mentioning] the direction in 
which he had passed. Sir Warham did not neglect this thing, but immediately 
assembled a body of vigorous, well-armed, mail-clad horsemen, and marched 
with them from Cork to a narrow defile, by which he was sure Maguire would 
pass on his return back. He had not been long in this ambush* when he saw 


‘* POSTERIS EDMUNDI 0’ DONOVAN X Rinn-chorrain, translated cuspis falcis by 

DE GAULSTOWN, GALLI DE BURGO GENERI, P. O’Sullevan Beare, and anglicised Rincorran. 
VIRIS) VERE BONES TSO. tls, —See Pacata Hibernia, book 2, ¢. xiii. 

Ree eee ee ye Us: Y Cinel-Aedha, now Kinelea, a barony in the 


QUORUM CORPORA HIC JACENT SEPULTA ; 
AC PRESERTIM PATRI EDMUNDO, 
DE ATA-TEMORIA, 
QUI OBUT 29° DIE JULIE A. D. 1817, 
ET AVUNCULIS GULIELMO ET PATRICIO, 
JOANNES 0’DONOVAN 
. HOC MONUMENTUM POSUIT.”’ this transaction is given in the Pacata Hibernia, 


12 a 


south of the county of Cork. 

z Salender: i.e. St. Leger, now pronounced, in 
Ireland, Salenger. P. O’Sullevan Beare writes 
it Salincher. 

4 In this ambush.—A very different account of 


2162 GQNNaZa RIOSshachTa EIRECGNN. [1600. 


Zane, betorprum ipm Coapnande hipin ac chi Maguidip cucca co na uachao 
mancploig, 7 1a FRainecpin a pole oo1b nip b6 chm ap cctlarb, 7 np bo pon 
iomsabala, na mfinma clichme po ba spépac lap an ci vo mracc bipuide, acc 
a aiccnedd Dapouccad 7 apccnam pop a ashaid vo bapuccad a tioobad 
amcal vo pome oon chup yin, vain po ronnpalg pum 7 Sip Uanam a céle 50 
hamnay canodiappard, 7 50 Oana OUPcpoldeac Fo po son cectapnae o1ob 
anole. Occ chha ctoncaip Uanam po cévoin la Magwmdip. Oo pocnacap 
bedop coice(n von mancyloig bai mM prappad Sip Ucnam la Maszudip man an 
ecéona. Ap a aol tna po Zonad 7 po sencpeagoad epium budfin 1pm 1opsart 
pm co nap bo hnploma pm pnfpcal anpponlamn von chup pin. Comd oh vo 
pome ool thfmpa san aipium fpr bomsuin nf bad pip, mp bo cian vo 
cod a hionad an iomaince an Tan oup panic anbpainne écca cucca Zup bo 


hficcfn v6 ofoal py a eoch co nenbail san puinec ap a haicle. 


book 1, ¢. i1., in which it is stated, that ‘* Sir 
Warham St. Leger and Sir Henry Power riding 
out of the Citie for recreation to take the aire, 
accompanied with sundry Captaines and gentle- 
men, with a few horse for their Guard, not 
dreaming of an enemie neere at hand, carelesly 
riding, every one as he thought good; within a 
mile of the Town, or a little more, Sir Warham 
St. Leger, and one of his servants, a little strag- 
eling from his companie, was, in a narrow way, 
suddenly charged by Mac Guire, who, with some 
horse (likewise dispersed), had spread a good cir- 
cuit of ground, in hope either to get some bootie, 
or to have the killing of some Subjects: they 
charged each other. Sir Warham discharged his 
Pistoll and shot the Traytor, and he was strucken 
with the other Horseman’s staff in the head, of 
which woundes either of them dyed, but none 
else, on either side, was slaine.” 

» On perceiving each other, 1p proipccpm 
apoile oo1b. This phrase is incorrect language. 
It should be constructed thus: “ 1ap b-paipspin 
a Bioobao nip bo céim an5-ctilaib 00 poine, 4 
nip bo pin 1omgabala na meanma ceichme 
po caipelb, acc (man ba gpépac), a aiccnead 


Oo cmd an 


dD Gpougad, ] apecnam pop a aghad vo bapuc- 
cad a biodbao.” 

° Five of the horsemen.—It is stated in the Pa- 
cata Hibernia, book 1, ¢. ii., that Sir Warham 
St. Leger and Maguire were mutually slain by 
each other, but that ‘‘ none else, on either side, 
were slaine,” and it is to be suspected that the 
P. O’Sullevan Beare 
gives the following account of this rencounter, 
and of O’Neill’s expedition to the South of Ire- 
land, in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, 
Oe ee Xi: 

‘‘Paucis inde diebus in Vitoniam venerunt 
Frater Matheus Ouetensis Hispanus Dubhlinn 


Four Masters are wrong. 


Archiepiscopus, & Martinus Gerda nobilis eques 
Hispanus deferentes 4 Summo Pontifice omni- 
bus, qui pro fide in Anglos arma caperent, in- 
dulgentias, et peccatorum veniam, et Onello 
Phenicis pennam, & 4 Rege Catholico Philippo 
Tertio (nam secundus obierat diem) viginti duo 
millia aureorum numorum in militum stipen- 
dium, Hispanis legatis reuersis, Onellus relic- 
tis in Tirona validis presidijs ipse cum nonnul- 
lis belli socijs non spernendas copias ducens, & 
visum frustulum sacrosancte Crucis, quod in 


1600. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2163 


Maeuire coming on with a small party of cavalry ; and after perceiving each 
other®, the person who had arrived thither did not retreat back, or exhibit a 
desire to shun, or an inclination to fly; but, rousing up his courage, as was his 
wont, he advanced forwards to kill his enemies, as he did on this occasion, for 
he and Sir Warham attacked each other fiercely and angrily, boldly and reso- 
lutely, and mutually wounded each other severely. But, however, Sir Warham 
was immediately slain by Maguire, and five of the horsemen* who were along 
with Sir Warham were also slain by Maguire ; but he was himself so deeply 
and severely wounded in that conflict, that he was not able to contend with an 
overwhelming force on that occasion, so that he passed through them without 
waiting for further contest; but he had not passed far from the scene of battle 
when he was overtaken by the languor of death, so that he was obliged to alight 
from his horse, and he expired immediately after. The death of Maguire 


monasterio Sancte Crucis fuisse fertur, & ex- 
ploratum Ibernorum animos, & an hostis aude- 
ret occurrere, in Momonias hyeme media proce- 
Vbi 
Macguier é castris digressus ab Edmundo Mac- 


dens in agro Corcachano tentoria collocat. 


caphrio signifero suo, Nello Odurnino, & vno ° 


sacerdote comitatus incidit in VVarhamum Sa- 
lincherum Anglum equitem Auratum Momo- 
niarum prefectum equitibus sexaginta stipa- 
tum. Inter eos preter publicas inimicitiarum 
causas ea etiam priuata emulatio erat: quod 
Macguieri Iberni, VVarhamo Angli preter om- 
nes partis vtriusque equites fortitudine, & dex- 
teritate palmam, & principem locum deferebant. 
Macguier conspecta hostilis equitatus multitu- 
dine, nec fugere, nec sese dedere ex sua digni- 
tate esse putauit. Sed additis equo calcaribus 
in medios hostes proruit. [lum hasta vibran- 
tem plumbea glande ex bombardula V Varha- 
mus ferit. Nihilominus Macguier V Varhamum 
hasta appetit & ictum euitare cupientem capi- 
tis declinatione per cassidem transfigit, & has- 
tam a capite pendentem relinquens stricto gla- 
dio per medios hostes euadit, duobus equitibus 


etiam saucijs, & sacerdote sequentibus: rursus- 
12? 


qué circumacto equo proruens omnes fundit, & 
fugat, nec longé secutus priusquam in castra 
venit ad Onellum, equo descendens 4 sacerdote 
expiatus ex vulnere animam efflat. Cuius equus 
postea cibo sponté abstinuisse fertur, donec in- 
edia perierit. VVarhamus quoque ex vulnere 
ad insaniam redactus intra dies quindecim é 
vita discessit. Onellus secum deferens Donatum 
Maccarrham Alle competitorem, ne in Anglo- 
rum gratiam rediret, in Vitoniam reuertitur, 
Vrmonio Comite, qui videbatur prelio dimica- 
turus, nihil obstante. Vertebatur annus mil- 
lesimus sexcentesimus, cum Carolus Bluntus 
Montis leti Baro cum proregio imperio mense 
Februario in Iberniam mittitur. Qui profectus 
in Vitoniam omnium antecessorum minimé pro- 
Vbi tri- 
bus amplius mensibus castrametatus, & ab Onello 
quotidianis prelijs, & vallo fossaque ductis in 
itinere interclusus aditu ad Ardmacham, «& Iu- 
rem infecta re Dubhlinnam redit. 


gressus Fachartam tantum peruenit. 


Onellus ni- 
hil memorabile damni fecit preterquam, quod 
Petrum Lessium Momonium strenuum equitem, 
cuits superius mentionem fecimus, bombardz 
iactu in capite vulneratum desiderauit.” 


T 2 


2164 ANNaZa RIOsShachTa EIREANN. 1600. 


bap pm Mhéguioip 1 nucmaille mfman 71 nmpce cacemd oUa nell, 7 vo 
maizib SZaowel ancfha. Nip b6 maccnad pon an ba herpde pimn asa, 7 
lomgona, perat imofSla, 7 anacail cup potashte, 7 pulang, ucntne eis, 7 
Mgnama na nomnsiall ina pomlp, 7 upmoipn saowel anchfna. 

Acbfpac ancile na poipfoh O neil ap an mumamm go belcaine ap cemd 
munbao o1oheao Mhesmoip amlard pin. Cond % vo pome sabarl von caoibh 
budfp pon 00 Chopcas, 00 oacthag an bappas méip, vo cpic Roipoec, J 
oo clon siobtin. Ceileabnaap vo Mhumneachanb ran pn, 7 po seall ora 
ecaompad on ccoccad bat pain acc Saranchoib coct vo pdip) OfoIpsl(sd a 
“mmplpam 7 00 énad a ccains(n, 7 via pfoduccad pm a pole. Ruce one 
oplong via paépclannaib 1 ngeitlpme, 7 1 nZGmlb lap go Macc 50 tip eoscan. 
Ro paccanb anaall ele o10b 1 noplcum Tapla ofpmuman,7 Rémaimn mic Slain 
abunc. Oo pao a usoappap pin, 7 bapancap ap buannacht oa mile pln vo 
orapmait 6 Concobain, 7 oo clomn cSfcan a bupc 1 ng(nalcacai’ ap oaly a 
cconganta, 7 a ppollamnaigte vo bht acc 1apla ofpmuman. Cwd Ua neill 
lanttam a phd ovinge saca poo vo chad Maal mic Usame, vo Sintip, lonm- 
ofp le Campeal, 5€ po baos an lupaip, 7 an Ppeprvenp 50 napmaal 1omda vo 
muin, 7] Do tip ian ccect Fo hat chat 1p na céd Llatib vo Manca 4 sé po bai 
lapla cuaomuman 4 lapla upmuman hi luimneae 1 noipchill ap a saborlpium 
a nofp 00 cod plum canpa i ppplotporcc, 7 a pRMtMsZ Zaca conaipe m po 
sab az ool oon mumamn so poctain 06 cap a aap) TCip eosain Zan cupbaio 
san clecmail, san amup bealarg, na bfpnad, san ect, bad ionmaowdim opas- 
bel uada, ace Magmoip a aénap amail pemebentman. 

Janla upmuman, 7 lapla cuadmuman vo dol o luimnede 1 ccoip Sipe 1 
manmomechs f néill, 7 an nool 06 cainpib Zan cacan, Zan clecmail, po 
lorpccead anban 7 poinsn(m In cclomm srobtin 1 nouchars in Rioine pind la 
hapla tuadmuman. Oo compioc an oa lanla pin 1 mbuitilenacanb, 7 50 
cll commmsh comd inntepide do ponpat an caipec, 7 loccan 1ap paoine na 
capce co hat chat dpiaduccad, 7 oonopuccad na noippicceac nua pin tan- 
sacan 1 neninn.1. Cond mountiop an lupcip, 7 Sip Soins: Capp Ppepoenp 


* Valour and prowess.—P. O’Sullevan Beare © Cliadh-Mail-mhic- Ugaine, a district lying 
agrees pretty well with this character of Ma- between the hill of Knockany and the moun- 
guire, and Sir John Davis acknowledges that tain of Slieve Reagh, in the barony of Coshlea, 
he was ‘‘a valiant rebel.” and county of Limerick.—See note 4, under the 


1600.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2165 


caused a giddiness of spirits, and depression of mind, in O’Neill and the Irish 
chiefs in general ; and this was no wonder, for he was the bulwark of valour 
and prowess", the shield of protection and shelter, the tower of support and 
defence, and the pillar of the hospitality and achievements of the Oirghialla, 
and of almost all the Irish of his time. 

Some assert that O'Neill would not have returned from Munster until the 
May following, had it not been for the death of Maguire. He proceeded to the 
south-east of Cork, and through the country of Barry More, Roche’s country, 
and Clann-Gibbon. He then took his leave of the Munstermen, promising them 
that, if he could seize an opportunity during this war waged upon him by the 
English, he would return again to settle their disputes, confirm their covenants, 
and establish peace among them. He took with him to Tyrone some of their 
chieftains, as hostages and prisoners, and left others of them in the hands of the 
Earl of Desmond, and of Redmond, the son of John Burke. He transferred his 
own authority,and gave a warranty for the hiring of two thousand men, to Dermot 
Q’Conor and the sons of John Burke, in the country of the Geraldines, in order 
that the Earl of Desmond might have their assistance. O’Neill then passed 
on through the direct roads by Cliadh-Mail-mhic-Ugaine’, and by the Suir, 
keeping Cashel to the right; and although the Lord Justice and the President 
had a great army, by land and sea, having landed in Dublin in the first days 
of March, and the Earls of Thomond and Ormond were at Limerick, awaiting 
his return from the south, he passed by them on his return by the same roads 
through which he had gone to Munster, until he got back to Tyrone, without 
receiving battle, opposition, or attack, upon any road or pass, and without losing 
any person of note, except Maguire alone, as we have before stated. 

The Earl of Ormond and the Earl of Thomond set out from Limerick along 
the Suir, in pursuit of O'Neill ; but he having passed them without receiving 
battle or rencounter, the Earl of Thomond burned corn and dwellings in Clann- 
Gibbon, the country of the White Knight. These two Earls [then] proceeded 
to the country of the Butlers, and to Kilkenny, where they passed Easter; and 
after the Easter holidays, they repaired to Dublin, to welcome and pay their 
respects to the new officers who had come to Ireland, namely, Lord Mountjoy, 


year 1560, note ‘, under 1570, and a passage a ford on the Morning Star River, is referred 
under 1579, p. 1719, supra, in which Athneasy, to as in the very centre of this territory. 


2166 


ANNdGZa RIOShachtTa EIREGNN. 


[1600. 


ba céiccld muman. lap noenam a ccuapca vo na hhanlaoanb pini nach chiach, 
poate Tap a nap Zan puinec, 7 an Ppepioenp manaén pu so pangacap so 


cll caimms. 


Nip b6 cian 1ap pin so po Zabad la comne ecip lapla unmuman 7 Uaitne 
mac Rudpaige dice wi mopda 50 ccommlion oaoine, aipm,7 é10fd la ceactapnae 


pm 1omaccallaim iI. 


muman o1a Lich pin ip ccomne yin. 


Ruce lapla upmuman an Ppeproenc 7 lapla cuas- 


Cn can pangatan oo vib Liab sup 


an tulaig iomaccalma po togad fcopna a ccompocnaib bedil ata pagac. 
baccan ag ceappnuccad a ccanstn,7 ag aagn(p ima naccaptaib pon a poile 


f Carey.—He wrote it Carew himself, as ap- 
pears from the State Papers; but his contempo- 
rary, Sir Henry Docwra, writes it Carey. The 
name is now called in Irish Capptn, Carroon, 
in the south of Ireland. For a full account of 
his appointment to the Presidency of Munster 
the reader is referred to the Pacata Hibernia, 
book 1, ¢.i. li. and 111. 

& Bel-atha-Raghat, now Ballyragget, a small 
town situated on the left bank of the River Nore, 
in the barony of Fassadinin, and county of Kil- 
kenny, and not far from the boundary of the 
Queen’s County. The ruins of the castle of 
They 
are situated in the demesne of Ballyrageet 


Ballyragget are of considerable extent. 


Lodge, which belongs to Kavanagh of Borris- 
Idrone. In the Pacata Hibernia, book 1, ¢. iii. 
is given a minute account of the manner in 
which the Earl of Ormond was taken, in a 
joint letter from the Lord President of Munster 
and the Earl of Thomond to the Lords of the 
In this letter it is stated, that this 
conference was held at a place called Corronne- 
duffe, eight long miles from Kilkenny. There 


Council. 


are two drawings of the taking of the Earl of 
Ormond which belong to two distinct points of 
time; one in the Pacata Hibernia (ubi supra), 
which refers to the moment of meeting, when 
both parties were ranged opposite each other, 
and a sketch in Tri- 


and the parley beginning; 


nity College, Dublin, which has been engraved 


for Ledwich’s Antiquities of Ireland (see second 
Edition, p. 276), which shews the taking of the 
Earl after the conference. 

Leland says, book 4, c. v., “that the rebels 
of all quarters were considerably elated at this 
event, while the friends of Government, in this 
time of danger and jealousy, easily entertained 
suspicions that a leader, who had usually acted 
with due circumspection, could not have ran so 
blindly into danger unless he had formed a clan- 
destine scheme of delivering himself into the 
hands of the rebels.” The loyalty of Ormond, 
however, was not suspected by Carew or Tho- 
mond, or even by his enemy, Sir Charles O’Car- 
roll, who, in a letter to the Lord Deputy Mount- 
joy at this period, acknowledges the Earl’s loy- 
alty, but observes, that ‘‘ he hath no heyre male 
of his body to inherit his title,” and that his next 
heirs were not over loyal to Her Majesty. This 
wily Irishman then writes: 

“Tf the Erle of Tyrone (as his fact well de- 
serveth) were cutt off, who were then so mightie 
in Ireland as the Erle’s kindred, who, degene- 


' ratinge from his Lordship, yf they were once 


invested with that honnor, I will not say they 
would, but may well feare least they would 
follow their old bias, and become as undutyfull 
as they haue bene. And perhapps it boath is, 
and willbe nedfull for her Majestie to have a 
duteful subiect nere them that may be a meanes 


to crosse their actions. I know not to what 


1600. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2167 


as Lord Justice, and Sir George Carey’, the President of the two provinces of 
Munster. After having paid this visit to Dublin, the Earls returned back with- 
out delay, accompanied by the President, until they arrived at Kilkenny. 

It was not long after this when a day of meeting was appointed between 
the Earl of Ormond and Owny, the son of Rury Oge O’Moreach, to have an 
equal number of men in arms and armour, to hold a conference ; and the Earl 
of Ormond brought the President and the Earl of Thomond to be present, at 
his own side, at that conference. When they arrived at the appointed place, 
which was in the neighbourhood of Bel-atha-Raghat*, they began to state their 
[mutual] covenants, and to argue their claims on each other, until a gentleman* 


end the plott is laid, and followed with such 
heat by his Lordshipp, to cut me off uppon so 
slight an occasion. Yet, consideringe with 
myself my own loialtie (in which I hoappe, by 
God’s Grace, boathe I and myne shall contynue) 
and the occasion of suspition heretofore gyven by 
those who are lick to inheritt after his Lord- 
shipp, it gyves me occasion to suspect that which 
I feare may follow.” y 

Leland remarks that Mountjoy, who possibly 
was not dissatisfied at the removal of a man who 
rivalled him in authority, and conceived that 
this event might induce the Queen to send him 
reinforcements from England, affected to treat 
it with indifference. Ormond remained in 
O’More’s hands from the 10th of April till 
the 12th of June, when he was set at liberty 
upon delivering sixteen hostages for the pay- 
ment of £3000.—See the Pacata Hibernia, book 
Ll; Goiyvil. 

» A gentleman.—His name was Melaghlin 
©’More.—See Ledwich’s Antiquities, p. 275. 
Peter Lombard, Comment., pp. 436, 437, 438. 
It looks strange that the Four Masters should 
have known nothing about the real cause of 
the taking of the Earl. 
writes, that the Earl of Ormond, “after an 


Sir George Carew 


hower, or more, was idly spent, and nothing 
concluded, &¢c., was desirous to see that infa- 
mous Tesuit, Archer, did cause him to bee sent 


for ; assoone as he came, the Earle and hee fell 
into an Argument, wherein hee called Archer 
Traytor, and reproved him for sending, under 
pretext of Religion, her Majesties subjects into 
Rebellion.” 

The most curious account of this conference 
is given by P. O’Sullevan Beare in his Hist. 
Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 5, ¢. viii., 
which runs as follows: 

“Interim in Lagenia Huon Omorra Portum 
Lisiz arcem commeatu intercludendo in magnas 
angustias deducit. Comes Vrmonius regij ex- 
ercitus imperator arci laturus opem cum am- 
plius quatuor millibus equitatus, & peditatus 
Dubhlinna profectus ad riuulum nomine va- 
dum Nigrum pervenit. Vbi Huon circiter mille, 
& quadringentos milites ducens illum in aperta 
planicie aggreditur. Acriter, & contentiose 
dimicatur. Huon hostis alas ad agmina sepeé 
compellit, itidem hostis multitudine repulsus. 
Vrmonius eo die milites sexcentos amisit, quo- 
rum corpora edibus accensis combusit, ne , 
intelligeretur tantum sibi damni fuisse illa- 
tum. Nam mos est Anglis occisos suos oc- 
culendi, hostes verd in publicis locis spectan- 
dos collocandi. Catholici sexaginta succubue- 
runt: circiter octoginta sunt vulneribus affecti. 
Vrmonius multitudine militum iter sustinens 
in arcem commeatum intulit. Cathirius, Mau- 
ritius, & Tohannes Oconchures Iphalij equites 


2168 AQNNGZa RIOshachTa EIRECNHN. [1600. 


50 po cup Ouine uapal oo mumncip Uaitne a lorm 1 népib, 7 1 nanadnacaib 
eich lapla upmuman, 50 po Fooam an ciapla a sabail po ofo1d. Ot connanpne 
an Ppeyploenc 7 1apla cuadmuman m ni pin poont a neich pop cculab, 7 ni 
po anpat 50 pangacan go cill chainmgh. Occ chfna po gonad lapla cuad- 
muman ipin cfecmanl pin. Ruce Uaitne mac Ruopoge lanla upmuman lop 
ap oaingmscib a ourtce. Ro bad pecel 1ongnad peacnon epeann lanla upmu- 
Oo deachaid tna an Ppeproenc, 7 lapla 
cTuadmMuMan IpM tpectmain ian ngabonl lapla upmuman o cill cams 50 
Ponclaipse, cappoe 50 heochoill, 7 o eocholl go copcaish. Oc cualais 
lapla ofpmuman 7 ping mac oonnchaid més cantars a ccoct an vt pin, 


man do bic illaam an 1onnap yin. 


cangacan 50 Lon a ccionoil 50 po Zabpac Longpone poupping planbotars 50 
mbaccap ma cciopcall booba an sach caoib vo Choncars tly 4 cua. 
bacap ppl pé coictioeys comlaine amlaid pin 50 po Zabad oppad miopa ecip 
Fingin mas captag, 7 an Ppeploeny, 7 rap navom an opparch fcoppa vo 
veachad lapla ofpmuman an pud an cine vo Cumsid bid o1a buanoadabh. 
O po PFloip an Ppeproenc, 7 lapnla ctuadmuman go po pecaoilpioc an luce 
baccap ina naghaid o anole, 7 50 mbaoi an conaip 6 Cconcans 50 luimneac 
pommtecta aca, Ro apccnatan a 06 n6 acpi v0 céoaib mancac so mile nd 06 


raisvDIUIN O Concais 50 maiz eala, 6 
pars o Oo 


cum centum peditibus improuiso scalis altis- 
simis admotis Cruochanum castellum, quod in 
Iphalia principatu Thomas Morus eques Aura- 
tus, & Siffirdus Angli presidio tenebant, as- 
cendunt, & propugnatoribus occisis expugnant. 
Rursus Comes Vrmonius regij exercitus impe- 
rator, & Huon Omorra vterque in alterius con- 
spectum copias perducit. Erat tunc apud Huo- 
nem Pater Iacobus Archerus e Societate Iesu 
Ibernus vir Catholice Religionis amplificande 
studiosissimus, perindeque Heresis hostis ac- 
cerimus, & ob id ab Anglis odio inexpiabili 
habitus; quippé qui primum Onello, deinde 
Huoni, tandem Osulleuano, & alijs Catholicis 
praua dogmata oppugnantibus, suo studio, con- 
Silio, suaque opera, & industria minimeé defuit, 
ac sua etiam authoritate Catholicorum agmen 


cogens cum Hereticis signa seepenumero contu- 


maiz eala 50 cill mocelléce, 7 o cll 


lit. 
nium ad sanam mentem petit, vt liceat colloqui. 


Hic religiosus motus spe reducendi Vrmo- 


Colloquendi facultatem Vrmonius non negat. Ita- 
que ex altera parte Vrmonius Dionysius Obrien 
Tomoniz Comes, Lomnachequé princeps, «& 
Georgius Caruus Anglus Momoniarum prefec- 
tus equis vecti; ex altera vero religiosus Arche- 
rus pedes tribus Ibernis militibus comitatus in 
vtriusque exercitus conspectu ad colloquium 
conueniunt, nulla incolumitatis fide interposita. 
Ibi Archerus, qui linguam Anglicam optime 
callebat propter Caruum Ibernicum idioma non 
intelligentem, Anglico sermone pié, sanctéequée 
suo more incipit facere verba. Eum Vrmo- 
nius interrumpit futile quoddam argumentum 
in Summi Pontificis sanctitatem obijciendo. 
Qua re subiratus Archerus cum pristinum oris 
habitum aliquantum mutasset, & simul baculum, 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2169 


of Owny’s people placed his hand on the reins of the bridle of the Earl of 
Ormond’s horse, and finally determined to take him prisoner. When the Pre- 
sident and the Earl of Thomond perceived this, they turned their horses back, 
and did not halt until they arrived at Kilkenny. The Earl of Thomond, how- 
ever, was wounded in that rencounter. Owny, the son of Rury, [then] took the 
Earl of Ormond with him into the fastnesses of his territory ; [and] it was a 
wonderful news all over Ireland that the Earl of Ormond should be detained 
in that manner. 

The week after the taking of the Earl, the President and the Earl of Tho- 
mond went from Kilkenny to Waterford, from thence to Youghal, and from 
Youghal to Cork. When the Earl of Desmond and Fineen, the son of Donough 
Mac Carthy, heard of their arrival at that place, they set out with all their 
forces ; and, pitching an extensive camp of tents, they formed a wide circle on 
every side of Cork, north and south Thus they remained for a whole fortnight, 
when Fineen Mac Carthy and the President concluded an armistice for a month. 
The armistice being agreed on, the Earl of Desmond went forth through the 
country to procure provisions for his retained soldiers. When the President 
and the Earl of Thomond learned that their adversaries had parted from each 
other, and that the road from Cork to Limerick was left open to them, they 
went forth with two or three hundred horsemen, and with one or two thousand 
soldiers, from Cork to Magh-Ealla', from thence to Kilmallock, and from thence 


discessit. Vrmonius ab Huone custodiz man- 
datus ad fidem Catholicam ab Archero conuer- 
Sed Onelli iussu veterum amicitiarum 


seu stipitem, quo seniles artus sustinebat, dex- 
tera forte tolleret, tres Iberni pedites, qui eum 
titur. 
memoris incolumis dimissus iterum ad pristi- 
num Heresis vomitum rediuit, de Archero vero 
silentio inuoluendum non est, eum Hereticis 


comitabantur, Anglici sermonis ignari, velle re- 
ligiosum stipite cum Vrmonio congredi, existi- 
marunt. Quamobrem periculum, quod inermi 


religioso ab armato impendere putabant, ante- 


uertere cupientes duo Urmonium aggressi equo 
deturbant, tertius quoque ferrum stringit: in 
quorum auxilium pluribus accurrentibus ex 
Catholico exercitu, multitudinem veriti Comes 
In Ar- 
cherum regij magna turba proruunt: Quibus 
Cornelius Orellus ab Huone missus occurrit. 


Tomonius, & Caruus se fugee mandant. 


Vtrinque equestri pugna & bombardariorum 
velitatione dimicatur, donec nox prelium dire- 


merit. Postero die pars vtraqué ab eo loco 


non modo terrori, sed etiam aded vel admira- 
tioni, vel stupori fuisse, vt per maria siccis pe- 
dibus incedere, per aerem volare, aliaque supra 
hominum vires assecutum esse crediderint, inde 
non Archerum, sed Archidiabolum rectius ap- 
pellandum esse confirmantes.” 

i Magh-Ealla: i.e. the Plain of the River 
Ealla, or Allo, now the town of Mallow, in the 
county of Cork.—See note *, under the year 
1598, p. 2080. supra. 


10 


2170 aNNaza RIOshachtTa elREGNN. [1600. 


mocelloce 50 luimnec. Tamnice ona rapla ofpmuman hi cconallchaib go 
pocnaice Ofpmdip opt 7 oporpcomlcc ap an bppeyproenp 7 ap Tanta 
cTuaomuman. 

ba ipm can pa vo pala accallaim inclfite etip an Ppeyroenc, 7 lapla 
cuaddmuman vo taoib, 7 Oianmaic mac an oubalcars uf concobaip von caoib 
apall. Neaé eipwe bai ag cpfic a ampaine la hiapla ofpmuman cap cfnn 
cuillme, 7 cuapupcail, péd, 7 pomaome pm pé mbliaona map an tan pa 
bacan ampa 1omda 1olapda po a pmact,7 FO a cCumacca an can pm. CAppeao 
aipfec po tioncoipee a anpén vo diapmaic, lapla ofpmuman vo taipbept 
von Ppeproenp, 7 olapla cuadmuman oap cfnn 1onnmaip, 7 edala, 7 ap 


poopy), 7 


k To deliver wp—P. O’Sullevan Beare tells 
this story somewhat better; but he and the 
Four Masters were ignorant of the machinery 
set at work by Carew to effect this dishonour- 
able capture of the Sugane Earl. But Carew 
himself, who appears to pride himself on his 
powers of cunning, subtlety, and treachery, has 
thought proper to transmit a detailed account 
of it to posterity in the Pacata Hibernia, from 
which the Editor is tempted to present the rea- 
der with the following abstract of it. 

The two most powerful leaders of the rebels 
in Munster were James Fitzgerald, commonly 
called the Sugane, or Straw-rope Earl, and Der- 
mot O’Conor Donn, who commanded fourteen 
hundred bonnaghtmen, or mercenary soldiers, 
consisting of Ulstermen and Connaughtmen, 
employed in the Earl of Desmond’s country, by 
commission from ONeill, the Pope’s King of Ire- 
land. This Dermot O’Conor was married to the 
Lady Margaret, the daughter of the late un- 
fortunate Gerald Earl of Desmond, and sister 
to the present heir to that title, who was de- 
tained a prisoner in the Tower of London while 
his dignity and estates were usurped by the 
Sugane Earl. In this complicated state of 
affairs Sir George Carew ‘“‘resolved to try the 
uttermost of his witt and cunning” to turn 


ap pocan oichaige vo plin,] 0a Fac aon no Febad lary, 7 plo paofo 


it to advantage. In a very secret manner he 
provided and sent a fit agent to sound the in- 
clination of the Lady Margaret, and, finding her 
fit to be wrought upon, it was propounded that 
if her husband would take the Sugane Earl 
prisoner, and deliver him into the hands of 
the President, he should receive one thousand 
pounds sterling, and that he should have a com- 
pany of men in pay from the Queen, and other 
conditions of satisfaction to herself and her bro- 
ther. The Lady Margaret, who, by an English 
education, contracted an affection for English 
government, and was particularly solicitous for 
the interests of her brother, naturally hated the 
man who had usurped his dignity by Irish law, 
on O’Neill’s authority, and prevailed upon her 
husband to form a scheme for delivering the 
Straw-rope Earl into the hands of the Lord 
President. 

The President’s secretary and historian gives, 
as matter of triumph, some very vile details of 
the little and paltry wiles to which the Lord 
President had recourse on this occasion. In 
that age of cold-blooded murders and disho- 
nourable dealings, such details were read with 
amusement, while, to us of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, they sound worse than the history of the 
Red Indian or the Bushmen of Africa! One 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND 


1600. ] 2171 


to Limerick. The Earl of Desmond then went into the Connelloes with nume- 
rous forces, to reconnoitre and watch the President and the Earl of Thomond. 

At this time it was that a private interview had taken place between the 
President and the Earl of Thomond, on the one side, and Dermot, the son of 
Dubhaltach O’Conor, on the other. He was one who had been for a year before 
in the military service of the Earl of Desmond, for hire and wages, jewels and 
riches, and he had many hireling soldiers under his jurisdiction and command 
at this time. The resolution which his misfortune suggested to Dermot was, to 
deliver up* the Earl of Desmond to the President and the Earl of Thomond, in 
consideration of receiving wealth and property, and the freedom and profits of 
an estate, for himself and every one who should adhere to him. He sent mes- 


Nugent, who had been a servant to Sir Thomas 
Norris, had turned over to the rebels after the 
death of his good master, and by the efficiency 
of his services acquired their esteem and confi- 
dence; but, imagining that he could get on bet- 
ter under the wings of the President, he came 
to submit to him, and to desire pardon for his 
faults committed. Answer was made, that ‘‘ for 
so much as his crimes and offences had been 
extraordinary, he could not hope to be recon- 
ciled unto the State except he would deserve it 
by extraordinary service, which, saith the Pre- 
sident, if you shall perform, you may deserve, 
not only pardon for your faults committed here- 
tofore, but also some stores of crowns to releeve 
your wants hereafter.” He promised to destroy 
either the Sugane Earl or his brother John. As 
a plot was already laid against the Sugane Earl 
by Dermot O’Conor, and as his death could only 
serve to raise up new competitors for his title, 
Nugent was instructed to murder John. He 
seized his opportunity and attempted to de- 
spatch him, but, as his pistol was just levelled, 
he was seized upon and condemned to die. At 
his executigfhe confessed his design, declaring 
that the Lo®f President had many others hired 
and sworn to effect what he intended. 

The plot of Dermot O’Conor for seizing the 


Sugane Earl remained still to be executed, and 
to promote its success all the ingenuity of the 
wily Lord was exerted. Ata period when his 
officers expected some manly and honourable 
warfare in the field, he suddenly dispersed his 
forces into different garrisons, in order to in- 
spire the rebels with confidence, and to induce 
the leaders to make the like disposition of their 
troops. He next forged a letter (of which a 
copy is ostentatiously printed in the Pacata Hi- 
bernia), as if addressed by the Lord President , 
to James Fitz-Thomas, acknowledging many 
obligations for his secret services to the State, 
and exhorting him to deliver up Dermot O’Co- 
nor alive or dead. Dermot, furnished with this 
letter, which it was to be supposed he had in- 
tercepted, sought an interview with the Sugane 
Earl, took occasion to quarrel with him, and 
took him prisoner, as a traitor, in the name of 
O’Neill! produced his letter, which was in Ca- 
rew’s own handwriting, as a proof of this his 
euilt, and conveyed him, and some of his com- 
panions, to Castlelishin, of which he held the 
command, informing the Lord President of his 
success, and eagerly expecting his reward. But 
before Carew could arrive to receive his priso- 
ner, John Fitz-Thomas, and the spirited rebel, 
Pierce Lacy, who had suspected the real pur- 


1 Was oy 


2172 GNNaZa RIOSshachTa ElREANN. (1600. 


cecta 50 hinclite pip na copccarb pm do parghid an ppeproenct, 7 an lanla, 
7 po nadmpiot a ccuna oiblimbh amlard pin. Ni po lice tpa Orapmaic hi 
ppall an nf po ccanac lamh uain no sabad lap (in a poile late a tropac 
mip luni na bliadna po) lapla ofpmuman ina oipeccarp plin 1 ccfipcmfoon a 
cipe, 7 a calman ap pob adbal cumacca odiapmaca, 7 poptan iolapda a 
daoine pm cip fpm. Jap ngabaul an lapla lap ap e 1onao in po la dia 
1omcommfcc € 1 mbaile vo baileib an Janla pina. Caplén an lippin 1 ngle- 
mfoén xfpalcach. Ro cup Von a imdiom, 7 bapoacza an baile vo chtipn 
Gonnaccaugh 1 ccaoimtecc an lapla o1a 1omcomlcc 1pm mbaile frm. Oo 
cod pin in cc{mn ale don tip 50 po faofo a tecca 1 ccfnn an Ppepioenp 7 
1apla cuadmuman oarpniip p5el vo1b, 7 Do cuingId Zac nich po seallad vo 
oap cfnn an lapla. 

Oz cualacan seapalcaig sabanl an lanla 7 a bat 1pm eicefnodil ippabe 
po tionolpioc pliocc Muimip mic Geanarle ap sac apm 1 mbacan 1 na pole 
lante 1 ccompocnaib conplin an lppin. CTanaiee ann on Mac murpip ciap- 
poise 1. Paccpaicin, mac tTomap, mic emainn 47 an Rivine ciappoansec .1. 
Uiliiam, mac Sain, mic Uilliam, Rioine an 5l(nna Emann, mac tomaip, mic 
Emainn, mic comaip, An Rioine Fionn 1. Emann, mac Sloan 7 ofpbpacaip 
von lapla buofin 1. S{an, mac tcomap puald, 7 oume uapal oo buncacaib 
o1an bo hoanm uillkam, mac Sfam na plman mic pocaipo paranais baos an 
popoad 1 ppocaip an lanla 6 po hoiponead € ma lapla go nuicce pin. Jan 
ctoct ooibpive wile hn ccfnn a poile nip bo cian po batap 1 momaccalloaim 
an tan po chinnpioc iad pon vo pomn an clcpamnab an bale, 7 ool va 
pobaint po cévoip, 7 Zan ofsain vo Fnad a ccopp, no a ccaomanmann Fo 
mbfnoaip an cianla ap ocap no oficcfn. Ro cfiimmsyple ap a hale pop a 
ec(pcaghaid 50 pangacan 50 minaib an banle, 7 ni no pacharspioc eiccfn, no 
onppoplann oa ppuaippiot, 7] oo ponpace bmg mbice via po manbad, 7 o1a 
po muohaslo via mumncip 50 po Zabad an bole pon an mbanoa leo po 
ofo1d, 7 5o cTTapopacs an cTiapla app varmodfom Fan puapeclad uadaib o1a 


pose of O’Conor, mustered four thousand men ' Caislen-an-lisin: i.e. the Castle of the Little 
of their followers and rescued the Sugane Earl. Fort, translated Castellum Castri by P. O’Sulle- 
The career of Dermot O’Conor was afterwards van Beare, Hist. Cathol. Ibern., folk 169. This 
brief and inglorious, and his fate tragical, as he castle is described in the Pacata Hibernia as 
richly merited by his base treachery. near the great fastness of Connilloe. Its ruins 


1600.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2173 


sengers privately with these conditions to the President and the Earl, and they 
mutually ratified these covenants. Dermot did not neglect what he had taken 
in hand, for he took the Earl of Desmond prisoner, one day in the beginning 
of the January of this year, at a meeting of his own people, in the very middle 
of his own territory and land ; for Dermot’s power was great, and his men were 
numerous, in that territory. And, after having taken the Earl prisoner, he sent 
him to be incarcerated in one of the Earl’s own castles, namely, in Caislen-an- 
Lisin', in the very heart of the country of the Fitzgeralds. He left a sufficient 
number of guards, consisting of Connaught kerns, to defend and guard the 
castle, along with the Earl, and to keep him there. He himself repaired to 
another part of the territory, and sent his messengers to the President and the 
Earl of Thomond, to tell them the news, and to demand what had been pro- 
mised him for [securing] the Earl. 

As soon as the Geraldines heard of the capture of the Earl, and the perilous 
position in which he was placed, the descendants of Maurice Fitzgerald col- 
lected from every quarter, on a certain day, to the neighbourhood of Caislen- 
an-Lisin. hither repaired Mac Maurice of Kerry, 1. e. Patrickin, the son of 
Thomas, son of Edmond ; the Knight of Kerry, i.e. William, the son of John, 
son of William; the Knight of Glin, i.e. Edmond, the son of John, son of 
Thomas ; the White Knight, i.e. Edmond, the son of John; and the bro- 
ther of the Earl himself, i. e. John, the son of Thomas Roe; and a gentleman 
of the Burkes, whose name was William, the son of John of the Shamrocks, son 
of Richard Saxonagh, who had been retained in the service of the Earl since 
he had been appointed Earl until then. All these having met together, they 
were not long in consultation when they came to the resolution to divide them- 
selves in four divisions for the four quarters of the castle, and proceed forth- 
with to attack it, and not to look to the love of body or precious life, until they 
should rescue the Earl by consent or violence. They then advanced straight 
forward until they arrived at the walls of the castle ; and they felt not the 
resistance or opposition they received, and they made little account of the num- 
bers of their men who were killed and destroyed, until at last they took the 
eastle from the warders, and rescued the Earl out, in despite of them, without, 


are still visible in the townland of Castle-Ishin, not far from the borders of the county of Lime- 
parish of Knocktemple, in the county of Cork, _ rick. 


2174 ANNGLGA RIOSHMAChTA EIRECHNN. [1600. 


cionn, 5an purluuccad, Fan poippoeanccad pap pon. Oo paopac manctm 
nanacanl oon banoa. 

Oo coivh tna an sabaal pm lapla ofpmuman a mim(p, 7 a miondin vo 
diapmait o concobaip peachnon eneann, 7 14p nool von lanla 1 mfpcc a 
muimntipe Tuce poccpa vo vlapmMait, 7 oa Zac Connaccac bas ina pocap, 7 
oa cchiteannaib an cip opaccbanl. Oo ponpat ianam po cé06ip innpin, 7 locan 
a 5{palcachaib Zo momat monnmara 7 névala, mmipglo, 7 naipnfis co nap 
bupupa apiom a puccpac connaccaig oilcenel gaca héoala jam 7 1apam 
a 5(nalcacaibh pm hfoh a nfpaonca pin pp porte 56 pin. 

Q ccopac mip lul apa haicle 00 slump an Ppnepiveny, 7 lanla cuaomu- 
man 50 ctclonol tcalobpeac vo parsoiuipib 6 Lumneac von taob ba cuaid vo 
Shionamn pian tpé conncae an claip 50 pangacan Gaile més colmain1 ccpioca 
cév Concobarpeino aiptipaigi. Oo coropioc annpin 1 nimloczad tan Sioncimn 
50 cloic Sl(nna baile erprde pil pon bnuac na Sionna von caoib cfp,7 po bad 
vo bailcib Rioipe an sl(nna €,7 ba on nglfmn pin ina bpull an baile 2. 5lMnn con- 
bnaige po hammmseao an Riome, 7 an clocpom sup ap cnumnigh an conscin 
m6p via pargid. CTanaice onvanap mon 6 lumneaé 1 naptpcaisib 1 ccomne 
an Ppeploenp, 7 1apla cuadmuman von baile ceona. Up puide oob pe na 
ashaid Do cuaid aca an m mbaile po cfnn oa la, vo bmplecapn blad ve lap 
an opoanap mop. Ro lingpoc € va Zac ctaoib ap a haicle, 7 po manbrac 
pice, nd 06 do paopnclamorb, 7 oaopclannoib co mumncip an Rioine bacan 
ag bapoacc an baile 50 pocaide do mnaib 7 vo Monoaomb. Ro manbao 
bfop opf{m vo mumnntip an pneproenp,7 an lanla lap an mbapoa, 7 nin bo 
poocang an baile pin vo sabail munbad pccaoilead a muincine rap an tan 
rin 6 1anla ofpmuman. 

Oc cualang O Concobeip crappongse 1. SCan mac Concobaip uf concobain 
anmeil oan cine an tcanuccad, 7 cloch slfmna ap na sabail san gun, san 
suapact vo Cod 1 cc{mn an pnepioenr 7 an lapla,7 vo Zeall a bAt oaom Lot 


™ Baile-Mic-Colmain, now Colmanstown, a 
townland in the parish of Killofin, barony of 
East Corca-Vaskin Clonderalaw, and county of 
Clare.—See note 9, under 1581, p. 1760, supra. 

" Cloch-Gleanna. 


castle of Glin, in the north-west of the county 





This was the name of the 


of Limerick. It is translated Vallirupes by 


P. O’Sullevan Beare in his Hist. Cathol. Lber., 
fol. 170: ‘*Quibus domesticis perturbationibus 
dum Catholici fluctuant et conficiuntur, Caruus 
Vallirupem (Cloch-Gleanna) equitis Aurati Val- 
lis arcem tormentis quassam in suam potestatem 
redigit.”” This castle was 102 feet in length 
and 92 in breadth. A plan of it, as then be- 


1600.1} ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2175 


indeed, paying the price of his ransom, and he himself without being wounded 
or losing a drop of blood. They extended mercy and protection to the warders. 

This capture of the Earl of Desmond had spread abroad to disrespect and 
dishonour of Dermot O’Conor ; and when the Earl went among his people he 
gave warning to Dermot, and to every Connaughtman who was with him, and 
to their kerns, to quit the country. This they immediately did ; and they 
carried with them from the country of the Geraldines much wealth, moveable 
property, and cattle ; and it would be difficult to enumerate all the different 
kinds of spoils which the Connaughtmen carried off from the Geraldines before 
and after their contentions with each other on this occasion. 

In the beginning of July following, the President and the Earl of Thomond 
set out from Limerick with a fine muster of soldiers, and marched westwards 
along the northern side of the Shannon, through the county of Clare, until they 
arrived at Baile-Mic-Colmain", in the cantred of East Corca-Bhaiscinn ; [and] 
from this they ferried themselves across the Shannon to Cloch-Gleanna’, a castle 
on the southern bank of the Shannon. 

The castle at which this great host had gathered was one of the castles of 
the Knight of Glin; it is situated in Gleann-Corbraighe, from which it received 
the name of Cloch-Gleanna, and the Knight the appellation of Ridire-an- 
Ghleanna. Heavy ordnance were brought in vessels from Limerick to meet 
the Earl and the President here. Having sat before the castle, they reduced 
it in two days, and made a breach in it with the heavy ordnance. They then 
rushed into it from every side, and slew a score or two of gentlemen and ple- 
beians of the Knight’s people, who were guarding the castle, together with 
some women and children. Some of the President’s and Earl’s men were also 
slain by the warders ; and it would uot have been easy to take the castle were 
it not that the Earl of Desmond’s people had previously dispersed from him. 

As soon as O’Conor Kerry, i. e. John, the son of Conor, heard that the forces 
of the country had been thinned, and that the castle of Glin had been taken 
without difficulty or danger, he repaired to the President and the Earl, and 
promised thenceforward to be on the side of his Sovereign. He gave up his 


sieged, is given in the Pacata Hibernia, Dublin or the Valley, so called from Glin, anciently 
edition of 1810, p. 112. Glencorbry, in the north-west of the county of 
° Ridire-an-Ghleanna: i.e. the Knight of Glin, — Limerick. 


2176 GANNACA RIOSHAChTaA EIREGNN. [1600. 


la a ppiompa 6 pm amac. Oo pav a bale 1. cappace an pull vo opum 


comnsill, 7 connanta von pneproenp, 7 don lanpla. O po clop a ccoiccimne In 
cclappaige 7 hy cclomn muipip mumnc(p na baanmiosna opagbanl an ac(pa 
rm ap a nfpccaipoib oo Zabpac acc bmypfo a mbanlcead, 7 acc paccbal a 
naivigce, 7 a noanapup obéla oplaicte, Ruccpat a mna 7 a mumntecpa an 
cilaibh a cenoc cfno Zanb, 7 a ccoillcead clutaipoiampa a ccoip mange, 7 
1 ccomhpocnaibh ofpmuman. 

Cn can dm po plop an ppeyplvent, 7 an Tiapla (.1. Tuadmuman) so plo 
teichpioc an cip mle oupmop ap sac caeb opal, 7 00 capan vo cuppioc 
pargoiuim 50 Lic pnamai nganupan. Congponc Mhfic mummy eipiwe, 1onnap 
50 mbaoi Sanapuin uata 1 lice pnama, 1 ccappaice an pull hn cclore 5lMoa, 1 
neapyp Zeibtine, 1 pplanamo, 1 ccpash UW, 1 napopfpca, lop cata, 7 1 mbarleib 
clomne muipp ap cha cenmoca hop cuactal. Ro pill an Ppepioeny, 7 
lapla tuadmuman 50 lumneac 1ap mbphc buada pon an cupup pin, 7 camice 
via parg¥o upmop conallac conntae luimms 7 caonpaise ap nfinge ooib 1 
nashaio lanta ofpmuman 50 mbacan oaomlic la a bpmonnpa. 

Mac mupip ciappaise 1. Pacpaiccin, mac tomaip, mic Emamn, mic 
comaip vo écc hn mfdon a aoip,7 a aimypipe ian mbfig 06 1 naéntaio lapla 
ofpmuman ip ccoccad pempaice. Rob avbap eccaoine p(n a cnota, a pola, 
7 a plalcaine vécc mellma amlad pin. CA mac tomap vo Zabenl a 1onard. 

Qn Roypoeach 1. Mump, mac vauio, mic muipip, mic Daud DO Ecc a Mi 
lan na bhadna po, macaém poitim, pooealboa, poglamta illaiom, 1 ngaoid- 
ilec, 7 1 mbénla eiprde. OA mac 1. Oaud vo gZabarl a ronan. 


P Carraic-an-phoill, now Carrigafoyle, on the Caran or Cashen River. The name Casan, or 


Shannon, in the barony of Iraghticonor, and 
county of Kerry.—See note “, under the year 
1580, p. 1730, supra. 

1 Kerry.—By Kerry is here meant Iraghtico- 
nor, or O’Conor Kerry’s country. 

 Fial, now anglice the Feale, a river rising in 
the barony of Duhallow, near the borders of the 
counties of Cork, Kerry, and Limerick, and, 
flowing in a north-westerly direction, passes by 
Abbeyfeale and Listowel, and meets the River 
Brick, to the north of Rattoo, from which point 
their united waters form what is now called the 


Caran Ciapage, i.e. the path of Kerry, it 
being, as it were, the high road into the coun- 
try, was originally applied to this river as far as. 
it is navigable for a currach or ancient Irish 
leather boat; and the church of Disert Trial- 
laigh, near Listowel, is referred to in an an- 
cient Irish manuscript, quoted by Duald Mac 
Firbis, as on the margin of the Capan Cianaige. 
—See Genealogies, Tribes, §c., of Hy-Fiachrach, 
p- 38, note i. 

S Askeaton. 
monastery of Askeaton, as taken on this occa- 


There is a view of the castle and 


1600.1] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2177 


castle, i. e. Carraic-an-phuill’, upon certain covenants and conditions, to the 
President and the Earl. 

As soon as it was generally heard through Kerry* and Clanmaurice that 
the Queen’s people had gained this triumph over their enemies, they [the inha- 
bitants] proceeded to demolish their castles ; and, leaving their mansions and 
residences wide open, they brought their women and families to the rear of 
their rough-headed hills, and their shady and solitary woods along the River 
Mang, and in the vicinity of Desmond. 

When the President and the Earl (1. e. of Thomond) learned that the greater 
number of the inhabitants of the country, on each side of the Fial’ and the 
Casan, had fled from their habitations, they placed garrisons in the castle of 
Lixnaw, the residence of Mac Maurice, as also in Carraic-an-phuill, the Rock 
of Glin, Askeaton‘, Fianaind‘, Tralee, Ardfert, and Lis-Cathain", and throughout 
all the castles of Clanmaurice, excepting Lis-Tuathail”. The President and the 
Earl of Thomond returned to Limerick, having gained the victory on that ex- 
pedition ; and the greater part of the inhabitants of Connello, in the county of 
Limerick, and of Kerry, came to them, having turned against the Earl of Des- 
mond, and joined their Sovereign. 

Mac Maurice of Kerry, i. e. Patrickin, the son of Thomas, son of Edmond, 
son of Thomas, died in the prime of his life, after having jomed the Earl of 
Desmond in the aforesaid war. 
his personal form, blood, and hospitality, should thus die in his youth. His son, 


It was a cause of lamentation that a man of 


Thomas, assumed his place. 

The Roche, i. e. Maurice, the son of David, son of Maurice, son of David, 
died in the month of June of this year. He was a mild and comely man, learned 
in the Latin, Irish, and English languages. His son, 1. e. David, took his place. 


sion, given in the Pacata Hibernia, book 1, c. vii. book 1, c. x., where there is a long account 


—See Dublin edition of 1810, p. 94. 

* Fianaind, now Fianait, and anglice Fenet, a 
townland with the ruins of a church and castle, 
on a point of land extending into Tralee Bay, in 
the barony of Troughanacmy, county of Kerry. 

4 Lis-Cathain, now Liscahan, a castle in the 
parish of Ardfert, barony of Clanmaurice, and 
county of Kerry.—See the Pacata Hibernia, 


given of Florence Mac Carthy’s attempt to get 
possession of this castle, which is not half a mile 
distant from Ardfert. 

W Lis-Tuathail, now Listowel, a small town on 
the bank of the River Feale, in the barony of 
Iraghticonor, and county of Kerry. <A plan of 
this castle isgiven in the Pacata Hibernia, book 1, 
ce. x., Dublin edition of 1810, p. 120. 


]3. & 


2178 GQNNaZa RIOshachTa EIREANN. 


(1600. 


O c{pball 1. an calbach mac wlham wodip, mc piIpsanamm, mic maol- 
puanaid vo mapbad a mi lal le pooaoimb uaiple vo rol ccfpball, 7 vo pol 
mfcain. Pl colgoa, copancach an calbac pin, wlle cpuad la a Ccomanpanab 
pall, 7 saoidel, Rivipe vainm 7 oondip a hugoanpap an pmionnra. 

lomac canglfc, 7 congal, ofpccmaptpa, 7 voptad pola m po olotangice 
oponsbuidne oipime vo tabaipc ecin Sarancaib 7 Zandil lars yin pam- 
paoh po. 

Ucacne o mopda do Licefn lapla upmuman amac a mi lan 7 pe bnaigoe 
vécc vo Zabarl 06 app oo céomacanb, 7 oop foaib na paénclann pob onspaige 
bacap pomamaiscte von lanla a ngioll le comall sac coingell, 7 Zac aip- 
c(ccal oan Momnaipccead aip ma puapcclad. 

Cn cuaitne ceona mac Rudpaise dice mic Rudpaige caofc ui monoa, no 
ba oume uapal oipofinc, aobclopach, 1ompaiteach pe hachad, 00 manbad 
la mumncip na bammogna 1 nanppoplann 1omaipice eccualams po pipad 
fcoppa oiblimb a ccompocpaib langip a mi Cugupe na bliabna ro. Oa mon 
Ta po cuip an mapbad pm vo Fail 0o Faipecead,] 0o FEppaicceace Zaowel 
laisfi 7 Eneann ule pon cculeab. Oume eipide bai ma aén ohne o éfpt 
ap a outhaig,7 00 bMm uplamap a atapnoa a lop a lama, 7 a cpuap a cpnoide 
a dopnaib oanap, 7 dednad ag a mbaoi a pemoiple ag ool 1 pudnacup pe 
hachaid poime pin 50 tcapopom f po a pmacc, 7 po a Cumacctorbh buofin, po 
bnGt a maon,7 a buannadh vo phn snacaiczge Zaoideal co na baoi aon banle 
did atapoa Ina Péccmaip 6 on 50 hon Zen mo ta Ponce laos na ma. 


* Calvagh.—He was the Sir Charles O’Carroll 
who wrote the letter to the Lord Deputy above 
quoted, p. 2166. 

¥ Was slain.—P. O’Sullevan Beare states, that 
Owny O’More, having incautiously separated 
from his people, was shot through the body by 
a musket-ball. Fynes Moryson gives a curious 
account of the Lord Deputy’s expedition into 
Leix, on which he slew this celebrated Irish 
chieftain ; and the Editor is tempted to present 
the reader with Moryson’s own words, as they 
are excedingly important in shewing the high 
state of cultivation to which Owny O’More had 
brought the territory of Leix at this period: 


‘‘ But the best service at that time done was 
the killing of Owney mac Rory, a bloody and 
bold young man, who lately had taken the Earl 
of Ormond prisoner, and had made great stirs 
He was the chief of the O’More’s 
sept in Leax, and by his Death (17th of August, 
1600) they were so discouraged that they never 
after held up their Heads. Also a bold, bloody 
Rebel, Callogh mac Walter, was at the same 
Time killed; besides that, his Lordships stay- 
ing in Leax till the 23rd of August, did many 
other Ways weaken them; for during that time 


in Munster. 


he fought almost every Day with them, and as 


often did beat them. Our Captains, and, by 


we 


1600. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2179 


O’Carroll, i. e. Calvagh*, the son of William Odhar, son of Ferganainm, son 
of Mulrony, was killed, in the month of July, by some petty gentlemen of the 
O’Carrolls and O’Meaghers. This Calvagh was a fierce and protecting man, a 
strong arm against his English and Irish neighbours, and a knight in title and 
honour by authority of the Sovereign. 

In this summer many conflicts, battles, sanguinary massacres, and blood- 
sheds, in which countless troops were cut off, took place between the English 
and Irish of Leinster. 

Owny O’More set the Earl of Ormond at liberty in the month of June, 
having received in his place sixteen hostages, consisting of the eldest sons and 
heirs of the most honourable gentlemen who were subject to the Earl, as pledges 
for the fulfilment of every condition and article agreed upon for his liberation. 

The same Owny, son of Rury Oge, son of Rury Caech O’More, who had been 
for some time an illustrious, renowned, and celebrated gentleman, was slain’ 
by the Queen’s people in an overwhelming and fierce battle which was fought 
between them on the borders of Leix, in the month of August of this year. 
His death was a great check to the valour, prowess, and heroism of the Irish 
of Leinster and of all Ireland. He was, by right, the sole heir to his territory 
[of Leix], and had wrested the government of his patrimony, by the prowess 
of his hand and the resoluteness of his heart, from the hands of foreigners and 
adventurers, who had its fee-simple possession passing into a prescribed right 
for some time before, and until he brought it under his own sway and jurisdic- 
tion, and under the government of his stewards and bonnaghts, according to 
the Irish usage ; so that there was not one village, from one extremity of his 
patrimony to the other, which he had not in his possession, except Port-Leix 
[ Maryborough] alone. 


their Example (for it was otherwise painful), ways and Paths so well beaten, as the Lord 


the common Soldiers, did cut down with their 
Swords all the Rebels Corn, to the Value of 
£10,000 and upwards, the only Means by which 
they were to live, and to keep their Bonnaghts 
(or hired Soldiers). It seemed incredible that 
by so barbarous Inhabitants the Ground should 
be so manured, the fields so orderly fenced, the 
Towns so frequently inhabited, and the High- 


Deputy here found them. The reason whereof 
was, that the Queen’s Forces, during these wars, 
never till then came amongst them.” 

Then it is quite clear that civilization and 
agriculture would have advanced in this coun- 
try if the Queen’s forces had never come into 
it. By this observation Moryson shews who the 
barbarous people really were, for, certainly, the 


exe? 


AQNNQZa RIOShachTA EIREGNN. 


2180 (1600. 


lan ppanlead 0a o1b(pccacaib eaccancenedil 6 1apla ofpmuman do cé1o 
sur an uachad plog vo pala ma pocain 50 caiplen na mainge. Ni bai eim 
vo dasZoaoimb sfpalcac vaon aonta FMypy, no as congnam lap act mac an 
MhGc mump pm pa hécc po aipnhopiom 1. comap, mac Pacpercin 7 Rioipe 
an 5l(noa, 7 Piapurp occ vole. 

S5pibenn vo teact a Saroib von mumain 1 mi Iw no bliadna po, 7 ba he 
a totachct, Mac 6cc lapla ofpmuman «1. Semup mac O{po1o, mic Slain, bai 
1 npiallnup ag an mbainpiogam (a ccionaid a atap, 7 ofpbnatpac a atan oo 
ool hi ccoccad puinpe) vo Lagth ap a cimpbdecc lap an mbainmosain rap nool 
baoi by 
ipm pspibenn pin a enpuaccna hi ccomdalaib 7 1 mbailcib mopa muman 50 
pabe an coce mac pm a. Sémup mac Geapoitc ag teacc anoip ma lanla 
onopach a husoanpap an pmonnpa, 7 50 FRUIccead gach aon dia OuThans bai 


pa na Zpaparb 06, 1a mbAc bliadam ap fichc 1 ccmmpech le. 


people who manured the fields so well, and 
fenced them so orderly, in the absence of the 
soldiers of the invaders, who destroyed all til- 
lage, should not be called barbarians. 

7 Pierce Oge De Lacy.—See note under the 
year 1186, p. 75, supra. He is called Petrus 
Lessius by P. O’Sullevan Beare, and Pierce 
Lacy in the Pacata Hibernia. 

* A letter.—This letter, which exhibits deep 
political craft and wisdom, was written, in the 
Queen’s name, by the Chief Secretary, Cecil, to 
Sir George Carew, Governor of Munster, on the 
Ist of October, 1600, and has been published in 
the Pacata Hibernia, book 1, c. xiv. 

» Gone under her mercy.—This phrase is in- 
correct, or at least has no meaning, because he 
had been under her mercy for twenty-one years. 
It should be: ‘ after he had promised to be faith- 
ful and active in suppressing the rebellion and 
the Pope’s religion in Ireland.” 

° An honourable Earl.—He was but provision- 
ally restored, for Carew was directed either to 
deliver or retain his patent according to the 
expediency of affairs, and the services he might 
be able to perform. It appears that this youth 
had been carefully educated, from his childhood, 


as a Protestant, in the Tower of London, by 
order of the Queen, who wished to preserve him 
for State purposes. He was sent over under the 
conduct of a Captain Price, a sober and discreet 
gentleman, and an old commander in the wars, 
who landed with his charge at Youghal, on the 
14th day of October, and proceeded thence to 
Mallow, where he presented to Sir George Ca- 
rew the heir of the great rebel, and Her Ma- 
jesty’s letter, signed by Cecil, and her letters 
patent, under the great seal of England, for his 
restoration in blood and honour. Carew, to make 
trial of the disposition and affection of the new 
Earl’s kindred and followers, consented that he 
might make a journey from Mallow into the 
county of Limerick, accompanied by Meyler 
Magrath, Archbishop of Cashel, and Master 
Boyle, Clerk of the Council (afterwards the 
great Earl of Cork). They came to Kilmallock, 
one of the strongholds of his ancestors, towards 
the evening, where he was at first received with 
the warmest and most enthusiastic welcome by 
the people, and almost immediately after viewed 
But 
this strange vicissitude will be best narrated in 


with feelings of loathing and abhorrence. 


the words of Carew himself, or of his secretary,, 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2181 


After his strange insurgents had dispersed from the Earl of Desmond, he 
repaired with his few remaining forces to Castlemaine. None of the Geraldine 
chieftains [now] sided with or assisted him, except the son of that Mac Maurice 
whose death we have recorded, namely, Thomas, the son of Patrickin, the 
Knight of Glin, and Pierce Oge De Lacy’. 

A letter* came from England to Munster in the month of July [recte October | 
of this year, the purport of which was, that the young son of the Earl of Des- 
mond, i. e. James, the son of Garrett, son of James, son of John, who was 
detained by the Queen as a hostage, in revenge of his father and father’s brothers 
having rebelled against her, had been released from his captivity by the Queen, 
after he had gone under her mercy’, and after he had been kept by her twenty- 
one years in captivity. It was, moreover, [ordered] in this letter that it should 
be proclaimed throughout the assembles and great towns of Munster that this 
young son, i. e. James, the son of Garrett, was going over as an honourable 
Earl‘, by the authority of the Sovereign ; and that every one in his country who 


Stafford, as printed in the Pacata Hibernia, 
book 1, c. xiv.: 

“And to Master Boyle his Lordship gave 
secret charge, as well to observe the Earle’s 
waies and carlage, as what men of quality, or 
others, made their addresse unto him, and with 
what respects and behaviour they caried them- 
selves towards the Earle, who came to Kilmal- 
lock upon a Saturday, in the Evening; and by 
the way, and at their entry into the Towne, 
there was a mightie concourse of people, inso- 
much as all the Streets, Doores, and Windowes, 
yea, the very Gutters and tops of the Houses, 
were so filled with them, as if they came to see 
him whom God had sent to bee that Comfort 
and Delight their soules and hearts most de- 
sired; and they welcomed him with all the ex- 
pressions and signs of Ioy, every one throwing 
upon him Wheat and Salt (an ancient Cere- 
mony vsed in that Province, upon the Election 
of their new Majors and Officers, as a Predic- 
tion of future peace and plenty). That night 
the Earle was invited to Supper to Sir George 


Thornton’s, who then kept his House in the 
Towne of Kilmallock ; and although the Earle 
had a Guard of Souldiers, which made a Lane 
from his lodgings to Sir George Thornton’s 
House, yet the confluence of people that flockt 
thither to see him was so great, as in halfe an 
houre he could not make his passage thorough 
the crowd, and after Supper he had the like 
encounters at his returne to his lodging. The 
next day, being Sunday, the Earle went to 
Church to heare divine service, and all the 
way his countrey people vsed loud and rude 
dehortations to keep him from Church, unto 
which he lent a deaf ear; but, after Service 
and the Sermon was ended, the Earle comming 
forth of the Church was railed at & spat upon 
by those that, before his going to Church, were 
so desirous to see and salute him: Insomuch as, 
after that publike expression of his Religion, 
the town was cleered of that multitude of 
strangers, and the Earle, from thenceforward, 
might walke as quietly and freely in the towne, 
as little in effect followed or regarded as any 


2182 anNNawa RIOshachta ElREAHN. (1600. 


hi ccoccad 56 pm aapece a pola 7 a onéper, 7 nfacuimne ap a coipib, 7 pilllo 
cap a cap do palgid an pmonnypa, 7 an iapla dice pr. Oa he tnat pa ccamiec 
an tianla 6ce pémpaice 50 hepinn so napmeal mop amanlle ppp on mbain- 
jMosam a mf octobep vo ponpad. Ap ctcecc v0 F0 Concaig vo coro an 
Ppeproenp, 7 lapla cuadmuman ma cfnn via Piaduccad. Cangacap iapam 
oiblimb 50 mais eala go cill mocealloce 7 50 lumneac, Canaice sup an 
lapla 6ce 5a¢ DUNE Da@ITTpebcacarb spalcach ap pparcpm na pipppfime 
bunad vob, 7 an opeam aga paibe 1omcommfcc conplOn na mange o Shemuy, 
mac tomaip tuccpac pide an baile voniapla écc 1. 00 Shemup mac seanoicc, 
7 00 pad an wiapla a pealb oon pneproeny. Ni bat om aén barle 1 noplaim 
Mhfic muy a. comap acc lop cuatal amam amail a oubnamap, 7 510 
elploe pio Zabad é la Fobepnoin Ciapparse «1. Sip peplup Uolment a mi novem- 
ben na bliadna po. 

Instn lapla cuadmuman ondpa msn concobaip mic vonnchard uf bmiam, 
bin an mic muipp pm a oubnaman vo toct an chelm pogla, 7 oibfinse a.pin 
dia OuThans ap ppotexion an Pneproenp 7 lanla tuadmuman 4 a hécciap pin 


1 noaing(n meic matsamna, 4 a havhnacal 1 maampoip mnpt. 
(po conpapal sfalcach 1. Ruadm, mac magnupa, mic emainn, mec 


pithigh vécc. 


other private Gentleman. This true relation I 
the rather make, that all men may observe how 
hatefull our Religion, and the Professors thereof, 
are to the ruder and ignorant sort of people in 
that Kingdome. For, from thenceforward, none 
of his father’s followers (except some few of 
the meaner sort of Freeholders) resorted vnto 
him ; and the other great Lords in Munster, 
who had evermore beene overshadowed by the 
greatnesse of Desmond, did rather feare then 
wish the advancement of the young Lord. But 
the truth is, his Religion, being a Protestant, 
was the only cause that had bred this coyness 
in them all; for, if he had been a Romish Ca- 
tholike, the hearts and knees of all degrees in 
the Province would have bowed unto him. Be- 
sides, his comming was not well liked by the 
vndertakers, who were in some jealousie that, 
in after times, he might be restored to his Fa- 


ther’s inheritances, and thereby become their 
Lord, and their Rents (now paid to the Crown) 
would, in time, be conferred upon him. These 
considerations assured the President that his 
personal being in Munster would produce small 
effects, but onely to make tryal of what power 
he had.” 

The only service that this young Earl was 
able to perform, was the recovery of Castle- 
main for the Crown, by his negotiations with 
Thomas Oge Fitzgerald, the Constable. Having 
obtained the surrender of this fort, which was 
strongly opposed by Florence Mac Carthy and 
the Sugane Earl, young Desmond returned to 
the English Court, where, it being understood 
that he was no longer worth feeding, he sud- 
denly disappeared. Mr. Moore thinks he was 
poisoned, but he quotes no authority. 

4 Pardon, literally forgetfulness or oblivion. 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2183 


was in rebellion would now, upon their return to the Sovereign and this young 
Earl, obtain a restoration of their blood and honours, and a pardon? of their 
crimes. This young Earl arrived in Ireland, accompanied by a great force, in 
the month of October following. Upon his arrival in Cork’, the President and 
the Earl of Thomond repaired thither to welcome him. They all afterwards 
came to Mallow, Kilmallock, and to Limerick. All the inhabitants of the country 
of the Geraldines, upon beholding the true representative of the family, came 
to this young Earl; and the people who had the keeping of Castlemaine for 
James, the son of Thomas, gave it up to the young Earl, i. e. to James, the son 
of Garrett; and the Earl gave the possession of it to the President. There was 
then no town in the possession of Mac Maurice, i. e. Thomas, except Listowel 
alone, as we have said; and even this was taken in the month of November by 
Sir Charles Volment*‘, the Governor of Kerry. 

The daughter of the Earl of Thomond, Honora, the daughter of Conor, son 
of Donough O’Brien, and wife of the Mac Maurice we have mentioned, fled 
from the plundering and insurrection of her husband, and came to her native 
territory under the protection of the President and the Earl of Thomond, and 
afterwards died at Dangan-Mac-Mahon®, and was buried in the monastery of 


Ennis. 


The Chief Constable of the Geraldines, 1. e. Rory, the son of Manus, son of 


Edmond Mac Sheehy", died. 


® In Cork.—This is incorrect, for, as we have 
already seen from the Lord President’s own ac- 
count of it, Captain Price, a trusty and discreet 
person, who was appointed by the Queen to de- 
liver this young Earl into the President’s hands, 
landed, with his charge, at Youghal, on the 14th 
ot October, and from thence brought him to 
Mallow to the President, where they arrived on 
the 18th of the same month. 

f Volment.—He wrote the name Wilmot him- 
self. There is a most minute and interesting 
account of the taking of this castle by Sir 
Charles Wilmot, given in the Pacata Hibernia, 
book 1, chap. xvi. 

& Dangan-Mac Mahon, now Dangan, a very 
large castle in ruins, in a townland of the same 


name in the district of Tuath-Ua-mBuile, pa- 
rish of Kilchrist, barony of Clonderalaw, and 
county of Clare. It is stated in the Pacata Hi- 
berma, book 1, ¢. xiii, that this Lady Honore ny 
Brien procured the murder of Maurice Stack, a 
very brave servant of the Lord President; and 
that her brother, the Earl of Thomond, upon 
hearing of it, was infinitely grieved; and that 
for it he held his sister in such detestation that, 
from that day forward to the day of her death, 
which occurred not many months afterwards, 
he never did see her, nor could abide the me- 
mory of her name. 

h Mac Sheehy.—The first of this family who 
came to Munster settled in the county of Li- 
merick as leader of gallowglasses to the Earl of 


aNNaca RIOShachta eiReEaNN. 


2184 (1600. 


An ppaccbail sfnalcach vo H1apmait mac an oubalcais, mic cuachanl 
uf Choncobaip 1ap ngabonl rapla ofpmuman Shemaup, mic tomaip amanl a 
oubnamanp, 7 a bin ve 50 hammofonac vomodip), canaice an Dianmaic pin 50 
ouchaig ui concobain puaid oo na cluaincib. Puan ppocerion 6n luptip 
(bao acc venam phpbip), 7 acc pognam von bampiosam ilaismb 7 1 nullcob 
1 pposman na bliadna po) no Fo ccaimice an ciapla 6cc ofpmuman po tan a 
ccansamap 50 hepimn .1. Sémup mac Zeanoitc. Ap creche odpuide vo chuin 
cosaIpM ap diapMaic, ucip po pop Hapmaic ofipbprup oon lapla pin an a 
cuaint coccand 1 ngfpalcacanb an bliadain porme yin 7 acbeapacc anorle 
sup ab v1 caumice Zabaul Sémap, mic tomaip an ows Fomad upaive a ofp- 
bnatorn pon opasbarl on erpium vo taipbipt o1a chionn. O do puact pgpi- 
benn an 1apla 50 DApMaic po tmiall cocc po na Togaipm mantle le clo 7 le 
ppocerion an lupwip 7 Ppeproenp va coiccead muman. CAs Zabarl 06 pran 
Tudo Te Colccead connact vo dol Tap Sionamn 50 Luimneac Ro t(n tepoice 
na long mac Ripofinod an iapainn, 7 vauid mac wllice an timchill € the bioo- 
banup, 7 puccpat pain 1 nuachad buione 1 ccompocnaib suipt mnyi sucope, 
7 po vic{noad oiapmaic leo, 1an na pagbail an. blce mbuidne 7 Fe po ppt € 
amlaid pn ba sap uaip pap an can porn nap bo vo1g Don Lucc pin a 1onnpaigid, 
an ba codnaé pom pop Céice céd vecc plp, 7 ba hanglonn € buodfin, acc nama 
na cumains neac 1omsabail écca cecib tan oup pice tiuglante neich. 

Ticcfpna plébe apoachaid vécc 1 nEfimpead na bliadna po .1. Sémup, mac 
Pianuip mic Semuip buicilep. 


Desmond, in the year 1420. He built the cas- mond sent for him,” &c., &c. 


tle of Lisnacullia, Cior na coille, 1. e. Woodfort, K Through enmity.—Carew, or his secretary, 


in the parish of Cloonagh, barony of Lower Con- 
nello, and county of Limerick, and about five 
miles to the north of the town of Newcastle. 
The ruins of this castle, which was a fortress of 
considerable strength, still remain in good pre- 
servation. 

i Until. This sentence is left unfinished by 
the Four Masters. It should be constructed as 
follows: ‘* When Dermot O’Conor left the Ge- 
raldines,” &c., &c., “he first procured a protec- 
tion from the Lord Deputy, and then proceeded 
to the Cloonties, in O’Conor Roe’s country, 
where he remained until the young Karl of Des- 


states: ‘‘ Theobald sent to the Earle of Clan- 
rickard for a protection, pretending that what 
he did was done in revenge of his Cousen, the 
Lord Burke’s, death. But the Earle, misliking 
the Action, instead of a protection, returned 
him this letter insuing.” 

He then gives Ulick Clanrickard’s letter, ex- 
pressing the Earl’s indignation at his conduct. 

! Gort-innse- Guaire, now the town of Gort, in 
the barony of Kiltartan, and county of Galway. 
There is a detailed account of this killing of 
Dermot O’Conor given in the Pacata Hibernia, 
book 1, c. xvii., where it is stated that “‘ Theobald 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


1600.] 2185 


Dermot, the son of Dubhaltach, son of Tuathal O’Conor, on leaving the 
Geraldines, after the Earl of Desmond (James, the son of Thomas), whom he 
had taken prisoner, had been forcibly rescued from him, proceeded to Cluainte, 
in the country of O’Conor Roe. He had obtained a protection from the Lord 
~ Justice (who was doing the Queen’s service in Leinster and Ulster in the autumn 
of this year), until' this young Earl of Desmond, i. e. James, the son of Garrett, 
of whom we have treated, had arrived in Ireland. On his arrival he sent for 
Dermot, for Dermot had married a sister of this Earl while on his military 
sojourn in the country of the Geraldines the year before ; and it is said by 
some that it was through her the capture of James, the son of Thomas, was 
effected, in order that she might the more easily obtain her own brother, by 
delivering the other in his stead. As soon as the Earl’s letter reached Dermot, 
he prepared to go, at his invitation, by the permission and protection of the 
Lord Justice and the President of the two provinces of Munster. But, as he 
was passing in a north-west direction through the province of Connaught, to 
cross the Shannon to Limerick, he was pursued by Theobald-na-Long, the son 
David, the son of Ulick-na-Timchill, through 
enmity‘; and they overtook him in the vicinity of Gort-innse-Guaire’, and, find- 
ing Dermot attended only by a small number of troops, they beheaded him. 
Though he was found in this condition, these people would not have dared to 


of Richard-an-Iarainn, and by 


attack him thus a short time before, for he was a leader of fifteen hundred men, 
and he himself was a stout champion. But no man can escape death when his 
last day has arrived. 

The Lord of Slabh-Ardacha”, i.e. James, the son of Pierce, son of James 


Butler, died in the winter of this year. 


ne Long Burke, who had a company of an hun- 
dred Foot in her Majesties pay (notwithstanding 
all Dermot’s Safe guards) assaulted him, who, 
for his safetie, retired into an olde Church, 
burnt it over his head, and in comming foorth 
of the same hee killed about fortie of his men, 
and tooke him prisoner, and the morning fol- 
Carew adds: ‘‘ Her 


Majestie’s honour was blemished, and the ser- 


lowing cut off his head.” 


vice hindred, by this malitious and hatefull 


murther ; who, considering of the fact, besides 
sharpe rebukes and reprehensions, the Lord 
Deputie was commanded presently to casheere 
and discharge him both of his Command and 
Entertainment.” 

m Sliabh Ardacha, now Slieveardagh, or Slew- 
ardagh, a barony in the east of the county of 
Tipperary. According to O’Heerin’s topogra- 
phical poem, this was originally the country of 
a family of O’ Deas. 


LOY; 


2186 ANNaZa RIOshachta ElRECANN. [1600. 


Remann a bupc mac Slam na plman, mic Riocaind paxanais, oo bit ma 
oune uaral, oipofinc, 1ompaiceach oo plin Zsnatongce saoidel an can po. baofs 
poe co na ofpbpaitmb (Sfan occ, mlham, 7 tomap) 1pm oa upmumain 7 1 
néle 1 pampad, 1 prosman, 71 n5Ampeao na bhiadna po. baoi vo L{fpoacc 7 vo 
honmainecc ploig,7 pocarde ag an cclomn pincSlon a bane 5up pararcchean, 
7 5up polmaigead na cine, 7 na cfnntaip pa commnfpa voib led. Ro sabao 
ona baulce carplém romoa 1 néle,7 m upmumann leo von cup pin. ba oibpde 
purde an Ion, bel ata own saip,7 cul o noubain 1 n€iib, 7 pont a colcham 
1 nupmumann. 

lan ccurcim Ucitne mic Rudparge dice ui mopda (amanl po aipnfdypiom ) 
vo ling Laoigip la Saranchoib 50 po Zabrac acc atnuaducchad a naicpeab 
aolcloch, 7 acc puise n pf cacib plecca conmll cfpnaig oan bo DomsZnap 
outhaige laoisip, 0015 mM porbe a viol oo1ohpe bad honnramhail oUaitne 
aga himodiom opna. 

Siol cconcobanp panlge 1. Shlocc bmain me cataoim mic cumn mic an 
calbaig 00 bfich hi ccommband Zao1vel pms pé a tpi no a cltaip vo bliadnoib 
sup an canpa. Ro bmypplo,7 po gabad leo an aipfec pin upmon cauplén 
Ua ppalge, acc nama an oaingtn, 7 blcecan ele a marlle ppp. Canance 
ona apoiupcip na héneann oa paisio pa Lugnapad na blhiaona po 50 momac 
chath 7 ppacad, 50 momac ppeal, 7 coppan, go ccucc pspopr 7 ppotbuam 
an banpoib aipche, 7 anapche an cine, 7 tainice ve~de a honccpeabars vo 
dol ap Toponn, an ceichead, 7 ap 1onnanbad 1 nullcoibh 7 1 crib oile Fo 
ooh na bliaona po. 


” Suidhe-an-roin, now Shinrone, a small town the south of the King’s County, adjoining the 


in the barony of Clonlisk, in the King’s County. county of Tipperary.—See the Ordnance Map, 
sheet 46. 


9 Port-a-Tolchain, called Portolohane in the 


—See Ordnance Map, sheet 42. See note °, 
under the year 1533, p. 1416, supra. 


° Bel-atha-Duin-Gair: i.e. Mouth of the Ford Down Survey, and now shortened to Portland, 


of Dungar, now called simply Dungar, an old 
castle in ruins in the parish of Corbally, barony 
of Ballybritt, and King’s County, and close to 
the boundary of the county of Tipperary.—See 
the Ordnance Map, sheet 43. 

® Cuil-O-nDubhain: i.e. the corner or angle 
of the O’Duanes, now Coolonuane, and some: 
times anglicised Cullenwaine, a townland giving 
name toa parish in the barony of Clonlisk, in 


a townland in the parish of Lorha, barony of 
Lower Ormond, and county of Tipperary.—See 
note *, under the year 1442, p. 925, supra. No 
part of this castle, which was erected by O’Mad- 
den, is now standing. It is not to be confounded 
with the castle of Coillte-Ruadha, which belonged 
to Mac Egan, and which is still in good preser- 
vation. 

" Conall Cearnach.—He was the chief of the 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2187 


Redmond Burke, the son of John of the Shamrocks, son of James, son of 
Richard Saxonagh, was at this time an illustrious and celebrated gentleman, 
according to the usages of the Irish. He and his brothers, John Oge, William, 
and Thomas, remained in the two Ormonds, and in Ely, during the summer, 
autumn, and winter, of this year ; and so great and numerous were the troops 
and forces of these sons of John Burke, that they ravaged and desolated all the 
adjacent territories and cantreds. They took many castles on this occasion in 
Ely and Ormond, among which were Suidhe-an-roin’, Bel-atha-Dun-Gair’, and 
Cuil-O’nDubhain’, in Ely ; and Port-a-Tolchain’, in Ormond. 

After the fall of Owny, the son of Rury Oge O’More, as we have related, 
Leix was seized by the English ; and they proceeded to repair their mansions 
of lime and stone, and to settle in the old seats of the race of Conall Cearnach’, 
to whom Leix was the hereditary principality, for there was no heir worthy 
of it ike Owny, to defend it against them. 

The O’Conors Faly, namely, the descendants of Brian, the son of Cahir, son 
of Con, son of Calvagh, were for three or four years in the Irish confederation, 
up to this time. During this period they took and destroyed the most* of the 
castles of Offaly, [and, indeed, all], except Dangan‘ and a few others. About 
Lammas this year the Lord Justice came into their country with many harrows 
and pracas", with many scythes and sickles, and destroyed and reaped” the ripe 
and unripe crops of the territory ; and the consequence of this was, that the 
inhabitants fled, and remained in exile and banishment in Ulster and other ter- 
ritories until the end of this year. 


Heroes of the Red Branch in Ulster, early in stubborn. The Lord Deputy, who was a great 


the first century, and the ancestor of O’More 
and the seven septs of Leix. 

’ The most, upmop.—This phrase is incorrect, 
and should be struck out, as incumbering the 
sentence. 


‘ Dangan, now Philipstown.—See note °, 


under the year 1546, p. 1498, supra. 

4 Praca.—This term is applied in Munster, 
to a harrow with very long pins, still used for 
the purpose of opening, or ripping up the soil 
around the Z1umap, or grass-corn, when the 
winter winds have rendered it too hard and 


student in botany and natural philosophy, used 
the praca, on this occasion, for the purpose of 
tearing up the corn after it had shot into ear, 
thus rendering it useless; as corn, after ar- 
riving at that stage of maturity, will not, if 
disturbed at the root, grow any more. This 
was a grand preparation for the awful. famine 
which soon after ensued in Ireland, to the great 
destruction of the Milesian race. 

w Destroyed and reaped.—This is possibly a 
mistake for pgpior no pgotbuain, “ destroyed 
or reaped,” for Mountjoy was too wise a man to 


try 2 


2188 AQNNAca RIOshachtTa eElREGNN. 


[1600. 


Oomnall ppdineac, mac vonnchawd, mic cataoip canpars Caonmdnars vo 
plodushad pp an lupcip pm posmap vo ponnad. Clann piachac, mec Clooa, 
mic Sfain do producchad pip map an ccéona. 

Cn coblach Saranach po hopoaiccead lap an mbampiogain, 7 la comainle 
Sharan vo con 50 hepinn vo pagio corccid ulad. On tan po hopovaiccead 
Copd mountiop ma lupcip op epmn im feil patpaice do ponnnaoh amail a 
oubnaman, po bap Zan puipeac, Zan eappnadad ag pup, 7 acc ullmugad an 
coblans fpm mn sac congzaib poamce a Wp amanl ap véine 7 ay oinmneadarse 
popcaémnacaip In Savoib von chup pm, uaip ba ctocpad mop mfnman la 
bampiosain Saxan,q Lay an ccomaiple torn, 7 abup an copnam 4 an cotuccao 
doponpac cenél cconaill,7] Eogsain Fo nullcoib ancfna 7 1 mbaoi oaon pann ppu 
ina nashad vo spép, 7 ona ba cumneac leo beor 7 po bai na salan inclite 
ina ccmde m po manbavd, 7 m po muohangfo via muincip, 7 Mm po tocarthpior 
DIA napceac, 7 o1a monnmup la coccad na hépenn g0 pin. Conad é ainfce 
ap panzacap ancoblac pempaice vo con 50 hepinn go po sabpac cuant nach 


Ro 


chat a mi Apmt na bliadna po. 


destroy such part of the corn as was ripe, when 
he had an army to carry it away. 

* Donnell Spaineach.—He was so called be- 
cause he was in Spain for four years. ‘ Daniel 
Keuanus cognomento Hispaniensis, quod in 
Hispania annos circiter quatuor fuerit commo- 
ratus.”—VTist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, 
lib. 4, c. vi. 

’ Harbour of Dublin.—This account, which 
the annalists had from common bruit only, is 
far from being accurate. Sir Henry Docwra 
himself informs us, in his curious and valuable 
little work, Narration of his Services at Lough 
Foyle, written in the summer of 1614, and 
never yet printed, that the fleet put in first at 
Knockfergus, now Carrickfergus. 
of the preparation and arrival of this fleet is very 
curious, and the Editor deems it his duty to lay 
it here before the reader, that he may compare 
the English and Irish accounts of the same im- 
portant event. After detailing the causes which 


moved him to write this Narration, which were 


His account 
@ 


PaooITc apyploe 1 nuntopac pampaio 


urgent and honourable, he proceeds as follows : 

“‘T had lying by mee some memoriall noates 
and a greate Number of letters, that if they 
were well searched ouer, togeather with the 
helpe of myne owne memorie, were able to 
bring to light the truth of that which otherwise 
was like to perish and Consume in Darkenes. I 
spent a little time to pervse them, & these are 
the effectes the doing thereof hath produced. 

“The Army, consisting in List of 4000 foote 
& 200 horse, whereof 3000 of the foote, & all 
the horse, were levied in England, the other 
1000 foote were taken of the old Companys 
about Dublin, & all assigned to meete att 
Knockfergus, the first of May: That part le- 
vyed in England was shipt at Helbree, neere 
vnto westchester, on the 24th of Aprill, 1600. 
And of these a Regiament of 1000 ffoote and 50 
horse, were to be taken out imediatelie vpon 
our landing, & assigned to S' Mathew Morgan, 
to make a plantation with att Ballishannon. 


‘‘ The Provisions wee carried with vs at first 


1600.1] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2189 


Donnell Spaineach”, the son of Donough, son of Cahir Carragh Kavanagh, 
made peace with the Lord Justice in autumn. The sons of Fiagh, son of Hugh, 
son of John [O'Byrne], likewise made peace with him. 

The English fleet, which had been ordered by the Queen and Council of 
England to be sent, by Patrick’s Day, against the province of Ulster, at the 
time that Lord Mountjoy was appoited Lord Justice over Ireland, as we have 
said, was being prepared and equipped, without delay or neglect, with all the 
necessary engines, in England ; for it was a great annoyance of mind to the 
Queen and the Councils there and here that:the Kinel-Owen, the Kinel-Connell, 
and Ulstermen in general, and those who were in alliance with them, had made 
so long a defence and stand against them; and they also called to mind, and it 
preyed like a latent disease upon their hearts, all of their people that had been 
slain and destroyed, and of their wealth that they had expended, in carrying 
on the Irish war till then, so that they resolved to send this fleet to Ireland ; 
and it arrived in the harbour of Dublin’ in the month of April of this year. 
From thence they set out in the very beginning of summer (by advice of the 


were a quantetie of deale Boards & Sparrs of 
ffirr timber, a 100 flock bedds, with other ne- 
cessaries to furnish an Hospitall withall; one 
Peece of Demy Cannon of Brass, two Culverins 
of Iron, a master Gunner, two master masons, 
& two master Carpenters, allowed in pay, with 
a greate number of Tooles & other vtensiles, 
and with all victuell & munition requisite. 

‘Soe, with those men from England, and with 
these Provisions aforesaide, on the xxv. day of 
Aprill wee sett saile, and on the 28th, in the 
Euening, put in att Knockfergus, where wee 
staide the space of 8 dayes before the Com- 
panyes from Dublin came all vnto vs. 

‘«The last of them coming in by the 6th of 
May, on the 7th wee sett saile againe, and the 
windes often fayling, sometimes full against vs, 
it was the 14th before wee could putt in to 
the mouth of the Bay at Loughfoyle; & noe 
sooner were wee entred, but wee fell on ground, 
& soe stucke till the next day ; then, at a full 
tide, wee waighed our Anchors, say!ed a little 


way, and rune on ground againe. 

‘“¢ On the 16th, in the morning, wee gott loose, 
& about 10 of the Clocke (100 men lying on 
shoare, & giuing vs a volie of shott, & soe re- 
tyring) wee landed att Culmore, & with the 
first of our horse & foote that wee could vn- 
shipp, made vp towards a troupe of horse and 
foote that wee sawe standing before vs on the 
topp of a hill, but, by ignorance of the wayes, 
our horses were presentlie boggt, & soe, at that 
day, wee made none other vse but onelie to land 
our men. The next day, the place seaming to 
my Judgement fitt to build, wee beganne about 
the Butt end of the old broken Castle, to cast 
vp a fforte, such as might be capable to lodge 
200 men in. 

‘‘Sixe days wee spent in labour about it, m 
which meane space, makeing vpp into the coun- 
trie with some troupes (onely with intent to 
discouer), wee came to Ellogh, a castle of 
O’Dogharteys, which he had newhe abandoned, 
& begunne to pull downe; but seeing it yet 


2190 


GQNNa2za RIOshachTa EIREGNN. 


(1600. 


(cpa comarple lapla clomne mocaino 7 lapla cuadmuman) 7 po poncongnad 


foppa tocc so loc pebarl mic lovam. 


Tenentable, & of good vse to be held, I put 
Captaine Ellis Floudd into it, & his Companie 
of 150 men. 

“On the 22"4 of May wee put the Army in 
order to marche, & leauing Captaine Lancellott 
Atford at Culmore, with 600 men, to make vp 
the workes, wee went to the Derry, 4 myles of, 
vpon the River side, a place in manner of an 
Tland, Comprehending within it 40 acres of 
Ground, wherein were the Ruines of a old Ab- 
bay, of a Bishopps house, of two Churches, &, at 
one of the ends of it, of an old castle ; the Riuer, 
called Loughfoyle, encompassing it all on one 
side; & a bogg, most comonlie wett, and not 
easilie passable except in two or three places, 
dividing it from the maine land. 

“This peece of Ground wee possest ourselves 
of without Resistaunce, & iudging it a fitt place 
to make our maine plantation in, being some- 
what hie, & therefore dry, & healthie to dwell 
vpon ; att that end where the old Castle stood, 
being Close to the water side, I presentlie re- 
solved to raise a fforte to keepe our stoore of 
Munition & victuells in, & in the other, a little 
aboue, where the walls of an old Cathedrall 
church were yet standing, to erect annother for 
our future safetie and retreate vnto vpon all 
occasions. 

“Soe then I vnloaded & discharged the Ship- 
ping that brought vs, all but those reserued for 
S' Math: Morgan, & two Men of Warre vnder 
Comaund of Captaine George Thornton & Cap- 
taine Thomas Fleminge, which were purposlie 
assigned to attend vs all that Sommer; & the 
first bussines I setled myselfe vnto was to lay 
out the forme of the said two intended ffortes, 
& to assigne to every Companye his seuerall 
taske, how and where to worke. 

‘‘T know there were some that presentlie be- 
ganne to censure mee for not sturring abroade, 


Seolaicc ianam laimh cli pp hEpinn 


& makeing iourneyes vp into the Countrye, al- 
leadging wee were stronge enough & able to doe 
it; I deny not but wee were, but that was not 
the scope and drift of our coming; wee were to 
sitt it out all winter ; Prayes would not be sett 
without many hazards & a greate Consumption 
of our men, the Countrie was yet vnknowne 
vnto vs, & those wee had to deale with were, as 
I was sure, would Chuse or Refuse to feight 
with vs, as they sawe theire owne advantage. 
These Considerations moued mee to resolue to 
hould an other Course, & before I attempted 
any thinge els, to setle & make sure the footing 
wee had gayned. 

“The two shipps of warre, therefore (the 
Countrie all about vs being wast & burned), I 
sent with souldiers in them to coast all alonge 
the shoare for the space of 20 or 30 myles, & 
willed wheresoeuer they found any howses, they 
should bring a way the Timber & other ma- 
terialls to build withall, such as they could. 
And O’Cane hauing a woode lying right ouer 
against vs (on the other side of the River) 
wherein was plentie of old growne Birch, I 
daylie sent workemen with a Guard of souldiers 
to cutt it downe, & there was not a sticke of it 
brought home, but was first well fought for. 
A Quarrie of stone & slatt wee found hard at 
hand. Cockle shells to make Lyme, wee dis- 
couered infinite plentie of in a little Iland in 
the mouth of the Harbour as wee came in, and 
with those helpes, togeather with the Provisions 
wee brought, & the stones and rubbidge of the 
old Buildings wee found, wee sett our selues 
wholie, & with all the dilligence wee could pos- 
sible to fortefying & framing «& setting vpp of 
howses such as wee might be able to liue in, & 
defend ourselves when winter should Come, & 
our men be decayed, as it was apparant it would 
be. And whether this was the right Course to 


1600.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2191 


Earl of Clanrickard and of the Earl of Thomond); and they were ordered to 
put into the harbour of the Lake of Feabhal, son of Lodan*. They then sailed, 


take or noe, let them that sawe the after Euents 
be the Judges of. 

‘““My lord Deputie att the time wee should 
land (to make our discent the more easie) was 
drawne downe to the Blackwater & gaue out 
that hee would enter the Countrey that way ; 
wherevpon Tyrone & O Donell had assembled 
theire cheifest strength to oppose against him : 
But his lordship now knowing wee were safe 
on shore, & possest of the ground wee went to 
inhabite, withdrewe his Campe & retourned to 
Dublin, & then being deliuered of that feare, 
those forces they had brought togeather for that 
purpose, being now encreased by the addition 
of more, & estimated (by Comon fame) to be 
about 5000 in all, they came downe with vpon 
vs, & placing themselves in the night within 
litle more then a mile from where wee lay, earelie 
in the morning at the Breaking vpp of the watch, 
gaue on vpon our Corps de Gaurd of horse, 
chased them home to our foote Sentynells, & 
made a Countennunce as if they came to make 
but that one dayes worke of it; but the Alarume 
taken, & our men in Armes, they contented 
themselves to attempe noe further, but seeking 
to drawe vs forth into the Countrey where they 
hoped to take vs at some aduantages, & finding 
wee stoode vpon our defensiue onelie, after the 
greatest parte of the day spent in skrimish a 
litle without our Campe, they departed towards 
the Eueninge, whither did wee not thinke it fitt 
to pursue them. 

“ An now did S" Mathew Morgan demaund 
his Regiament of 1000 foote, & 50 horse, which 
at first (as I saide before) were designed him 
for a Plantation att Ballyshannon, but vpon 
Consultation held how hee should proceed, & 
with what Probabilitie he might be able to 
effect that intended bussines, there appeared soe 
many wants & difficulties ynthought on, or 


vnprouided for before, that it was euident those 
forces should be exposed to manifest Ruine, if 
at that time, & in the state as thinges then 
stoode, hee should goe forward; the truth 
whereof being certified both by himselfe & mee 
to the lords of the Councell in England, as alsoe 
to the lord Deputie & Councell of Ireland, wee 
received present directions from them both to 
suspend the proceeding in that action till anno- 
ther time, & soe I discharged the Rest of the 
shipping reserued for that iourney, & not long 
after the Companys growing weake, & the list 
of the foote reduced to the number of 3000, 
that Regiament was wholie dissolued & made as 
a parte onelie of our army. 

“On the first of June, s' Arthur O Neale, 
sonne to old Tirlogh Lenogh that had beene 
O Neale, came in vnto mee with some 30 horse 
& foote, a Man I had directions from the state, 
to labour to drawe to our side, & to promise to 
be made Earle of Tyroane, if the other that 
mainteyned the Rebellion could be dispossessed 
of the Countrey. By his advice within fewe 
dayes after I sent s' John Chamberlaine, with 
700 men, into O Canes Countrie, to enter mto 
it by Boate from O Doghertyes side, because at 
the hither end, lying right ouer against vs, was 
a Continuall watch kepte, soe as wee could not 
stirre but wee were sure to be presentlie dis- 
couered. These men, marching all night, put 
ouer at Greencastle, & by breake of day, on the 
10th of June, fell in the middest of theire 
Creagtes vnexpected, Ceazed a greate Pray, & 
brought it to the Waterside. But for want of 
meanes to bring it all away, they hackt & 
mangled as many as they could, & with some 
100 Cowes, which they put abord theire Boats, 
besids what the Souldiers brought away kild, 
they retourned.” v 
* The lake of Feabhal, son of Lodan, now Lough 


2192 GQNNAZza RIOshachta EiREGNHnN. [1600. 


co no gaibpiot pont 1pm marsm pm po hCpbaoh pnt. lan poccam doib 1 
cup po toccbad leo an sac caeb DON Cuan TI punt oo TpInplolb calman 
amail po hopoagsead vob 1 Saroib, pont oibpioe an chuice Ur neill oon cin 
1 mompocnaib omeachta ui cacham 1. oun na long, 7 oa pont 1 nouchais 
ui vomnanll, pont d1obh 1pin chal mom 1 noachens ui docantas bn ccmoca 
céd imnp heogain,7 pop ole von caob tiant(p ce pins noome cholum cille. 
Ro sabpac na sZoill po cedoip ace dDoImMuccad dfocc ma tcrImcell, 7 acc 
denam oaingin mup cpiad, 7 otnclad noiomop co mbatap ioncopnaim pM 
biodbadarb. Roptap oaingne 7 poptan mnille olccaic na ctipce cloc aolta 
Cp 
a hacle pin no bloopac an mamiptip, 7 an vamliacc,7 po hadmillead leo 
ma mbaot oobaip ecclaptacoa 1pin mbanle co neaopnpac tise 7 cubachla 


7 na catpacha ppp 1 ceaivt pé poda | paotap ofpmain occa noenam. 


oiobh. henpy ovecuna ainm an Zenepala baof leo. Rioine enoeane epioe co 
n5ao1p 7 co nsliocay, 7 po bad pinn aga, 7 ensaile om. Sé mile ba pé lion 
cangacap an ou pin. lan ccocht co voipe voibpioe vo ponpac bmsh mbice 
don cull méip 7 do On na long. SKacan na Zoill pé pooa na po Licc m oman, 
no an imeccla vob ctoct tan na mupaib peccaip, ache (6 mbfcc, 7 no bioip 
Dpons mon o10b hi ccataup Zach novwche, an na tapota ammup poppa, Fo po 
Uonaizt do paot 7 vo salan la hhomecuims: an 1onaio 1 mbacan, 7] la clp na 
pine pamnaca. Uc batpac iolbmone d10b von Thom 1PM. 

lomtupa Ui Oomnaill o po aymspde a nfhcactarge ap a peconaib pectain 
la parcc(p 7 oman, ba plo do poe nemhni vo denam _diob, 7 po t(eclamaice 
a ploigh lap v0 dol 1 ndeipcept CéOiccId Connacs DIONnpad na tcuat bavap 
an sac taeb vo pleib echzse, 7 cuadmumain vo fonpad. OAcbip on an baccan 
iad na haplada 1. lanla clomne procaipd 7 lapla cuadmuman po pupal pop 
an lupcip,7 pon an ccomaiple an capcecap tnomplors pm vo chun cuicce pum 


S 


Foyle, situated between the counties of Lon- 





donderry and Donegal.—See note f, under the 
year 1248, p. 331, supra. 

* Dun-na-long, i.e. the Fort of the Ships, now 
Dunnalong, on the east side of the River Foyle, 
in the barony of Tirkeeran, and county of Lon- 
donderry. 

» Oireacht- Ui- Chathain, i.e. O’ Kane’s country. 
Dunnalong was in the territory of O’Gormly, 


which was tributary to O’ Neill. 

© Cuil-mor, i.e. the Great Corner or Angle, 
now Culmore, a fort on a point of land over, 
Lough Foyle, about five miles to the north of 
Londonderry, in the barony of Inishowen, and 
county of Donegal. 

4 Of them, i.e. of the materials obtained from 
them. 

© Six thousand men.—This is not correct, nor 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2193 


keeping their left to Ireland, until they put into the harbour of that place, as 
they had been directed. After landing, they erected on both sides of the har- 
bour three forts, with trenches sunk in the earth, as they had been ordered in 
England. One of these forts, 1. e. Dun-na-long*, was erected on O’Neill’s part 
of the country, in the neighbourhood of Oireacht-Ui-Chathain®; and two in 
O’Donnell’s country, one at Cuil-mor*, in O’Doherty’s country, in the cantred of. 
Inishowen, and the other to the south-west of that, at Derry-Columbkille. The 
English immediately commenced sinking ditches around themselves, and raising 
a strong mound of earth and a large rampart, so that they were in a state to 
hold out against enemies. These were stronger and more secure than courts 
of lime and stone, or stone forts, in the erection of which much time and great 
labour might be spent. After this they tore down the monastery and cathedral, 
and destroyed all the ecclesiastical edifices in the town, and erected houses and 
apartments of them®. Henry Docwra was the name of the general who was 
over them. He was an illustrious Knight, of wisdom and prudence, a pillar of 
battle and conflict. Their number was six thousand men®. When these arrived 
at Derry they made little account of Culmore or Dun-na-long. The English 
were a long time prevented, by fear and dread, from going outside the fortifi- 
cations, except to a short distance ; and a great number of them were on the 
watch every night, that they might not be attacked [unawares]; so that they 
were seized with distemper and disease, on account of the narrowness of the 
place in which they were, and the heat of the summer season. Great numbers 
of them died of this sickness. 

As for O’Donnell, when he perceived that they were not in the habit of 
going outside their encampments, through fear and dread, he made no account 
of them, and assembled his forces, to proceed into the south of Connaught, to 
plunder the countries that lay on both sides of Sliabh-Echtge‘, and especially 
Thomond. He had good reason for this, indeed, for it was these Earls, namely, 
the Earl of Clanrickard and the Earl of Thomond, who had requested the Lord 
Justice and the Council to send over this great army, to keep him* in his [own] 


is it a matter of surprise that the Four Masters £ On both sides of Sliabh-Echtge, i. e. Clan- 
should not have known the exact number. Sir  rickard and Thomond. 

Henry Docwra himself states that he had only & To keep him, i.e. to give him something to 
four thousand foot and two hundred horse. do at home, and prevent him from overrunning 


122 


2194 aNNaZa RIOShachta elREaNN. (1600. 


Dla FoPoad nat Tin Ina neccmaip an a mfince leo né chsfo pom dia tein 

poppin. O no chinn pon an ccomanple pm po paccaib 6 vochantaig taofpeac 

inp heogain 1. Sfan 6cc, mac Sfam, mic pelim us vocantaigs In ppoichll 
fonp na hallmupchoib an na ciopctap dionnpad a cpiche. Ro paccaibh ona 
Niall sapb 6 ovomnall, 7 anall oa pluag 1 mompude fpopna alla map, 
(coppa, 7 cTmoca céd Enda mic néill. Ro cionoilead a ploig laip 1ap pm co 
noiccp(o tap eipne plan. Oo bine lap céccup sac aén baof po a mamuyp 
1 nullcoib an m ploigead pin. Oacan tna connaccaig 6 Suca 50 opobaosp, 4 

o1aptap tine hamalsand go bneipne ui poucchlls acc phtlm,7 ace pupnaide 

an a dolpom dia pargio Zo bale an méotag iap na ccocht po a togainm 

yum. 6a ovo na connachtoib bai hipmohe acca epnarde pum O puaipc 

ban 6cc mac bmam, mc bmn ballarxg mic eogain, O concobain Slisis 

Oonnchad, mac catanl dicc, mic ToNDS, mic catanl éicc sup na cuacharb pile 

pm comppliab a cucid co mun, O concobain puad Clod mac coinpdealbang - 
pucnd mic caldce bude, mic catail puaid 50 lion a cionoil, Mac n1ianmaca 

mage luincc .1. concoban, mac Tads, mic EoFain, mic Talos co na Muinntip, 

7 Mac wlham banc 1. cepoicc mac uacéin clocas, mic Slain, mic oluepaiy 

co na toiclpeal. 

Ap nool oUa vomnaill co na pocnaicce a hullcoib 1 noonl na cconnactac 
pm 50 baile an Mocaig po apecna oon conann, the lap mage haf an fino- 
binoans, do clomn connmais, do cpfc maine mic eacoac, 7 ouplan clomne 
Riocaipno Zan cat Zan comnypsle san sun oume uav, na lair co po Zab porao 
7 lonsponc 1 mantapn clomne procaipd 1 noipeacc pémainn im Tnactnona oie 
pataipn 7 an pfeil eom an an maint ap ceind. Rangaccap paibce porme 
1 ccuaomumain an tan pin, 7 po bad oorg led na slucnppead ap an ionao 1 
ccappupcaip oroche vomnaig 50 poncha maione a luain. Nip bo hf pin 


Clanrickard and Thomond. If O’Donnell had the Nine Hostages. According to Teige, the 
remained at home to guard his own Tirconnell, son of Tibot Mac Linshy, who had been steward 
instead of making forays into Clanrickard and to the celebrated Hugh Roe O’Donnell, and 
Thomond, Docwra’s forces would have been ren- who was living in 1620, this territory contained 
dered completely powerless; and had Niall Garv _ thirty quarters of land. It was the name of the 
remained faithful to Hugh Roe, he could have north-east part of the barony of Raphoe, adjoin- 
easily annihilated Docwra’s men. ing the Lagan, which is still well known, and 

" The cantred of Enda, son of Niall: i.e. Tir- comprising, according to Mac Linshy, forty-six 
Enda, i.e. the territory of Enda, son of Niall of quarters of land.—See note 4, under the year 


1600. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2195 


territory, away from them, for they deemed it [too] often that he had gone into 
their territories. Having adopted this resolution, he left O'Doherty, chieftain 
of Inishowen, i. e. John Oge, the son of John, son of Felim O'Doherty, to watch 
the foreigners, that they might not come to plunder his territory. He also left 
Niall Garv O'Donnell, and some of his army, encamped-against them on the 
West side, between them and the cantred of Enda, son of Niall’. He then 
mustered his forces, to proceed westwards across the River Erne. He took 
with him on this hosting, in the first place, all those who were under his juris- 
diction in Ulster; and the Connacians, from the River Suck to the Drowes, and 
from the west of Tirawly to Breifny O'Reilly, were expecting and awaiting his 
arrival at Ballymote, whither they were gone at his summons. Among the 
Connaughtmen who awaited him there were O’Rourke (Brian Oge, the son of 
Brian, son of Brian Ballagh, son of Owen); O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son 
of Cathal Oge, son of Teige, son of Cathal Oge), together with the people of 
the districts. which lie from Coirrshliabh northwards to the sea; O’Conor Roe 
(Hugh, the son of Turlough Roe, son of Teige Boy, son of Cathal Roe), with 
all his muster; Mac Dermot of Moylurg, 1. e. Conor, son of Teige, son of Owen, 
son of Teige, with his people; and Mac William Burke, 1. e. Theobald, the son 
of Walter Kittagh, son of John, son of Oliver, with his muster. 

When O'Donnell and his forces out of Ulster had joined these Connaught- 
men at Ballymote, he marched through Corran, through the middle of Magh- 
Ai-an-Fhinnbheannaigh’, through Clann-Conway, and through the territory of 
Maine, son of Eochaidh’, and the level part of Clanrickard, without giving battle 
or skirmish, and without killing or losing a man ; and he halted and pitched 
his camp in the west of Clanrickard, in the Oireacht-Redmond*, on the evening 
of Saturday, the Tuesday following being the festival of St. John. On this 
occasion, notice [of his approach] was sent into Thomond before him [by spies]; 
and they thought that he would not move from the place where he was stopping 
on Saturday night till daylight on Monday morning. But this is not what he 


1175, p. 19, supra. Ui-Maine, or Hy-Many, O’Kelly’s country.— 

i Magh-At-an Fhinnbheannaigh, now Machaire See Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, pp. 4, 25. 
Chonnacht, in the county of Roscommon. For kK Oireacht-Redmond.—A district in the barony 
its exact situation see note”, under the year of Kiltartan, in the county of Galway, belong- 
1189, p. 87, supra. ing to a sept of the Burkes.—See note under 


i The territory of Maine, son of Eochaidh: i.e. the year 1599. 
12 2.2 


2196 aNNata RIOSshachtda ElREANN. 


vo pone plum, act eipse a moicovedorl na maione dia DomNaIsh co po tapm- 


[1600. 


cimmph an a ashaid ovoipecc pémainn, vo cenél Cloda, vo cenél vtingarle, 4 
vo clon cuilém uaccain 50 paimcce Tan popsup pap ian napccam upmoin 
na noinfp pm a midmfoon an Laof fpm. Gabeap Ua vomnaill longponc im 
avhaig pm pop bpd an popsap pm clucin pamaca aman an lopccad mn 
uile cenmotha an maimptip. Ro lice pecaoilead va pccermealtaib vo 
cipccain na noip(p ina ciméell. ba pampping porpl(can an clippédead oa pole — 
dO ponpac na peceimelca pin, uaip po cuaptaisead, 7 po cneacloipccead, po 
hmopad, 7 po hoinccead leo (on 1onam céona vo lo go hoiwdce) 6 Cnaice 
ui clopoubain1 moctap na coicejiche hi temocaic téo na noilén, co cataip 
muyichada hi cconcabaipceind iaptapaig 50 oonup cille muine, 7 Catpach 
Rupp, 7m masgha1 nub bnacain so oopup baile Com Zobann 1 ccopcamod- 
puad, 7 boithe neill bn ccenel pfpmaic. Rob 1omda ona oaothain ofsouine 
uapail no TIZeapna Tine ag cuidecca c(chnaip no ciiccip do MuInTip W DOM- 
noaill an pecach muine, 7 1 lab cumm In ccucomumain mm oroche pin. 

Ro éimg Ua vomnaill an a bapac 1pm mavain o1a Lucan Fo popad 1onmall, 
Zan Tospaim, san cinnepnar co na plogaib ap a bpupallbotaib belpealanca 
| sabait oce apecnam na conaipe Plaptappna TuadmuMan parptuaid Zach 
noipeac vomnt(p 6 ccopbmanc, ooplap ceneol ppfpmanc, 7 vo boipmn so pan- 
Zacan ma naohaig 50 maimypcip Concomovpuan, 7 50 capcaip na ccléipeac 


co na ccpeacaib, 7 co na n5abalanbh leo. bacan na plog ag cin 7 acc 


' Cinel-Aedha, anglice Kinelea, was O’Shaugh- 
nessy’s country, in the south-east of the barony 
of Kiltartan. 

™ Cinel-Donghaile.—This is the tribe name of 
the O’Gradys, and it became, as usual in Ireland, 
that of their territory also. In latter ages this 
territory comprised the parishes of Tomgraney, 
Mayno, Inishcaltra, and Clonrush, of which the 
two latter parishes are now included in the 
county of Galway, but both belong to the dean- 
ery of O mBloid and diocese of Killaloe. 

" Craig- Ui-Chiardubhain: i.e. O’Kirwan’s 
rock, now Craggykerrivane, a townland in the 
parish of Cloondagad, barony of Clonderalaw, 
and county of Clare. 


° Cantred of the Islands, now the barony ot 
Islands in the same county. 

® Cathaiwr-Murchadha : i. e. Murrough’s Stone 
Fort, now Cahermurphy, a townland containing 
the ruins of a caher or Cyclopean stone fort, in 
the parish of Kilmurry Mac Mahon, barony of 
Clonderalaw, or East Corca-Bhaiscinn, in the 
same county. 

1 Kilmurry: i.e. Kilmurry, in the barony of 
Ibrickan. 

' Cathair-Ruis, now Caherross, a townland 
containing the ruins of a castle in the parish of 
Kilmurry Ibrickan.—See note 8, under the 
year 1573, p. 1672, supra. 

° Baile-Hoin-Gabhann, now Ballingowan, or 


1600. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2197 


did, but rose up at day-break on Sunday morning, and marched forward through 
Oireacht-Redmond, throughCinel-Aedha', through Cinel-Donghaile™,and through 
Upper Clann-Cuilein, and before the middle of that day had passed westwards 
across the River Fergus, after having plundered the greater part of these districts. 
On that night O’Donnell pitched his camp on the banks of the Fergus, to the west 
of Clonroad, after having plundered the entire of Ennis, except the monastery. 
He sent forth marauding parties, to plunder the surrounding districts ; and far 
and wide did these parties spread themselves about the country; for from that 
time of the day till night they traversed, burned, plundered, and ravaged [the 
region extending] from Craig-Ui-Chiardhubhain", in the lower part of the fron- 
tiers of the Cantred of the Islands’, to Cathair-Murchadha? in West [recte East] 
Corca-Bhaiscinn, to the gates of Kilmurry* of Cathair-Ruis‘, and of Magh in Hy- 
Bracain to the gate of Baile-Eoin-Gabhann* in Corcomroe, and of Both-Neill 
in Kinel-Fearmaic. Many a feast, fit for a goodly gentleman, or for the lord 
of a territory, was enjoyed throughout Thomond this night by parties of four 
or five men, under the shelter of a shrubbery, or at the side of a bush. 

On the following morning, Monday, O’Donnell set out with his forces from 
their tents and pavilions, steadily and slowly, without pursuit or hurry ; and 
they proceeded on their way diagonally across Thomond, exactly in a north- 
easterly direction, through the east of Hy-Cormaic" and the level of Kinel- 
Fearmaic, and through Burren, and arrived before night, with their preys and 
spoils, at the monastery of Corcomroe, and at Carcair-na-gCleireach”. The 
troops continued scouring and traversing the country around them while day- 


longing to ‘‘ Teige mac Morogh O’Brien.” 


Ballygowan, alias Smithstown, a townland in 
which are the ruins of a castle in good preser- 
vation, in the parish of Kilshanny, barony of 
Corcomroe, and county of Clare.—See note ’, 
under the year 1573, p. 1670, supra. 

* Both-Neill: i.e. Niall’s booth, hut, or tent, 
now anglice Bohneill, and in Irish Cuirt Bhoithe 
Neill, a castle situated in a townland of the 
same name, in the parish of Rath, barony of 
Inchiquin, and county of Clare. In a list of 
the castles of the county of Clare preserved in 
a manuscript in the Library of Trinity College, 
Dublin, E. 2. 14, this castle is set down as be- 


u Hy-Cormaic, a district in the barony of 


Islands, and county of Clare, now supposed to 
be co-extensive with the parish of Kilmaley, 
but it was anciently much larger, as has’ been 
already proved.—See note °, under the year 


1573, p. 1668, supra. 


“ Carcair-na-g Cleireach: i. e. the Narrow Road 
of the Clerics. This name is still preserved, and 
is applied to a narrow and steep road extending 
from the abbey of Coreomroe towards Corranrue, 
in the barony of Burren, and county of Clare. 
It is usually called the Corker road in English. 


e 


2198 ANNa~a RIOSshachta E€IRECHN. [1600. 


caipcel na cipe ma ctimcell cap an caem lonte co nan paceaibyplc aiccpeab, 
no anup bad 1ond&apim san topccad gan Lon pecmor. Ro bad pmtitcced 
oiavh 7 ofchange in cip wle via nfip CO a bpaupccpiona va Zac leit 1ompa 
imaccuaines, 7 po bad Lop via ccon pon popoal conaipe caoble na oobaipciach 
ofchange baof ucapcib (ccapbuay in Zach 1onad a ccabpacaiy 1 naghoud mpm 
Lo clccna. 

(cpagacc na ploigh mm Ua noomnall ap a banach o1a main, 7 loca 
can beilgib blinchaippside na ban bone, 7 cap an ccancorp ccumaing 
ccaolpooms Zan Toro, Fan Tacan, Fan Tonaisecc, Fan copparm Fo pangacap 
50 mfmoaca masphde mfohnavde. Cipyce an avhais pm ap cnoc an s(ppam 
bein erccip chill colgan 7 saullim. Ro evoipdeihgpiot a ccpeaca 4 a ngabala 
pm anole, ap a bapach an ot pin,7 po bai sac opong o10b 1apccam ag oinsead 
j acc ol&itiomain a pelba pamoiple buofipm hi péo pligcib caomcois1d con- 
nacc. Nip bo pooa an wmode puccpac an lo pm eiccin, an pobcan peichs 
TUNIS, 7 Mi po cuilpioc a pamcoolad an aohag pram an uaman a pobanta 
6 a mbiodbadaib 1ap mnopead a ccipe tanpa. Oo smacc longpopc 1 ccom- 
pocnaib 0616 an aohang pin 6 po laiple mimeccla diob. Ro sabpaz a ngille, 
7 ananada ace upsnarm a bppomne 50 po céchartpioc 1aparh a mbiGd ZFomTan 
paachis, contuilpiot hi pcame 50 an a banach. Ocpaccacapn an plos ar a 
puan 7 ciagais in cc{nn cpéva. Ro chfoms Ua vomnaill oo Mhac wlham, 
7 von luct our pangacan a Mantap connact poad nia cagib. Cwmd pip 
pop Zac noineac ip na conab coicc(nna go painice oford laot 50 conmancne 
cinle cola 1 nfioipmfdon an coicciwd. Capps ann an aohang pin. 

Ro popcongain Ua vomnaill an a banac pop a mumncip a nnmle cpfice 
anc{na,7 a néovala oo Lficcfn uadanb o1a ce1 516, a nZiollanpaid, a naép orem, 
7 sonca vo Liccfh leo. Ro bad don opus poptan atgaoive via martib an 
can pin. Tadce occ, mac nell, mic neil pumd, mic néill, mic Toippdealbars 
oiec, mic ToIppoealbang bCpnong ui baorsill, 7 Oulbsionn, mac meccon, mic con- 


* Set them astray—The word fopoal is ex- toa peninsula extending into the bay of Galway, 
plained by O’Clery, ‘‘o0-e6l .1. peacpdn, i.e. and comprising the whole of the parish of Bal- 
want of knowledge, i.e. going astray.” lynacourty, about five miles to the south of the 

’ Carcair: i.e. of Carcair-na-gCleireach, town of Galway. 

« Meadhraighe.—This is latinized Medrigia by * Cnoc-an-ghearrain-bhain : i.e. the Hill of 
O'Flaherty in his Ogygia. The name is still the White Garron or Horse, now Knockagar- 
preserved (pronounced Jfaaree) and is applied ranbaun, a hill on which a fair is held yearly, 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2199 


light remained ; so that they left no habitation or mansion worthy of note 
which they did not burn and totally destroy. All the country behind them, as 
far as they could see around on every side, was [enveloped in] one dark cloud 
of vapour and smoke ; and, during the entire of that day, the vastness of the 
dark clouds of smoke that rose over them ‘aloft in every place to which they 
directed their course, was enough to set them astray* on their route. 

On the following day, Tuesday, O'Donnell and his forces rose up and pro- 
ceeded through the rocky passes of White Burren, and through the close and 
narrow road of Carcair’, without receiving battle or skirmish, and without 
being followed or pursued, until they reached the mansions on the smooth plain 
of Meadhraighe*. They remained that night on the hill of Cnoc-an-ghearrain- 
bhain*, between Kilcolgan and Galway. On the following day they divided 
the spoils and booty among one another at that place ; and each party of them 
were then guiding and closely driving their own lawful portions of the property 
along the roads of the fair province of Connaught. The journey which they 
performed on that day was not a long one, for they were weary and fatigued, 
not having been able to sleep on the night before, through fear of being attacked 
by the enemies whose country they had plundered. Having now altogether 
laid aside their apprehensions, they made an encampment for the night before 
they had gone far. Their servants and attendants proceeded to prepare their 
dinner, and, having taken food till they were satisfied, they retired to rest until 
morning, when the army, rising from their slumber, proceeded on their journey. 
O’Donnell permitted Mac Wilham and those who had come from Iar-Connaught 
to return to their homes. He set out himself in a directly eastern direction, 
along the common roads, until he arrived, at the end of the day, in Conmaicne- 
Cuile-Tolaigh’, in the very centre of the province, where he remained for that 
night. 

On the next day O’Donnell ordered his people to send away all their cattle- 
spoils and plunders home to their houses, and to let their servants and the 
unarmed and wounded go along with them. Among those of their chiefs who 
were mortally wounded at this time were Teige Oge, the son of Niall, son of 
Niall Roe, son of Turlough Bearnach O’Boyle; and Duigin, the son of Maccon, 


situated about a mile to the north of the village ® Conmaiene-Cuile- Tolaigh, now the barony of 
of Clarinbridge. Kilmaine, in the south of the county of Mayo. 


2200 aNNaza RIOSshachtd ElREGNN. [1600. 


corccpiche uf clGmg,7 ba hann po gonad iavpide, anaon la opus ele oo 
mumncip Uf vomnaill po baccapn ag 1onnpargid an clcip moip pop lapla cuao- 
muman. Cp on cclap pin canmmgcean conntae an clap. Acbatpac an orap 
pempaive pfon-an cconaip ag poad voib, 7 po 1omcuipise apaon ora cTipib co 
no hadnarcice 1 noan na ngall. 

Ro lice tpt Ua vomnall opong mép dia rnlfoob 7 ora amporb lap na 
cptchaib,7 lap an luée pempaice vo péouccad conaipe oo1b. Ro comaiplfice 
oUa puaipe, 7 DIA MuIMnTip TodECT DIA TTIZIb, 7 DO Comnaccoib apclna. 
Popcay cna Ua vomhnaill coicc céd laoc do porgmb a mead ma pocaip co 
p(pccat mancaé via pammumneip bavfin a male pnra. Chimie ipin longpopic 
1 mbacan m aohars pam 50 hiap mfdon laf. Coccap 1apam ther an ccoiccead 
porpotp 50 mbaccap acc loch machi ccpepupceul na marone an a banac. ba 
heplde pont capeachap lapla clomne mocaipo. Ro liccpiot a pecfiimelca 
an Zac Lit o106 DIndpead na cpiche, co po Tionoilpiot ma mbaoi vo cpod, 7 
omnli m zach campo ma mompocnab, 7 vo patpac leo 50 haon margin. 
Tiasait co na cepfchaib leo thep an ccoiccead pon sup sabpac longpopct 1 
nmel an tine py Suca 1 nofp, aohaig an domnang vo ponnad, aipipie hipurde 
co mavam an lucin. Coccan an a banac cap at acc ppionn pon an Suca, 4 
Tne may naoi mic allguba so pangacan sup an pesarp im tpat nona, sabaic 
longpons pip an abainn a cud m avhaig pin. CTiagaic an a banach can 
coipppliab na pespa, 7 the cmocaib an copamn 7 co baile an Mhocans. 
Scaoic na plois dia T7516 1apam, co névalaib 7 co monnmapanb. 

Mac uf neil 1. Sip Ant, mac coippdealbars tunis, mic neill conallang, 
mic apt mic cumn, oo dol bi ccfnn na ngall (po sab popt 1 notin na long) 
vo coccad an Ua neill,7 an cant céona pa opagail bay 1 ppanpad na ngall 
péempaice. 

Imtupa Ut doomnanll, bai co na plogaib san posluapact o do nuact a TUAad- 


mumain iapp an cupup pempaice so Septembep ap ccimn. 


© The county of Clare is named.—This is a mere 
note, which very much incumbers the narrative ; 
but it is very correct, and refutes the idea that 
the county of Clare has derived its name from 
Sir Thomas de Clare. 

4 Seaghais.—This was the old name of Coirr- 
shliabh, or the Curlieu range of hills, on the bor- 

. 


lan léccad a 


ders of the counties of Roscommon and Sligo. 

© Died among the English—He joined Docwra 
with thirty horse and thirty foot on the Ist of 
June, and died on the 28th of October following. 
The Queen intended creating him Earl of Tyrone. 
—See Docewra’s Narration ; and Moryson’s His- 
tory of Ireland, book i. ¢. 2. 


1600.} ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2201 


son of Cucogry O’Clery; who were both [accidentally] wounded by another party 
of O’Donnell’s people, as they were attacking Clar-mor upon the Earl of Tho- 
mond. From this Clar the county of Clare is named®. The two aforesaid died 
on the road, returning home ; and they were both carried to their territories, 
and were buried at Donegal. 

O'Donnell sent a large party of his warriors and soldiers with the preys 
and people aforesaid, to clear the way for them; and he advised O’Rourke 
and his people, and the other Connaughtmen in general, to return home. 
O'Donnell retained five hundred heroes of his choice soldiers, and sixty horse- 
men, of his own faithful people. They remained in the camp in which they 
~ had been the night before until after mid-day. They then proceeded through 
the province in a south-easterly direction, and arrived, by the twilight of the 
following morning, at Loughrea. This was the chief residence of the Earl of 
Clanrickard. They sent out marauding parties in every direction to plunder 
the country ; and these collected all the cattle and herds in their neighbourhood 
in every direction, and brought them to one place. They came with their preys 
eastwards across the province, and on Sunday pitched their camp with them 
near the borders of the province, to the south of the Suck, where they remained 
until Monday morning. On this day (Monday) they proceeded across Athleague, 
and through the plain of Nai, son of Allgubha [i.e. Machaire-Chonnacht], and 
in the evening arrived at Seaghais*, where they encamped northwards of the 
river for that night. On the next day they crossed Coirrshliabh-na-Seaghsa, 
and proceeded through the territory of Corran to Ballymote. The forces then 
dispersed for their homes with spoils and riches. f 

The son of O'Neill, namely, Sir Art, the son of Turlough Luineach, son of 
Niall Conallagh, son of Art, son of Con, went over to assist the English, who 
were fortified at Dun-na-long, in order to wage war against O'Neill. This Art 
died among the English*. 7 

As for O’Donnell, he remained with his troops, without making any excur- 
sion [out of Tirconnell], from the time that he returned from the aforesaid 
expedition in Thomond to the September following’. After his soldiers and 


f September following.—This appears to have inactive in his own territory till September; for, 
been copied from the Life of Hugh Roe O’Don- according to Docwra, O’Donnell made the at- 
nell. It is not true that O’Donnell remained tack described in the text on the 29th of July. 


1A 


2202 


QNNaZa RIOSshachTaA EIREGNN. 


[1600. 


peeipl dia amypaib, 7 dia aop cuapupcail an caiplsc pm, Ro tocuip pum 


laoprde Cucca oup an Fpuicchblo baogal pon na sallaab. Ro haynfolo v6 


Docwra gives a most curious and minute account 
of the attack made on him by the Irish, and the 
coming over to his side of Sir Arthur O’Neill 
and Niall Garv O’Donnell, with their followers, 
without whose intelligence and guidance little 
or nothing could have been effected by Docwra, 
who candidly acknowledges the fact, and re- 
marks: “ Although it is true withall they had 
theire owne ends in it, which were always for pri- 
vate revenge, and wee ours, to make use of them 
for the furtherance of the publique service.” His 
journal of the transactions that took place in the 
neiShbourhood of Derry and Lifford, from this 
period to the first of November, is as follows: 
“On the 28th of June came some men of 
o’Doghertyes, & lay in ambush before Ellogh ; 
the Garrison discouering them, fell out & skir- 
misht; a litle of from the Castle wee perceived 
them, from the Derry, to be in feight. I tooke 
40 horse & 500 ffoote, & made towards them ; 
when they Sawe vs coming they left the skir- 
mish & drewe away: wee followed vp as fast as 
wee could, &, coming to the foote of a moun- 
taine, which they were to pass ouer in theire 
retreate, wee might see them all march before 
vs, though but slowlie, yet with as much speede 
as they were able to make, being, to our grieffe, 
about 400 foote & 60 horse, & wee makeing as 
much hast on our partes to ouertake them. By 
that time the last of them had obtained the topp 
of the hill: St John’Chamberlaine & I, with 
some 10 horse more, were come vpp close on 
theire heeles, all our foote, & the rest of our 
horse, coming after vs as fast as they could, but 
all out of breath & exceedinglie tired. Hauing 
thus gained the very topp of the hill, & seeing 
but fewe about me, I stayed and badd a stand 
to be made till more Company might come vpp; 
and withall, casting my head about, to see how 
our men followed, I seeing the foote farr be- 


hinde, & our horse but slowlie Clyming vpp; 
turning about againe I might see S$’ John 
Chamberlaine unhorsed, lying on the ground, a 
stones cast before mee, & at least a Dozen hew- 
ing at him with theire Swords. I presentlie 
gaue forward to haue rescued him, & my horse 
was shott in two places & fell deade vnder mee, 
yet they forsooke him vpon it, & wee recouered 
his bodie, but wounded with 16 woundes, & in- 
stantlie giving vp the Ghost, wherevpon wee 
made a stand in the place, & staying till more 
Companie came vp, wee brought him off, & suf- 
ferred them to march away without further 
pursuite. 

“On the second of July I put 800 men into 
Boates, and landed them att Dunalong, Tyrone 
(as wee were tould) lying in Campe within two 
myles of the Place, where I presentlie fell to 


raiseing a Forte. His men came downe & skir- 


‘misht with vs all that day, but perceiuing the 


next wee were tilted, & out of hope to be able 
to remoue us, they rise vp & left vs quietlie to 
doe what we would, where, after I had made it 
reasonablie defensible, I left S' John Bowles in 
Garrison with 6 Companyes of Foote, & after- 
wards sent him 50 horse. 

“On the 14th of July came O’Donnell with 
a troupe of 60 horse, &, earely in the Morninge, 
as our watch was ready to be discharged, fell 
vpon a Corpes de Guard of some 20 of our horse, 
but they defended themselues without loss, & 
orderlie retyred to the Quarter, only Captaine 
John Sidney was hurte in the shoulder with 
the blowe of a staffe. 

“On the 29th of July he came againe with 
600 Foote & 60 horse, and lay close in ambush 
in a valley within a quarter of a myle of our 
outmost horse sentinells; & Moyle Morrogh 
mac Swyndoe (a man purposelie sent with mee 
by the state, and soe well esteemed of as the 


1600.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2203 


hirelings had within this period rested themselves, he summoned them to him, 
to see whether he could get any advantage of the English. He was informed 


queene had giuen a Pention of vis a day vnto 
“during his life, & the present Comaund of 100 
English souldiers) having intelligence with him, 
caused some of his men to goe, a litle before 
Breake of Day, & driue forth our horses (that 
were vsually euery night brought into the 
Iland to Graze) directlie towards him, In soe 
much as, vpon the sodaine, before any thinge 
could be done to preuent it, he gott to the num- 
ber of 60 into his power, & presentlie made 
hast to be gone. But with the alarum I rise vp 
from my Bedd, tooke some 20 horses, and such 
foote as were readie, Bidd the rest follow, & soe 
made after them. At fower myles end wee 
ouertooke them, theire owne horses kept in the 
reare, flanked with foote, marching by the edge 
of a Bogge, & those horse they had gott from 
vs sent away before with the foremost of theire 
foote. When they sawe vs cominge, they turned 
heade & made readie to receiue vs; wee charged 
them, & at the first encounter I was stricken 
with a horseman’s stafe in the Foreheade, in soe 
much as I fell for deade, & was a goode while 
deprived of my sences; Butt the Captaines & 
Gentlemen that were about me (whereof the 
cheife that I Remember were Captaine An- 
thony Erington, Captaine John Sidney, Cap- 
taine. John Kingsmyll, & Mathew Wroth, ‘a 
Corporall of my horse Companie) gaue beyond 
my Bodie & enforced them to giue ground a 
good way, by meanes whereof I recouered my- 
selfe, was sett vp on my horse, & soe safelie 
brought of, & Conducted home, & they sufferred, 
with the prey they had gott, to departe with- 
out further pursuite. | 

““T kepte my Bedd of this wound by the 
space of a fortneth, my chamber a weeke after, 
& then I came abroade; & the first thinge I did, 
I tooke a viewe & particuler muster of all the 


Companyes. How weake I found them, euen 


beyonnd expectation (though I had seene them 
decay very fast before), is scarselie credible; &, 
I thinke, noe man will denye but it was euen 
then a strange Companie, that, of 150 in list, 
could bring to doe service 25 or 30 able, at the 
most. 

“Then did I alsoe manifestlie discouer the 
Trechery of the said Moyle Morrogh Mac Swy- 
nedo” [Mulmurry Mac Sweeny Doe], “ hauing 
intercepted the Messenger that he employed to 
O’Donnell in all his Bussines, out of whose 
mouth I gott a full Confession of all his Prac- 
tices, & especiallie, that it was hee that caused 
his men of purpose to drive forth our horses, 
which he was so manifestlie convinced of as hee 
had not the face to denie it, wherevpon I deli- 
uered him to Captaine Flemminge, who was then 
going to Dublin, to carry to my lord Deputie, 
there to receiue his tryall; who, ‘putting him 
vnder hatches in his shipp, & himselfe coming 
to shoore with his Boate, the hatch being opened 
to sett Beere, he stept vp vpon the Decke, & 
threwe himselfe into the Riuer, & soe Swamme 
away to O’Canes side, which was hard by; they 
in the shipp, amazed with the soddayneness of 
the fact, & doing nothing that tooke effect, to 
prevent it. 

* On the 24th of August came Roorey, bro- 
ther to O Cane (hauing before made his agree- 
ment with mee, to serue vnder S* Arthur 
O Neale), & brought with him 12 horse, 30 
foote, & 60 fatt Beeues,—a Present welcome at 
that time, for besides that fresh meate was then 
rare to be had, our provisions in stoore were 
very neere spent. I gaue him thereof a Recom- 
pence for them in money, & allowed him a 
small parte of souldiers to goe forth againe, 
whoe returned the next day, & brought 40 
more. Annother small Pray hee sett againe 
within fewe dayes after, & then, thinking hee 


13. Ar? 


2204 


GNNaAZa RIOSshachtTa EIREGANN. 


(1600. 


sup. bo snat veachpmd na ngall cocc pon ingelcpad vo parsioh pepsuipc 
papaish baof pon roncanb an baile .1. dope, Opongs do mancypluag na ngall aga 


had gayned himselfe Credite enough, hee came 
& demaunded 800 men to doe an enterprise 
withall, that should be (as he tould a very faire 
& probable tale for) of farr greater importance 
& seruice to the Queen. I had onelie the per- 
suation of S* Arthur O Neile (who I verylie 
thinke was a faithful & honnest Man), granted 
him some men, though not halfe the Number he 
askt, because, in truth, I had them not. But 
before the time came they should sett forth, 
S' Arthur had’changed his opinion, & bad mee 
bewarre of him. I stayed my hand therefore, 
& refused him the men. He apprehended I did 
it out of distrust, & with many oathes & Pro- 
testations indeuored to perswade mee of his 
truth & fidelitie; But finding all would not 
prevaile, he desired I would suffer him to goe 
alone with such men of his owne as he had, & 
he would retourne with such a testimonie of 
his honnestie, as I should neuer after haue 
Cause to be doubtefull of him more. I was 
content, soe hee left mee Pledges for his re- 
tourne ; hee offered mee two that accepted of 
theire owne accords to engage theire liues for 
it, & himselfe besids promised it with a so- 
lemn oath taken vpon the Bible, soe I lett him 
goe. The next day he came backe to the wa- 
terside, right ouer against the towne, with 300 
Men in his Companye, and, hauing the River 
betweene him & vs, called to the souldiers on 


our side, & bad them tell mee he was there re- 


turned, according to promise, But ment noe 
Longer to serue against his owne Brother; & if 
for his Pledges I would accepte of a Ransome of 
Cowes, he would send mee in what reasonable 
Number I should demaund ;;. But threatned, If 
1 tooke away theire ltves, there should not an 
English man escape that euer came within his 
danger. This being presentlie brought vnto 
mee, & approued to be true by Repetition in 


myne owne sight & hearing, I caused a Gibbett 
to be straight sett vp, brought them forth, & 
hanged them before his face; & it did afterwards 
manifestlie appeare this man was, of purpose, 
sent in, from the very begining, to betraye vs, 
& at this time he had laid soe faire a Plott, all 
was done by directions of Tyrone, who lay in 
Ambush to receiue vs. 

** And now the winter beganne to be feirce 
vpon vs; our men wasted with continual] Ja- 
boures, the Iland scattered with Cabbins full 
of sicke men, our Biskitt all spent, our other 
prouisions of nothing but Meale, Butter, & a 
litle Wine, & that, by Computation, to hould 
Tyrone & O’Donell, 


to weaken vs the more, Proclaming free passage 


out but 6 dayes longer. 


& releife through theire Countrie, to send them 
away, to as many as would leaue vs and departe 
for England. Our two fortes, notwithstanding 
all the dilligence wee had beene able to vse, farre 
O’Donell, 


well obseruing the opportunitie of this time, if 


from the state of being defensible. 


his skill and Resolution had beene as good to 
prosecute it to the full, on the 16 of September 


“came, with 2000 Men, about midnight, vndis- 


couered, to the very edge of the Bogge that di- 
vides the Iland from the mayne Lande (for our 
horses were soe weake & soe fewe that wee were 
not able to hould watch any further out), & 
there, being more then a good muskett shott 
of, they discharged theire peeces, whereby wee 
had warning enough (if neede had beene) to 
But there 
was not a Night, in many before, wherein both 


put our selues in Armes at leysure. 


myselfe & the Captaines satt not vp in expecta- 
tion of this attempt, and Captaine Thomas 
White, having some 20 horse readie in Armes 
for all occasions, came presentlie, & brauclie 
charged vpon the first that were now past ouer 
the Boge & gott into the land, kild about 14 


1600. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2205 


that the horses of the English were sent out every day, under the charge of a 
party of English cavalry, to graze upon a grassy field that was opposite the 


or 15, whose bodies wee saw lying there the 
next day, & the rest, takeing a fright, con- 
fusedly retyred as fast as they could; yet, to 
make it seene they departed not in feare, they 
kept thereabouts till the morning, & then, as- 
soone as it was broad day Light, they made a 
faire Parade of themselues vpon the side of a 
hill, full in our sight, & soe marched away. 
‘The very next day came in a supplie of vic- 
tuells, very shorthe after 50 newe horse, & 
shortelie after that againe 600 foote, & withall, 
because the lords had beene aduertized the 
stoore howses wee erected at first, of Deale 
boardes onelie, were many wayes insufficient, 
& vnable to preserue the munitions and vic- 
tuells in, they sent vs, about this time, two 
frames of Timber for howses, with most thinges 
necessarie to make them vp withal, which they 
ordayned to supplie that defect with; & now 
alsoe, where before the souldiers were enioyned 
to worke, without other allowance than theire 
ordinarie pays, Theire lordships, vpon adver- 
tisment of the inconueniencie thereof (which in 
truth was such as, doe what wee could, the 


workes went but exceeding slowlie forward, &,» 


with very much difficulty), I then receiued or- 
ders to give them an addition to their wages 
(when they wrought vpon the fortifications) of 
4a day; & soe wee were then, in all things, 
fullie & sufficientlie releeued. 

‘¢On the third of October came in Neile Garvie 
O Donell, with 40 horse & 60 Foote; a man I 
was also directed by the state to winne to the 
(Jueene’s seruice, & one of equall estimation in 
Tyreonnell, that Sir Arthur O Neale was of in 
Tyrone. The secreet message that had past 
betweene him & mee, hee found were discouered 
to O Donnell, and therefore somewhat sooner 
then otherwise he intended, & with less assu- 


raunce & hope of many Conditions, that hee 


stood vpon. Yet, it is true, I promised him, in 
the behalfe of the Queene, the whole Countrey 
of Tirconnell to him & his heires; & my lord 
Deputie & Councell at Dublin did afterwards 
confirme it vnto him yvnder theire hands; «& his 
Coming in was very acceptable att that time, & 
such as we made many vses of, & could ill haue 
spared. 

‘* The next day after hee came, wee drewe 
forth our forces, & made a journey to the He of 
Inche, where, by his information, wee had 
learned there was a good Prey of Cattell to be 
gott ; but the tides fallmg out extraordinarie 
high, wee were not able to pass them to gett in, 
so as wee were forced to turne our Course & 
oe downe into O-Dogherties Countrie, though 
to litle purpose, for, knowing of our coming, hee 
draue away all before vs, onelie some stacks of 
Corne wee found, which wee sett on fire. 

* The 8th of October I assigned vnto the said 
Neale Garvie 500 foote & 30 horse, vnder the 
leading of S' John Bowles, to goe to take the 
Liffer, where 30 of O Donnells men lay in Gar- 
rison in a Forte in one of the Corneres of the 
towne; & most of them, being abroad when they 
came, were surpriced & slaine, & the place 
taken ; yet soe as one of them had first putt 
fire into the Forte, which consumed all the 
Buildings in it; but the rest of the Howses 
scattered abroade in the towne (which were 
about 20) were preserued & stood vs afterwards 
in singuler good steade. 

**O-Donell having heard of the takeing of 
this Place, came on the xi of October, with 
700 foote & 100 horse, & encamped himselfe 
about 3 myles off at Castle Fyn. ‘The next day 
he came & shewed himselfe before the Towne, 
our Garrison made out, had a skirmish with 
him of an houre longe, wherein Neale Garuie 


behaved himselfe Brauclie; Capten Augusten 


2206 ANNAZaA RIOShachtca EIREGNN. [1600. 


ppopcoim(cc sach laof, Oc cualaig pum mnypin po Zab aga pocpboad cionnuy 
no benad amup pon an eachnaid tpn, conad € ni vo pome oOpons mon oia 
milfocab, 7 ofpim mancac (nap bo luga oloat pé céo a Lion etin Tporgteac, 
5 mapcaé) vo bplic lap 50 vicelca 1 nvopcaca na howce 50 hucc allbpuaie 
romdomam po bai 1pm maspliab canla pop ashaid ooine a tuand, boal m po 
ba pal voib mucin an bonle, 7 nap b6 popanccpiona voibpide 1avpom. Ro 
cup uacthad blce va mapnplog 1 monaoaib 1onpoilgioe a ppoccur von baile n 
cceils pop na heoca, 7 pop a naép comfcca co na hompatoip a nfchnada 
pop a cchlaib oomdip1 cecib can po bad lamn leo. Gaccap om an cuce pin 
an na nmnell go hupctopac an laof. Ac ciac an (chpa cuca oapp an updpocat 
(co na luct popcom(cca) amail po snachangpioc. Ro fins(ccap mancpluas 
uf Domnall 0616 Dan a nhy1,7 00 pavpacc ammurp pon lucht an poncommécca, 
mapbaice opong o10b, 7 cepna a pole la luap a neachpad 7 a népma. 
Oaboice mumncin Ui vomnanll acc 1omam eacpaide na ngall po a ccumangs. 
Tice a plos budofin dia ccompuntace pon na Zalloib, 7 po cuinpioc na hich 
plmpa. Ro popcal Ua vomnaill pop opuins o1a mapncyplog ool lap na heocha, 
7 san anmam pmppium ioip co popcaip co honad mmll. Oo ponad amlard. 
Cnaip o vomnall po ve61d 7 an Lion po tos Dia Mancy los ma Panpad co na 
milfoob tnoistec. 

Oc ciad na so01ll verliuccad a neoe pri Eippitc po céooip, 7 sabance a 
napma, 7 v0 Lficcfc 1 noeavhaid uf dormnall. Oo veacaid an senepal Sip 
henpp vocuna co na mancplog pop a neocaib (voneoc po porte a nfoca 1 
nionadaib milli o10b, 7 na po pecayf pnd don cup pin), 7 tTiagaic ipin 
cospaim amanl ap véine po peopac. Ot connainc 6 vomnaill mapcpluag na 
nsall pon oianmpim ina deavhad cmap 1 nodeoid a mlead Thoigteac co na 
dDlonma mancylogs ma Focaip co puccpac mapcplog na ngall pap. Oo blnace 
Heath tooke a light hurte in his hand, & some more with his owne hands, & had his horse 
10 or 12 Men on ech side were slaine. slaine vnder him. Captaine Heath took a shott 

“On the 24th he came againe, &laide him- in the thigh, whereof he shortelie after died, & 
selfe in ambush a myle from the towne, watch- some 20 more there were hurte & slaine. 
ing to intercept our men Fetching in of turfe, * On the 28th of October dyed S* Arthur 
which, before our Coming, the Irish had made O’Neale of a fevour, in whose place came pre- 
for their owne Provision. The Alarme taken, — sentlie after one Cormocke, a brother of his, 
the Garrison made forth againe, & Neale Garvie that clamed to succeed him as the next of his 


behaued himselfe brauelie as before, charged kinne, & had, in that name, good entertainments 
home vpon them, killed one, hurt one or two from the Queene. But shortelie after came his 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2207 


town, i.e. Derry ; when he heard this, he began to meditate how he could 
make a descent upon those horses; and this is what he did: he took privately, 
in the darkness of the night, a large party of his soldiers, and a squadron of 
cavalry (amounting to no less than six hundred, between horse and foot), to 
the brink of a steep rocky valley, which was on the flat mountain to the north 
of Derry, from whence they could plainly see the people of the town, who 
could not easily see them. He placed a small party of his cavalry in ambush 
for the horses and their keepers, at concealed places not far from the town, so 
as to prevent them from returning to the town when they should wish to do 
so. They remained thus in ambush until the break of day, when they per- 
ceived the horses with their keepers coming across the bridge as usual. 
O’Donnell’s cavalry set out after them, and attacked and slew some of the 
‘keepers; but others made their escape by means of the fleetness and swiftness 
of their horses. O’Donnell’s people then commenced driving off as many of 
the English horses as had been left behind in their power. The main body of 
their own force coming up to assist them against the English, they sent the 
horses before them. O’Donnell ordered a party of his cavalry to go off with 
the horses to a secure place, and not to wait for himself at all until they should 
reach a secure place. ‘This was uccordingly done; [and] O’Donnell remained 
behind, with a body of his cavalry which he selggted and with his foot soldiers. 

When the English perceived that their horses had been taken away from 
them, they immediately arose, and, taking their arms, set out in pursuit of 
O'Donnell. “Phe General, Sir Henry Docwra, with his horsemen mounted on 
their horses (i.e. such of them as retained their horses in secure places, and 
had not lost them on that occasion), joined in the pursuit as rapidly as they 
were-able. When O’Donnell saw the cavalry of the English in full speed after 
him, he remained behind his infantry with his troop of cavalry, until the Eng- 


owne sonne, Tirlogh, that was, indeed, his true 
& imediate heire, whome the state accepted of, 
& admitted to inherite all the fortune & hopes 
Hee had not attained to the full 
age of aman, &, therefore, the service he was 


of his father. 


able to doe was not greate, but some vse wee 
had of him, & I thinke his disposition was 
faithfull & honest. 


“‘ All this while, after Liffer had beene taken, 
O’Donell kept vp & downe in those parts, watch- 
ing still to take our men vpon some advantage, 
but finding none, & hearing two Spanish shipps 
that were come into Calebegg with Munition, 
Armes, & Money, on the 20th of November he 
departed towards them, & betweene Tirone & 


him intending to make a ‘dividend of it.” 


aNNacwa RIOSshachta EIREANN. [1600. 


poe amup calma pop Ua noomnaill van cfin a cepfiche,7 a nfimg. PForr- 
aaship o Domnall ppp veabaid go véola vupcnowdech, 7 plptap romainfce 
amnup (coppa clecan na oa lite. Cerlccip anole commbpacaip dua vom- 
naill 1. God mac Coda omb mic Cloda puad ui vomnall, posa pogablaigi 
ap amup an genepal Sip henpp vocupa co ccapla 1 ccul a éoain gan 1ompoll 
50 pop 50n 50 haic{p amnup. Soop an senepal pop cculaib ian na tpeagoao 
pamlad, 7 poorce na soll ancha ian ngum a ccoonaig, a ccfin comanple, 7 
a ccopfingip po méla, 7 ataip, 7 ni po Lmpac a nfchpa ni ba pipi. Criaccanc 
muincin Us domnaill oa peconaib, 7 po pimead leo a neacna oup puccrac, 
pulll(> pon of6 céoab each ba plo a lion. Rannayp Ua vomnaill na heoca 
ap a hatte popp na huciplib 1ap na ccompamaib. 

bai imoppo Ua oomnaill 1 pponbaipp: pony na Zallaib san posluapche ap 
a tip 50 ofinld octobep. Ro tionnpccam annpioe dol 50 TuadDMuMaM do ploip! 
via hinopead. Ro clcclamad a plog lap iap ccmnfo pon an ccomaiple pin, 7 
ni po camp co nainice cap Slicceach piap,7 co baile an mocaigh. Ro paccanb 
Niall sanb, mac cumn, mic an calbong, mic Magnapa Ui vomnanll van a erp 
ipin cepich o1a Mhomcomm(ce popp na Zallaab ap na ciopcatp o1a hinopead. 
7 Oabaice na Zoll ag ail q ace acach Neill sainb ui comnaill go hinclhice, 
J acc enal nig) an cine pain vlamad 1a0 bad copccnac. Ro tingeallpac 
apccada 1OMdG, ] Maome mapa 06 PHIPpN dia TTiopad ma ccommbas. Gai 
plum ag coiptect pp na comcaib acho food co no vEOnaIs a ainpén 06 
po vesoh oul o1a posi la miaiple an aépa phos pon vallons bacap imanaen 
FMT) 7 pop aitpeac 06 ciod ian tcpioll. Oo deacacan a tTmap ofpbnaitpeac 
loup ipin commfinge pin 41. Coo bude, Oomnall,7 Conn. Ro ba pfinove on vo | 
salloib a noolyom o1a monnpaigid, uaip poptap peitig, mC ptms san coolad 


8 Hugh, son of Hugh Duv.—He is described, in 
the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell, by Peregrine 
O’Clery, as “the Achilles of the Irish race.” 


Sir Henry Docwra little knew who it was that 


struck him when he wrote: ‘* At the first en- 
ceunter I was stricken with a horseman’s staffe 
in the forehead, in soe much as I fell for dead, 
and was a good while deprived of my senses,” 
&ec., &e. The weapon cast at Docwra was a 
javelin, not a mere stick or staff; and P. O’Sulle- 


van Beare says that Doewra’s helmet was pierced 
by it. 

‘“‘Secundo die, quam in terram exsiluerunt, 
Odonellus oceurrens centum sexaginta octo 
equos eis adimit, et rursus equos iuxta oppidum 
pascentes Catholici rapiunt, quos sequuntur 
Angli. Hugo Odonel- 
lus cognomento Junior Docrium telo per Ga- 


Equestre prelium fit. 


leam fixo fracto cranio vulnerat.”’—Hist. Cathol. 
Iber., tom. 3, lib. 6, cap. v. fol. 171. 


1600.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2209 


lish came up with him. They made a courageous attack upon O’Donnell for 
[the recovery of] their spoils, and of what was under their protection. O’Don- 
nell sustained the onset valiantly and resolutely ; and a fierce battle was fought 
them. One of O’Donnell’s kinsmen, namely, Hugh, the son of Hugh Duv’, son 
of Hugh Roe, made a well-aimed cast of a javelin at the General, Sir Henry 
Doewra, and, striking him directly in the forehead, wounded him very severely. 
When the General was thus pierced, he returned back; and the English, seeing 
their chief, their adviser, and their mighty man, wounded, returned home in 
sorrow and disgrace, and pursued their horses no further. O’Donnell’s people 
proceeded to their tents, and, on reckoning the horses which they had carried 
off, they found them to exceed two hundred* in number. O’Donnell afterwards 
divided the horses among his gentlemen, according to their deserts. 

O'Donnell remained besieging the English, without moving from his terri- 
tory, until the end of October, when he began to make preparations to go again 
into Thomond, to plunder it. After having come to this resolution, he assem- 
bled his forces, and made no delay until he came westwards across the Sligo, 
and to Ballymote. He left Niall Garv, the son of Con, son of Calvagh, son of 
Manus O’Donnell, behind him in the territory, to defend it against the English, 
and prevent them from plundering it. | 

The English [now] began privately to entreat and implore Niall Garv 
O'Donnell [to join them], offering to confer the chieftainship of the territory 
upon him, should they prove victorious. They promised him, moreover, many 
rewards and much wealth, if he would come over to their alliance. He listened 
for a long time to their offers ; and his misfortune at length permitted him to 
go over to them', by the evil counsel of envious and proud people who were 
along with him; but for this he was afterwards sorry. His three brothers, 
namely, Hugh Boy, Donnell, and Con, joined him in this revolt. The English 
were, no doubt, the better of their going over to them; for they were weary 


" Two hundred.—Doewra says that the num- 
ber was sixty, but the probability is, that this 
is a mistake of his transcriber (for we have not 
his own autograph), for 160. P. O’Sullevan 
Beare makes the number 168. 

‘ To go over to them.—P. O’Sullevan Beare states 


that Niall Garv was deserted by his wife for his 


treachery towards her brother on this occasion. 
** Asper eam occasionem opportunam ratus, ad 
Anglos se confert (ob id a Nolla coniuge sua 
Odonelli sorore desertus), quibus Leffiriam, 
quam ipse custodiz cause tenebat tradit. In 
ea Angli decem cohortes collocant.”—Hist. Ca- 
thol. §c., tom. 3, lib. 6, c. v. fol. 171. 


13 B 


2210 aNNaza RIoghachta elRedann. [1600. 


san cumpanad Zac noice la homan Uf domnaill, 7 popcap paéchars, gallnong 
la hiomcuimse an ion 1 mbacan, lap na biadaub pfnnoa, 7 lap an ppeotl 
pallce pipbsomnc, 7 la hfpbond wipfeola, 7 Zac cuapa ba coich vob. Rop 
aipchip Niall 6 oormmanll im sac nf ba cfpbard poppa, 7 po Fuapecarl oorb 
ap m ceancaip ccumaing 1 mbacap. Gfipip veich ccéd laoc go lfitbean lap, 
baile e1pide pop up an loca ceona, 7 ba oinapup omveipc Ua oomnaull 
eiprde, 7 ba hévamg(n an ronbaid pm, uarp m paibe otnad o1ogcinn, na carp- 
ciall clac aolca ann pm pe foda, ian na blovad pect ram, act mad ounclad 
dinnim ap na mdénam vo Cpiaid 7 opooaib an calmamn,7, caol claip Edomain 
mypecide Ina TImcell az iompuinec La hartgin an otin bar ann poime vo tuncc- 
bail oomohipe. 

Ro paccanbhpiot an caép comlcta an pont pin pap la huaman 7 mmeccla 
6 po pachanspioc na soll cuca, 7 san 6 vomnall vo bit ma ppoccup. Ca- 
podam cansaccap na soll von pont, 7 po toccanbpioc mui monaroble 7 
pumada cmiad,7 cloc pon a pccat sup bo ovaing(n pp cacuccad eripoib 1 
nacchaid a namac. 

Lud anaile plp vo pammumneip Uf dormnall ma deaohand 50 Frror pecel 
an cine, 7 acpéd 06 ma nol(pnad imnce dia 1p. ba hongnad mop, 7 ba 
maccnad mfnman la hUa noomhncall a bnataip,7 a chamam oiomptd faip, 
uaip ba pf ofipbpup Ui domhnall nuala, po ba bampéimig oon ci mall. 
Impafp Ua vornnall a coiccead connacc, ap ni paimice cap bonle an mocarg 
yap an can puccpac psela paip,7 1ompafo a plog amail ap ofine po péeopac. 
Qeéc cfna m puacc la a milfocab O vomnanll oo Pplpcal, act Mad uatad oIE 
rhancplos Ko paimice bi ccompocpaib oon Lacbip pémpaice. Ni caipmc lap 
na sallarb cpfcha, na ainccne vo dénam peri paimce O oomnaill pon 
cctlaib, acc a bt as vansmuccad a lLongpopt, 7 ag claive mop, 7] oc cuc- 
laccan 6 vomnall oo towdecc, ni po Lace a eccla voib an pope 1 mbaccan 
opaccbail pon cfnn aom nit ora mbaoi vepband poppe. 

Cipipd Ua vormnaill 1 monad nap b6 hfvipcian o na sallarb co puccpac 


k For want of, literally, “without sleep, with- which Derry is situated. The reader is to bear 
out rest every night, for fear of O’ Donnell.” in mind that the Irish called all the extent of 
| Of their situation, literally, “of the place in water from Lifford to the sea by the namé of 
which they were.” Lough Foyle. What modern map-makers call 


™ The same lough: i.e. the same lough on the River Foyle, the ancient Irish considered as 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2211 


and fatigued for want of* sleep and rest every night, through fear of O’Don- 
nell; and they were diseased and distempered in consequence of the narrow- 
ness of their situation’, and the old victuals, the salt and bitter flesh-meat they 
used, and from the want of fresh meat, and other necessaries to which they 
had been accustomed. Niall O'Donnell provided them with every thing they 
stood in need of, and relieved them from the narrow prison in which they 
were confined. He took ten hundred warriors with him to Lifford, a town 
upon the banks of the same lough™, and a celebrated residence of O’Donnell ; 
but at this time the place was not fortified; for there had not been any strong 
fortress or castle of lime and stone there for a long time before (the one there 
last having been destroyed), or any thing but a small rampart of earth and 
sods, surrounded by a narrow, shallow ditch of water, as preparations for the 
erection of a fortress similar to the one which had been there before. 

The guards, as soon as they perceived the English approaching, vacated 
this fort through dread and fear, because O’Donnell was not near [to assist] 
them. The English thereupon entered the fort and raised large mounds and 
ramparts of earth and stone to shelter them; so that they were sufficiently 
fortified to hold out against their enemies. 

One of O’Donnell’s faithful people followed after him with information 
concerning the state of the country, and told him what had happened in his 
absence. O'Donnell was much surprised and amazed that his kinsman and 
brother-in-law had thus turned against him, for Nuala, the sister of O'Donnell, 
was the wife of Niall. O'Donnell returned from the province of Connaught ; 
fori!he had not passed westwards beyond Ballymote when the news overtook 
him, and his forces as quickly as they were able; but [no part of] his soldiers 
were able to keep pace with him, except a few of his cavalry, and he arrived 
in the neighbourhood of Lifford aforesaid. The English had not been able to 
make preys or depredations before O'Donnell returned back, but were [em- 
ployed] strengthening their fortress, and erecting ramparts; and when they 
heard that O'Donnell had arrived, they were afraid® to come out of their fort 
for anything they wanted. 

O'Donnell remained at a place not far from the English, until some of his 


a part of the lough. permit them to leave the fort in which they 
“2 They were afraid, literally, “f2ar did not were for any thing they were in need of.” 
13 B2 


y 


2912 aNNatwa RIOshachta ElREANN. [1600. 


uacad via mlfoonb tnoigteach pap. 6a pooala hUa noomnaill batapn na 
soll san puabarnc, 7 ni po amp pyr an plog ni ba pra co pop tarpbfin an 
cuatad po bai vo na sallaib pop caeb cpuacam lghfn alla nofp pmpp an 
abamn acuad. Oc ciacc na soll erpide Do paccaccap a docom, 7 mall 
sapb 6 vomnaill co na bnmtmb plmpa a ccoipigeacc na tnooa. Oo blinac 
paigin nugpa pon apoile san nac noanacup veabta an la pm cetup, act a 
bic 1 nupparcill pon a cele, ucip ni po paoilpioc na soll 6 oomncall vo bAt 
1 ccfince ploig amanl po bat 7 baccan imecclang 1m ceilcc 00 tabcupt mmpa, 
co nan bo hail o61b vol 1 nmcfine on mbanle ap a aofo1. Ga pon ccuma ccéona 
vo mumntin Ui vomnaill ba hecconnoa ooibpem ool 1 mfpce a namazc 1 
niompoiccy1 an puint lap an uachad ploy po baccap. Ro Hoipoespioc py 
anole ce nib po copa, caoncompaic po pecaprac. Ro sonad ananll uadaib 
do y1a, 7 anall la orubparccib pls, 7 parser, 7 uboallmell luaide. Acc 
nama ba m6 po cneccnangic do muinntip Ui domnanll an a nucit 1pm 10om- 
antec. Tiagaice na soll 1a ceIs1b 1apccam, 7 vo taécc Ua oomnaill co 
na mumcip dia pecopub, 7] ba 50 ppuapnad, 7 50 FELPS Luimne Luo Ua oomh- 
null cannpide an ba mela lap san a plog vo toct Cuicce an la pm, uain ba 
ofimin lap oa mbficcip occa an ionbad yin na oispitip Zoill uada feb vo 
deachacap. Ro olttas(pcain Ua vomnaill ap a haitle a mompuide pony 
na Zallonb ian mbpic ora mil(ooib pain co Licc, 7 sabarp lLongpont fo of 
mile cfimenn oon Licb(p acpubpaman pon peat a ofpa tpebta 50 po eplam- 
aascip na hanbanna bacan 1 momporccyp: vo na sZalloib. No laadpom aép 
bnait, 7 carpecélca pony an mbaile sac nowce an na po Lficcfo nfch anonn 
nach alle muna poipcip oapp an aboann budeapp 7 ona ni po paccon conéiyn 
na eapypurp éluda po mile cfimfn von baile ap na po la ponaipfoha, 7 edap- 
naide Poppa do comlcc,] do FMothaipe popp na sallarb na ciopcarp taippib 
5an patuccad, 7 pop clomn cuinn Uf domnaill pampioh, 7 pop a mumeip, an 


° Cruachan-Lighean, now Croaghan, a remark- 
able hill giving name to a townland in the parish 
of Clonleigh, barony of Raphoe, and county of 
Donegal. The summit of this hill is about two 
miles north and by west of the bridge of Lif- 
ford. 

According to the Ulster Inquisitions this 


townland belonged to the monastery of Clon- 


leigh.—See also the Life of St. Cairneach in 
Colgan’s Acta Sanctorum at 28th March, p. 782, 
where Cruachan-Ligean is described as situated 
“ad occidentalem ripam freti siue sinus vulgo 
Loch-febhuil nuncupati, iuxta Lefferiam oppi- 
dum.’”’—See the references to Druim Lighean, 
which was an alias name of this place, under 


the years 1522, 1524, and 1583. 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2213 


foot-soldiers had come up with him. O'Donnell thought it too long the Eng- 
lish remained without being attacked, and he did not wait for the coming up 
of [the main body of] his army, but exhibited before the English the small 
number he had, on the south side of Cruachan-Lighean’, to the north of the 
river. When the English perceived him they marched out to meet him, with 
Niall Garv O’Donnell and his brothers in the van, as leaders of the battle. 
They skirmished with each other, but there was no obstinate conflict on that 
first day, though they continued in readiness for each other; for the English 
thought that O'Donnell was in want of forces”, as he [really] was; and fearing 
that an ambush might be laid for them, so that they did not wish to go far 
from the town for that reason. It was the same case with O’Donnell’s people. 
It would be unwise in them to come in collision with the enemy so near their 
fort, with the small force of which they consisted. They [at length] separated 
from each other, though not in peace or friendship. Some were wounded on 
both sides by the discharging of javelins, arrows, and leaden balls; but more 
of* O’Donnell’s people were wounded in this skirmish on account of the few- 
ness of their number. 

The English then proceeded to their houses, and O’Donnell and his people 
went to their tents; and it was with anger and indignation that O’Donnell 
returned thither; for it grieved him that his army had not come up with him 
on that day; for he was certain that, if he had had them with him at that time, 
the English would not have escaped from him as they had. O’Donnell after- 
wards, when his army had come up with him, laid a close siege to the English, 
and pitched his camp within two thousand paces of Lifford above-mentioned, 
in order to protect his husbandmen, so that they might save the corn crops in 
the neighbourhood of the English. He sent out spies and scouts every night to 
reconnoitre the town, and not to permit any one to pass in or out, unless they 
should pass southwards across the river; and he left no road or passage within 
one thousand paces of the town upon which he did not post guards and ambus- 
cades, to watch and spy the English, and hinder them from passing out unnoticed, 
but especially the sons of Con O’Donnell and their people, for these he consi- 


’In want of forces, literally, “in dearth or should be expressed thus: ‘* But O’Donnell’s 
scarcity of forces.” suffered more in this skirmish than the enemy, 
4 More of-—This idea is not very correct. It on account of the fewness of their number.” 


9214 aNNaca RIOSshachTa EIREGNN. [1600. 


ap poppa ba ouilse Laipprum a comfcr, 4 ap iad po Deana Ddpom iliomac na 
nfoapnaigse, 7 mm aépa pniocaie. 

bao plum pp pé cplochac Late an ou pin co tcaipnic La lucht na cpiche 
a napbanna oullmugad Jo po cuippioc € a minchabaibh 7 a mfnbolecarb ora 
cTTappud, 7 imploam pop eachaib, 7 caiphb oa baht nionavaab oaingmb bart 
na pipoaip a namaice cucca. 

In anale amypip oUa comnaill pia pra po paccai’ an longpone hipin co 
noeachad pop ammup na ngall oup an ccaompad a ccealgad ap na mipaib 
amach popp an maigpho. O 00 deacatap mucin uf comnaill pon 1onchaib 
an baile, po bacap na soll acca ppoampccy!,7 ni po pasplec ponpa ua 
ac Zenpac gup bd vo chuingio uspa, 7 veabta oo ofchaccap. lompadice 
muincip Ui vomnaall tap a nap oomdipe 6 na pucupplot an ni pop a cTapd- 
pac iappand. ~=O0 smacc eaiplm pon up na habann alla cucd o1amd canm 
an oaol ( Zopicc on mbanle. Ciagaic vponga mona ofob o1a pccopanb, 7 
FEM apoile copecad, an ni po paolpfec na soll o1a Linmoon an la hipm. Oc 
concapic Niall gapb 6 oomnenll, mumcip ut vomnaill co h{ppaoice anpinpite 
acbepc ppp na sallaib sup b6 coin omMb ammuyp vo tabaint poppa. Gabeance 
na sorll occa nGold pop a encalprum co cao canéfnach m GcipmOén a mun 
an na bad poofnc via namoib comeaip apmta éroigce. O pobcan enlama 
lanam oup picclcc vapp na mupab peaccaip 1 nuno cata. Capodain vo 
lect pop amup muintipe Ut vomnaill pon perm pin 7 an ci Niall 1 pemcur 
co na bnaitmib, 7 co na muincip 1 maille ppp. 

Cc chi o vomnalll chucca 1acc, 7 ba po leap a ppaiccpin via paugsid, 7 po 
punisfpcaip a miloa ma monadaib enoalca po a nfpcomain co na noona 
cas 7 nip pelce a nowbnaccad co mbacan popr an mbpuac allcanach oon 
abcinn. Ima compamice v61b 1apcccin co mbacan mfpce ap mfpec,7 plptan 
sleo canmin éccpaccach (conna oiblimb. Scuchaic a manpclors vo cum 
anole co mbacap ace cumnpeamad a cele vo manaofmb moipleabpa, 7 00 
cnaoipeachab cfnnglappa. Oo pacc Niall 6 oormnall cumnpeam von tplig 
yimms prothpooa po roccap a plinnéin pon ofpbnataip uf oomnaill pon 
Magnup 50 po clannapcaipn an ccna is mn 50 po tplZoapcaip a mmfoon- 
cha tmap an éivead vo pala ume. Oc connainc Rudpaise 6 vomnaill 


* Beyond the reach, literally, ‘“‘ where their S Dael, now Deel, or, as it is called by the de- 
enemies would not reach them.” scendants of the Scotch settlers, Dale-burn, a 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2215 


dered were difficult to be watched, and it was on account of them that his 
sentinels and ambuscades were so numerous. 

He remained here for the period of thirty days, during which time the 
people of the country were enabled to save their corn and carry it away in 
smal] baskets and sacks, on steeds and horses, into the fastnesses of the country 
beyond the reach’ of their enemies. 

On one occasion O'Donnell, before he left this camp, went towards the 
English, to see if he could induce them to come outside the fortifications on 
the level plain. When O’Donnell’s people had arrived opposite the town, the 
English began to reconnoitre them; but they did not sally out against them, 
for they perceived it was to offer defiance and challenge for battle they had 
come. O’Donnell’s people then returned back when they did not obtain what 
they wanted, and they halted for some time on the brink of a river called 
Dael’, a short distance to the north of the town. Large parties of them went 
to their tents, and about other business, for they did not think that the English 
would follow them on that day. When Niall Garv O’Donnell perceived 
O’Donnell’s people scattered and unprepared for action, he told the English 
that they ought now to attack them. The English at his bidding armed them- 
selves quietly and silently in the centre of their fortifications, in order that 
their enemies could not see them until they were armed and accoutred. When 
they were ready they sallied out from their fortifications in battle array, and 
then, with Niall and his brothers and people in the van, advanced against 
O’Donnell’s people. 

O'Donnell saw them advancing, and: rejoiced at seeing them coming ; and 
he placed his soldiers in their proper stations fronting them, with their war- 
like weapons ; and he did not permit to shoot at them until they had arrived 
at the opposite bank of the river. They afterwards met together hand to hand, 
and a sharp and furious battle was fought between both parties. The two 
hosts of cavalry rushed to the charge, and began to fight with large spears and 
greenheaded lances. Niall O'Donnell gave Manus, brother of O'Donnell, a , 
thrust of a sharp, long lance under the shoulder-blade, and, piercing the armour 
with which he was clad, he buried it in his body, and wounded his internal 


river which flows through the barony of Raphoe, tance to the north of the town of Lifford.—See 
and discharges itself into the Foyle a short dis- note *, under the year 1557, p. 1557, supra. 


2216 GNNaZa RIOSshachTa EIREGNN. [1600. 


(mosoamna ceneol cconall) a ofpbpataipn vo sun vo bfpc ammup calma 
ponp an ci mall, 50 ccano pongom amnap aich(p vo gae mon fo fpcomain 
a ochta pain. Tuanecarb Niall coppac an eric aipoépmargh allmapoa vo 
pala poa (coppa, 50 po bhhapcain an popgam hn ccul a édain von eoch Fo 
naincc aninchinn. Ro bladaptaip cpd ionnpma na cpaoipige icca ppthgad 
tappaing pon a hap von ci Ruopaige co beancaib’ a apn 1pm eoch co na 
baof laippiom acc mad an dicealcaip ma oupn. Ro thatamaip an teach 
veiploe po OfO10. Mo nuan am nac oaém lic po Ffpyac an laochnaio pin 
ceneal cconaill a mbapainn pm a mbiodbadaib 7 nach mm ccépa bacap ucopn 
nf po cumpecarsce an ccfin baccap pamlard, 7 m po monnapbea, 7 ni po 
colpniti ap a pRoIpb noilip amanl vo ponta cid 1apTTam. 

Oala na ngall mo apfcc bacan an mancplos occ 1ompubad anole vo 
paopacc a nasthe 1 naoinpeacc pop tnasghceachaib ui ovomnaill 50 po 
poaice plmpa biucc, acc nama ni po Zonta uadcnb, accmaoh uate, vain ni 
po LMmpac na Zoill capp an ccatlatain peaccain,7 ba plo po of{pa ooib san a 
Unmein, ucip po Zonad a ctcaofpeac 1pm tcachap 4 pob ficc{n doib 1ompoo 
lp 50 Lacb(p 50 ppuaip bap iapccain. Ro l(npac vpons mop vo mumncin 
Ui vomnaill 1a0 (6 cian, 7 ZabartTe aga noiubpaccad, 7 acca cclodmlo Fo po 
manbad, 7 50 no Zonad pocaide viob. Ro bad voig la haop na tospama so 
ppaompide poppa via Lnad an plog 1a0 m ba pia. Acc nama m po Vice an 
catmeile don luct popy po ppaoinead ceovamup a LMmmain vomdip!. 

lompadip O vomnall vo na peconaib 1ap mmtecc vo na Zallaib. 6a 
cTMaman coippeac po bap ip longpopt ino aohars pm po oaigh mfic a 
plata, 7] a pfosdamna (ora manad verp a bnaitpeac) vo bach pm Momgno 


‘ The steed. The Four Masters should have 
omitted this short sentence, which so much in- 
P. O’Sullevan Beare, 
who had wooed the historic Muse with more 


cumbers their narrative. 


success than any of the Four Masters, describes 
this battle much more elegantly, as follows, in his 
Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 6, ¢. v. : 

‘*Erat Asper vir animo magno, & audaci, & 
rei militaris scientia preditus, atque multos a 
sua parte Tirconellos habebat, quorum opera, & 
virtute fretus in plano cum Catholicis manum 
conserere non recusabat: Fidem tamen Catholi- 


cam semper retinuit Hereticorum ceremonias 
auersatus, sicut & Artus [Onellus] qui citd e 
vita discessit. Circum Leffiriam vero, & Lucum 
a regijs & Catholicis acriter & sepe dimicatum 
est. Memorabilis est equestris pugna, qua re- 
gijs fugatis Magnus Odonelli frater Asperum 
loco cedentem hasta transfossurus fuisset, nisi 
elus ictum remoueret Eugenius Ogallachur cog- 
nomento Junior ipsius Magni Comes pietate & 
amore in Onellam suorum dominorum familiam 
motus. In quam familiam dispari animo fuit 
Cornelius Ogallachur, qui Aspero persuasisse 


1600. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2217 


parts. When Rury O'Donnell, Roydamna of Kinel-Connell, perceived his 
brother wounded, he made a brave attack upon Niall, and aimed a forcible and 
furious thrust of a large javelin at Niall’s breast; but Niall raised up the front 
of the high-rearing foreign steed which he rode, so that the spear struck the 
steed in the forehead, and penetrated to his brain. Rury broke the socket of 
the javelin in drawing it back by the thong, and left the iron blade buried in 
the horse; so that he held but the handle of it in his hand. The steed’ finally 
died of this. 


fight on one side against their enemies, and that they were not at peace; for, 


Wo is me that these heroes of Kinel-Connell were not united in 


while they remained so, they were not banished or driven from their native 
territories, as they afterwards were ! 

As for the English, while the cavalry were battling with each other, they 
faced O’Donnell’s infantry in a body, and drove them a short distance before 
them ; but, however, only a few of them were wounded; for the English did not 
pursue them from the field of contest, because their leader* had been wounded 
in the conflict ; and they were obliged to return with him to Lifford, where he 
afterwards died. A great number of O’Donnell’s people pursued them for a 
long distance, and continued to shoot at and cut them down with the sword, 
so that numbers of them were slain and wounded. The pursuers thought that 
they should have defeated them [the enemy] if the main host pursued them 
further; but fear did not permit those who had been repulsed in the beginning 
to pursue them again. 

When the English went away O’Donnell returned to his tents. And dispi- 
rited and melancholy were they that night in the camp, on account of the 
son of their chief’, and their Roydamna (if he should survive his brothers), 


fertur, vt ad Anglos faceret transitionem, & 
Magnum vulnerauit apud Moninem iuxta Lef- 
firiam, vbi equitatus vtrinque incomposité con- 
currit, & Magnus equo vectus interquinque 
equites Ibernos regios ab Aspero in dextero la- 
tere hasta percutitur, & circumuentus a Cor- 
nelio sub humero icitur. Hastarum cuspides 
licet loricam non penetrauerint tamen Magno in 
Rothericus fratri auxilio 
veniens Asperi pectus hasta appetit: Asper lo- 


corpus infixerunt. 


ris tractis equi caput tollens eius fronte excipit 


£3.¢ 


Rotherici ictum, quo equus fixus exanimis cum 
aspero corruit. Sed Asper a suis leuatus Lef- 
firiam reuertitur, Odonello cum peditibus ap- 
propinquante. Magnus ex vulneribus egit ani- 
mam intra decimum quintum diem, & breui 
Cornelius ab Odonello deprehensus laqueo stran- 
gulatur.”—Fol. 171, 172. 

u Their leader.—This was Captain Heath. 
‘‘He tooke a shott in the thigh whereof he 
shortlie after died.”,— Docwra. 
¥ The son of thew chief.—His father, Hugh, 


2218 ANNdta RIOshachta ElREANN. [1600. 


mbaip. O poamec O vomnaill von Longpopc po popcal apach pronncaolangs 
do denam vo Mhagnup 6 oomnall o1a 1omcap cap an mb(pnup. Oo gnite 
on amal po h{frbavh. Tiagaic oponga mopa lap o1a aép 1onmame, 7 pam 
muimnein co maccaccap co van na ngall. Ro ovépsad 1omoag otpaip vopom 
ampaide. Oo paoad lisa Uf vomhnall curcce oia LASlp,7 ni po peopac 
lasCp 06. OAcbipcpac sup bo manb. Ro bai mampcip hi ccompocpaib von 
oianad 1 mbaccan mfic b(chad vonod .S. pnonpéip, 7] no ticclo an lucc ba hfcc- 
nade o1ob dia Palsiopium do eiptecc a coibpion do pnoclptc v6, 7 ofpnaiom 
a capofpa pmippin ccommdead. Oo gnipiom a paoipwe san nach noicioll 
Ro cmeptain a peacta pm oa, 7 ba hartpeac lap a maomfnman 7 a 1onn- 
occbail an ccfn pomaip. Ro mart bfop a sum don ci pop gon 7 acbfpe sup 
bo hé phypm poofpa, ucap ap é po pours pap céccup. Oaaprum amlaio pin 
pm né peccmaine ag poichill écc gach aon lonthe, 7 atain tToccaide don ono 
pempaice ina pappad vo spep dia romcoim(c pon mnclfomb oiabal. Ro 
toca copp an coimbdead iaptcain, 7 puain bap ap a hartle (22 Octobe) 
ran Mbuaiduccad pop ofmon, 7 voman. Ro hadnacht 1apam 1 notaiphgse a 
pimnpean 1pm mamipcip pempaice. 

Ro bai a achaippium a. God mac Magnupa, mic Coda omb ma pean- 
vacald aga Fompe a ppoccup oon mamipcip. Ac cuap oopéin a mac vo epile 
no la paip 50 mon 50 mbat hi pupce achawdiappm. baccap tna a anmcaipoe 
asa Tioncorccpom im Lfp a anma vo sper. 

Cn caovh po mac Mashnaypa, mic Coda dicc, mic Coda puard, mic nell 
sainb vo écc an 00 vecembep. Tigeapna cenél cconall mnyp1 hE€ogharm, 7 
loccain Connacht pp pé pé mbliadan ppichle go po hGimptmslo la gallenb 50 
ccand a tigeapnap co na bimachtam via mac do Cod puavh rap na éluo 
6 sallaib,*p(p pucip tiseapnap gan ferll, san prongonl, san coccad, Zan com- 
puacad an cClooh mac maghnupa hipm ian nfce a Ofpbpactap an Calbach. 
Ftp ashman ionnpaigteac go mbucid ccpoda, 7 tacamp 1 cas(pmap,] wa 
coistinapy, Momgetoip, 7 aipect(oip na ccoicemoch 7 na ccomappan o1ap bo 


was still living, but was not the chief ruler of 
Tirconnell at the time, for he had resigned to 
his eldest son, Hugh Roe, as early as the year 
1592, when it is stated by the Four Masters 
that he was old and feeble-—See p. 1929, supra. 


“ Sons of life: i.e. religious persons. It is 


the antithesis of meic bdyy, i. e. sons or children 
of death, which means malefactors, or wicked or 
irreligious persons. 

* Confessors. —Anmcainoe is the plural of 
anméana or anaméana, which is translated 





‘‘confessarius” by Colgan in his Zrzas Thaum., 


1600.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9919 


being in a dying state. As soon as O'Donnell arrived at the camp he ordered 
a litter of fair wattles to be made for Manus O’Donnell, [on which] to carry 
him over Barnis. This was according to orders. Many of his dear friends 
and faithful people accompanied him to Donegal, where a sick man’s couch 
was prepared for him, and O’Donnell’s physicians were brought to cure him; 
but they could effect no cure for him. They gave him up for death. There 
was a monastery in the neighbourhood of the fortress in which were sons of 
life’, of the order of St. Francis; and the wisest of these were wont to visit 
him, to hear his confession, to preach to him, and to confirm his friendship 
with the Lord. He made his confession without concealment, wept for his 
sins against God, repented his evil thoughts and pride during life, and forgave 
him who had wounded him, declaring that he himself was the cause, as he had 
made the first attack. Thus he remained for a week, prepared for death every 
day, and a select father of the aforesaid order constantly attending him, to 
fortify him against the snares of the devil. He received then the body of the 
Lord, and afterwards died on the 22nd of October, having gained the victory 
over the devil and the world. He was interred in the burial-place of his 
ancestors, in the aforenamed monastery. 

His father, i.e. Hugh, the son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv, was at this 
time a very old man, living in a state of dotage near the monastery. He was 
informed of the death of his son; he was greatly affected; and he was in a 
decline for some time afterwards. His confessors* were always instructing him 
respecting the welfare of his soul. 

This Hugh, the son of Manus, son of Hugh Oge, son of Hugh Roe, son of 
Niall Garv, died on the 7th of December. He had been Lord of Tirconnell, 
Inishowen, and Lower Connaught, for twenty-six years, until he was weakened 
by the English, and bestowed his lordship, with his blessing, on his son, Hugh 
Roe, after he had escaped from the English. This Hugh, the son of Manus, 
had attained the lordship after the death of his brother Calvagh, without 
treachery or fratricide, war or disturbance. He was a valiant and warlike 
man, and victorious in his fights and battles before and during his chieftainship, 
and the preyer and plunderer of the territories far and near that were bound 


p- 294, and ‘“‘synedrus seu confessarius” at the soul,” and is used in ancient Irish writings in 
p- 298. The term literally signifies “friend of _ the sense of spiritual director or father confessor. 


tse 2 


9290 aNNazta RIOshachta eiRedaNn. [1600. 


of a Plapuccad oce pansio cfint a ceneoil ponpa 50 mbaccan pomamaisthe 
06, F{p po la pniom, 7 ofiticce an tpaoganl ve ran ccaipbine a ziseapnaiyp 
ola mac, 7 po bad ofSsaimlemd a lt pmia via ace ccull(m pocnaicce dia 
anmain ppl pe occ mbliadan Fo pio Ecc don cup po, 7 po hadnact co nondip, 7 
co naipmiomn (amail po bad dion) 1 mamipcipn S. Pnonpéip 1 notin na ngall 1 
notaiplise na TTIZEapnad TanZatap porme o10N0 1 Nod. 

Imchupa Ut oomnanll ian pponbad 06 an cmocaic late pin hi ppopbaipyt 
pon na gallarb, Ro cmall on longpont 1 mbof pmyp an né pm opaccbail 4 
vol 50 honav ele nap bo heippimmtle po bad pra biuce o na gallaib pop up 
na pinne alla cian, conpa,7 b(pnap, ucan pop uaman lap uache na saipbypme 
sfimmioca via plinofoab ag pmiochaine 7 as poncommlcc pon na sallonb sac 
nooce 0015 ba 1 nionam na pamna an can pm, ba mchio lap a plos vo 
bpit 1 monadh cumpanca ap na mop paogtap, uonn ni po tuilpiot a parme 
pM hated pooa. Coccan na plog sup an maigm pempaice. Gabaic lons- 
pont ipuide 1 ppopccad na plodbade 1 mompocnaib na habann. Oo niao 
pianbota 7 poincenfha ap a hontle,7 Zabaicc ace clpccad an pldoa ma nuip- 
cimceall co no(pnpac oainsfn aipbe (coppa 7 a namaicc co nan bo pooains 
a paisio tpfimic. Ro cocait pamlod co pangaccan pecéla via pars ot 
luing 00 teact on Spain oionnpaighio na ngaowel baccan pin ccoccad 1 
mbaoi anszacc 7 apm, ptoap 7 lumde. 6a hann po sabpioc pide pone In 
ccuan 1 mnbip mon bn cconnaccaib. Re paofopiom na pccéla céona co 
hua néill, 7 00 coo badem 50 connaccaib 1 mi vecemben do ponnpad 7 Pacc- 
bad a veanbpataipn Rudpagse ua vomnaill 50 nupmop a plos 1pm lonsponc 
acpubnamanp o1a €1p acc lomcopnam na cmce. lap poctam vopom so Tip 
placnac muaide po la a téca sup an luinglp péimebencman oa onal poppa 
ceact 50 cuan na cceall mbfcc,7 po app perp 1 notin néll an ba perl seme 
an colmbead ann an Tan pin, 7 00 nome na céo laite von tpollamam oaip- 
mitniuccad amcal po bad vip. Rangaccap pecéla cuiccepiom co ttaimec 
6 nell ma D1 don Tip, 7 ni po caMpiom ni bad pipe acc ctmall a ccomoail 
i neill conup palaccap oa pole cul hi ccul pon an ceconaip. Tiagaree Fan 


° Of Invermore, wbin mop, Portus magnus, * Killybegs.—See this piace already referred to 
now Broad Haven, in the north of the barony under the years 1513, 1516, 1550. 
of Erris, and county of Mayo. Docwra says * Dun-Neill: i.e. the Dun or Fort of Niall, 
that these ships put in at Calebeg, now Killy- now Dunneill, alias Castlequarter, a townland 


begs. in the parish of Kilmacshalgan, barony of Tire- 


- 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 299) 


to obey him, asserting the right of his tribe from them until he made them 
obedient to him; a man who had laid aside the cares and anxieties of the 
world after having given up his lordship to his son, and who was a good 
earner in the sight of God, meriting rewards for his soul for a period of eight 
years until he died at this period. He was interred with due honour and vene- 
ration in the monastery of St. Francis at Donegal, in the burial-place of the 
lords who had successively preceded him. 

As for O'Donnell, at the expiration of the thirty days during which he 
continued besieging the English, he prepared to leave the place in which he had 
been during that period, and to go to another place not less secure, a little 
further from the English, on the west brink of the River Finn, between them 
and Barnis; for he was afraid [of the effects] of the cold, rough, wintry season 
on his soldiers, who were watching and guarding every night against the Eng- 
lish; for it was then Allhallowtide; and he thought it time to bring his army 
to a place of rest after their great labour, for they had not slept at ease for a 
long time. The forces proceeded to the aforesaid place. They pitched a 
camp under the shelter of the wood that was in the vicinity of the river. They 
erected military tents and habitations, and proceeded to cut down the trees 
around them, and raised a strong rampart between themselves and their ene- 
mies, so that it was difficult to get across it to attack them. Here he passed 
the time until news reached him that two ships had arrived from Spain to the 
Irish who were engaged in the war, with money and arms, powder and lead. - 
These ships put in at the harbour of Invermore’ in Connaught. He sent the 
same news to O'Neill, and went himself to Connaught in the month of Decem- 
ber; leaving after him his brother, Rury O’Donnell, with the greater part of 
his forces, in the camp which we have mentioned, to defend the country. On 
his arrival in Tireragh of the Moy, he sent messengers to the above-mentioned 
ships, to request them to come into the harbour of Killybegs’. He remained 
himself at Dun-Neill*; for it was the festival of the Nativity of the Lord, and 
he solemnized the first days of the festival with due veneration. News came 
to him that O’Neill had come after him into the country ; and he delayed no 
longer, but set out to meet O’Neill. They met soon after on the road, face to 


ragh, and county of Sligo.—See Genealogies, 175, 262, 305, 306, and the map to the same 
Tribes, §c., of Hy-Fiachrach, pp. 134, 135,171, work. 


2222 ANNaGZa RIOshachta ElRECNN. (1600. 


apipiom 50 pangaccan 50 otn na ngall. Tangaoapn ona maite Lite cumn 
ma noocum sur an margin ym. 

Canag cpa an loins a oubpaman 50 cuan cerlionn la caob na cceall 
mbfs. Oo pavad 1 mbaof mnzib vapszace, 7 0a Fac nadvarilece (po paofohead 
sup na haipeachaib) via pongo Zo otM na ngall,7 po pannad a noo 1. Le 
oud néill,7 ola compann coccaid, 7 an Lf nall oua noomnaill, 7 o1a mbaoi 
fon a pane. 

Siubhan ingfi Mhéguidin caconnacc (o1a nZoipt1 an comanba) mac con- 
connact, mic bmaimn, mic Pilip, mic comanp bf an bapuin uf néill .1. plpoopnca, 
mac cumn, mic cuimn, mic enpi, mic eogain,7 ba pide macaip fj neill 1. Qooh, 
7] conpmaic a dDeanbnatap, 7 1ap manbaoh an bapum po porad 1pide le hénpt 
mac fellim pucd mic capt mic aoda mic eosain, mic nell cicc, 7 pucc mac 
romtmail 06 1. coppdealbac. bean po bad pont cotaiste 7 congbala ctpuas 
7 tpén, oamh 7 vedpad, pedb 7 oilleacc, eccarly 7 ealadan, boéc 7 aidilec- 
neac, bean po ba cfnn atcomainc, 7 comciple oumplib, 7 voipeacarb céiccw 
concobaip mic neara, bfn bite bannoa diada, déancac cfnnpa, Comnipcleac Fo 
ccaonvutpacc, 7 co plinc noé 4 cobnfppam oo écc 1 macaipe na cpoip 
22. luni, 7 a hadnacal 1 mompeip oun na ngall 1ap ccant(m cumpp core 7 
a pola, 1ap nongad, 7] 1ap naitmse rap ccioonacal almpan momoda oupoaib 
eccailp! 0€, 7 50 ponnavac vond .S. Fponpeip an vag a héccnaince vo Zabarl 
etip manbarb. 

Sloiccead la hand luptip na hepeann Cond mounziop a mi Sepcembep 
vo dol 1 ccip eoccam. Co cuap lap cetup co opoicle ata, appaide 50 oun 
oealgan, 7 50 bealac an magne. CTainice 6 neill pm ccfn ole oon bealac. 
O Ro proip an wuyptip 6 nell vo teacc an of pin ba plo vo pome campa oo 
;wdiuccad von taob a tcanla € bavéin don bealac 50 mbaoi an conaip pn 
Zan acaise, Fan iomaoall (conpa achaio paca. O po ba cian lap an iupcip 


> Harbour of Teilionn, now Teelin,asmallhar-  rish of the same name, barony of Tirkennedy, 
bour about a mile anda half long, but very nar- county of Fermanagh.—See note *, under the 
row, situated about seven miles westwards of year 1509, p. 1301, supra. 


Killybegs, in the barony of Banagh, and county © Bealach-an-mhaighre, now Bothar-a-mhaighre, 
of Donegal. anglice, the Moyry Pass, an old road extending 
© Province of Conor Mac Nessa: i.e. Ulster. across the townland of Carrickbroad, parish of 


* Machaire-na-Croise : i, e. the Plain of the LKilleavy, barony of Orior, and county of Ar- 
Cross, now Magheracross, a townland in a pa- magh, about three hundred paces from the 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9993 


face, and went forthwith to Donegal. Thither the chiefs of the North went to 
meet them. 

The ships aforementioned put in at the harbour of Teilionn’, near Killybegs. 
All the money and other necessaries that were in them [which were sent to 
the Irish chiefs] were brought to them to Donegal, and divided into two parts, 
of which O’Neill and his confederates in the war received one, and O’Donnell 
and his allies the other. 

Joan, the daughter of Maguire (Cuconnaught, usually styled the Coarb, son 
of Cuconnaught, son of Brian, son of Philip, son of Thomas), and the wife of 
the Baron O'Neill, 1. e. Ferdoragh, the son of Con, son of Con, son of Henry, 
son of Owen, [died]. She was the mother of O’Neill (Hugh), and of his bro- 
ther, Cormac. After the killing of the Baron, she was married to Henry, the 
son of Felim Roe, son of Art, son of Hugh, son of Owen, son of Niall Oge 
[O'Neill], for whom she bore a prosperous son, namely, Turlough ; a woman 
who was the pillar of support and maintenance of the indigent and the mighty, 
of the poets and exiled, of widows and orphans, of the clergy and men of science, 
of the poor and the needy ; a woman who was the head of counsel and advice 
to the gentlemen and chiefs of the province of Conor Mac Nessa‘; a demure, 
womanly, devout, charitable, meek, benignant woman, with pure piety, and the 
love of God and her neighbours. She died at Machaire-na-croise* on the 22nd 
of June, and was interred in the monastery of Donegal, after receiving the body 
and blood of Christ, after unction and penance, after having made many dona- 
tions to the orders of the Church of God, and more especially to the monastery 
of Donegal, that she might be prayed for there among the dead. 

A hosting was made by the Lord Justice of Ireland, Lord of Mountjoy, in 
the month of September, to proceed into Tyrone. He marched first to Dro- 
gheda, thence to Dundalk and Bealach-an-mhaighre®.. O’Neill came to the 
other end of the pass. When the Lord Justice learned that O’Neill had arrived 
at that place, he pitched a camp at his own end of the pass; so that the pass 
was not travelled or frequented for a long time between them. The Lord 


boundary of the counties of Louth and Armagh. of Mountjoy into Ulster, calls this place Balli- 
The ruins of a small castle are still to be seen nemoyree, and describes it as “between Dun- 
here, on the north of the pass. Fynes Moryson, dalk and the Newry.”—See his History of Ire- 
who gives a minute account of this expedition /and, Dublin edition of 1735, vol. 1. p. 79. 


2234 GNNA~a RIOSHaChTaA EIREGHN. (1600. 


baof an bealac aga sabaul pip do plonnycain aon vo lo Toct Theme oaim- 
dedin uf nell. Cn can po as 6 néill an ni pin po lérce partfoa peolnim- 
nla parsoitude oa parsiod (FO coppmanllp porclo pipbeac a bpumnib blc- 
lann) a botanb 7 a bélpcataib an poplonspuipt. Gabcutc aga ngun, 7 aga 
n5éepcplsoan, sa ccailec,] sa ccomcollad sun bo héiccin oHib pillead a 
PpMeng na conaipe ceodna Zup an ccampa ian mapbao lin ofpime oa nuap- 
lib, o@ naipeachanb, va nglaplat, oa ngiollanpaio. Ro paccaibpioc beor ile 
oa Zac (inal évala vo carplib, 7 ofchaib oparob aipm, 7 eiccead 1pm 1oma- 
pice pin. 

Pucop aniupcip a cefin cml ian pin ell 7 elang a propcomecc ui neill 
an an mbealac 50 noeachaid cpfimic Zan thot, san tacap, a mi occobep vo 
ponpad. Oncan no pacharg 6 nell an nf pm vo taot pon an pig map an 
luptip co mbaccap'm oa campa eimeac1 monchab pm anole 50 oid na 
miopa ceona. Ni po léiccead tha an iuyptip peaca pm 1 Tip Eosain von cup 
ym, sup 66 héiccfn 06 pillead oon caob Ton 00 bealac an magne vo Lfitimel 
na noiptean. Oo taod 1apam 1 nancpargsib a cuan ceuplinne co pme jsall, 7 
appaioe co hat chat. Ni po ctmall ona an lupcip ool tap bealac an magne 
apteac 50 c{nn achaid 1ap pin. : 

Sin Sfon chembeplin copmnel vo gallaab ovoipe vo dol plos mop fon 
ud noocaptas O14 NDPedd 7 OIG Onccann, oo pala ua vocantals (Fo nuatao 
plogs ma papnad) pap na sallenb. Ro pigfo ensal amnap (conpa so po 
Ppaoinead pon na sallaib 50 po mapbad an copinel la hua noocancais 50 
nopuing ele a maille ppip. 

Niall sanb 6 vomnaill tna, bai pide co na bnaicpib, 7 co na Zallaib a 
maille poy mm litbean amail po aipnhotmap, 7 00 ponad ploiccead leo Fo 
hoip(cc uf Catan vo CuInsId cpeac omcne, 7 ni po hanad leo Zo pangavan 50 
vianaic. Oo nalaccan opecca véanmana do mumnzip 7 nell vob. Efcan 
lomain(ce (coppa Fo po Fonad pocawe uaocib avi 7 anall 50 po meabao 


© Sir John Chamberlain.—This entry is evi- general allusion to’ them, which is exceedingly 
dently misplaced by the Four Masters, for we valuable to the historian, in the following words: 
learn from Docwra’s Narration, that “ Sir John “ After hee” [O’Donnell] ‘ was gone, the 
Chamberlaine was mortally wounded with 16 Garrison, both heere and at Dunalong, sett di- 
wounds, on the 28th of June.” vers preyes of catle, and did many other ser- 

8 A hosting.—Sir Henry Docewra does not de- vices all the Winter longe, which I stand not 
tail these forays in his Narration, but he makesa upon to make particular mention of, &, I must 


1600.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9995 


Justice, thinking it too long that the pass had been blocked up on him, he 
attemped to force it one day, in despite of O’Neill. When O'Neill perceived 
this thing, he sent forth from the tents and booths of the camp fierce and ener- 
getic bands of soldiers against him, like unto swarms of bees issuing from the 
hollows of bee-hives. They proceeded to wound, pierce, hew, and hack them, so 
that they were compelled to return back by the same road to the camp, after 
the killme of countless numbers of their gentlemen, officers, recruits, and atten- 
dants. They also left behind much booty of every description, as horses, steeds, 
accoutrements, arms, and armour, in this conflict. 

Some time after this the Lord Justice got an advantage and opportunity of 
O’Neill’s watch on this pass, and proceeded through it in the middle of October 
without battle or opposition. When O’Neill perceived this, he got before the 
Lord Justice on the way ; and both remained encamped face to face until the 
end of the same month. The Lord Justice was not permitted to advance beyond 
this place into Tyrone on this occasion, but was compelled to return by a route 
east of Bealach-an-Mhaighre, along the borders of the Oriors. He afterwards 
proceeded in vessels from the harbour of Carlingford into Fingal, and from 
thence td Dublin. The Lord Justice did not attempt to go beyond Bealach-an- 
Mhaighre for some time after this. 

Sir John Chamberlain‘, a colonel of the English of Derry, marched with a 
numerous force against O'Doherty, to plunder and prey him. O’Doherty, with 
a small party, met the English ; and a fierce battle was fought between them, 
in which the English were defeated, and the colonel and others were slain by 
O'Doherty. 

Niall Garv O’Donnell remained with his brothers, and with his Egglish, at 
Lifford, as we have already stated; and they made a hosting® into Oireacht-U1- 
Chathain, in quest of prey and booty; and they did not halt until they arrived 
at the Dianait", where a great number of O’Neill’s people met them. A battle 
was fought, in which many were slain on both sides, and O’Neill’s people were 


confess a truth, all by the helpe & advise of 
Neale Garvie & his Followers, and the other 
Irish that came in with Sir Arthur O’Neale, 
without whose intelligence & guidance little or 
nothing could have been done of ourselves, al- 
though it is true withall, they had theire owne 


ends in it, which were alwayes for private Re- 
venge, and wee ours, to make use of them for 
the furtherance of the Publique service.” 

h Dianait, now the Burn Dennet, a stream 
flowing through the parish of Donaghedy, ba- 
rony of Strabane, and county of Tyrone. 


13 D 


2226 ANNQZa RIOShachta elReECaNnN. (1601. 


pop muincin f nell. Impaor mall co na gallarb go néoalaib romodaib, 7 50 
ccopcecan o1a ceIZIb 50 Lacb(p oo mohips. 

Pech ndile 1ap pin 00 coroh mall co na bpatmb,7 co na sallonbh 1 ceip 
eoshain 50 po cnechad glfno aichle go lip leo. 

bplymaidm ele leo ap clomn an Fipooipche mic Eom mec ovomnaill ag 
cnoc buob la caob an tppata bain, 7 oaome 00 manbad Leo. Coippoealbac 
écc 6 comne 50 nopuing ele oo Zabarl, ] cm picic mance vo bin opuarcec- 
laoh app. 

Cin barle nua hn ccip Eogamn, 7 canplen na ofincce vo sabarl la mall, 4 
la sallaibh, 7 a mbfin oiob vod Sap bfce 1ap pin. 

Ruodpoase mac Eiccnechain, mic Eiccnecham, mic nectain, mic toinpoeat- 
bars an plona tj vomnaill vécc. 


QOl1S CRIOST, 1601. 


Corp Cmorc, mile, pe céo, a haon. 


Clann cSfain na Sfmap, mic Riocaino Sharartus cap a ccanzamap a 
cctpapca capla ooibpioe bHt 1 ccampa 1 nouthargs { mfchonp 1 nuib gainin ip 
na céolaitib vo mi lanuam. Canaice bnat, 7 coupcelad 6 buitilenchaib 
oppa pm maigm pm iap na cup amac vo opuing va nodoimbh uaple co 
PEUIZT van, 7 Coapbaosal ap an ionnpaisid 1pm 1onad pint mbaccap. Conad 
cape pm tamicc Sip uacep, mac Slam, mic Sémaip buicilep, 7 Mag Pranayp 
1. S€mup, mac Emainn, mic Semaip, 7 opens do daomib vanple an oa Conntae 
1. Conntae tioppac anann 7 Conntae cille cainmph hi ccoinne, 7 hi ccomoail, 
o1ohce ovaimse, $0 hart naontaohaid naonbarle. ba he cmocé ap canpacc ina 
momaccallaim, 7 ba haip po anpac ionnparshio vo cabaipc ap m ccampa 
comaccach pan moicdfocal ap na mapach. 

Capla ni nfmgnatac, 7 célmume cinn(mnac von poplongponc bancach pin 
i. poall opagbail ma momcomm(lcc 50 pangacan a nfpccanaice ma ninmfoon. 
Ro pagbaitc 1a ina ppaomlige podbta peoils(ppta,7 ma ccollaib copcapoa 
cpopbucalce plcnon a mboth, 7 a mbelysalan. Ro mapbad von cup yin 


i Gleann-Aichle, now Glenelly, a remarkable ji Cnoc- Buidhbh, now Knockavoe.—See note ”, 
valley in which the old church of Badoney, near under the year 1522, p. 1356, supra. 
Strabane, in Tyrone, is situated.—See Colgan’s k Baile-Nua: i.e. Newtown, now Newtown- 


Trias Thaum., p. 181, n. 171. 1 Stewart, in the barony of Strabane, and county 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2227 


defeated. Niall, with his English, then returned to their houses in Lifford, with 
many spoils and in triumph. | 

On another occasion after this, Niall, with his brethren and with his English, 
went into Tyrone, and the entire of Gleann-Aichle' was plundered by them. 

They gave another defeat to the sons of Ferdorcha, the son of John, son 
of Donnell, at Cnoc-Buidhbh’, near Strabane, where they slew many persons. 
Turlough Oge, O’Coinne, and some others, were taken prisoners; and they 
afterwards exacted-sixty marks for his [Turlough’s] ransom. 

Baile-Nua* in Tyrone, and Castlederg, were taken by Niall and the English ; 
but they were recovered from them shortly afterwards. 

Rury, the son of Egneaghan, son of Egneaghan, son of Naghtan, son of 
Turlough-an-Fhina O'Donnell, died. 


= 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1601. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand siz hundred one. 


The sons of John of the Shamrocks, the son of Rickard Saxonagh, of whom 
we have already treated, happened to be encamped during the first days of the 
month of January in O’Meagher’s country, in Ikerrin. Spies and scouts came 
upon them in that place from the Butlers, after it had been reported by some 
of their gentlemen that an advantage and opportunity could be had by attack- 
ing them in the place where they [then] were. For this purpose Sir Walter, 
the son of John, son of James Butler, and Mac Pierce, i. e. James, the son of 
Edmond, son of James, with some of the gentlemen of the two countries, 1. e. of 
the county of Tipperary and of the county of Kilkenny, came to a conference 
and meeting on a certain night, at an appointed place. The result of their 
conference, and the resolution to which they agreed, was, to attack the Con- 
naught camp at day-break next morning. 

An unusual accident and a sad fatality occurred to the camp of the Bourkes, 
namely, an advantage was taken of their [want of] watching, so that their ene- 
mies came into the midst of them. They left them lying mangled and slaugh- 
tered, pierced and blood-stained corpses, throughout their tents and booths. 


of Tyrone. Docwra, who stormed this castle stone, strong and well built, 6 myles distant 
on the 24th of May, describes it as “a pile of from the Liffer on the way to Dungannon.” 
13 D2 


2298 ANNaza RIOshachta eElRECNN. [1601. 


O SCchnapang 1. SCan mac an Jolla omb, mic viapmaca, mic uillham bot pop 
ronnapbad o na atapnda amanl gach poshlard ele hi prappad clomne Sfoin 
a banc. Oo 5abad ann Sfan 6ce mac Slain a banc, 7 puccad € oa 1omcoim(cr 
50 cill cammmsh. Tepna Rémann a bupc, 7 Uilham ap m iomain(ce pin 50 
nopuing oa noaoimb a maille piu. Coccan appioe 1 newb, 7 np bo cian a 
ccomnaide 1pm cepic pin an can vo apccnacan 1 nullcob ian pragbail na 
mbaulcfoh bon leo oaipctfp muman conuicce pin an blcc momcom(cca. Cp 
nool o6ib 1 ccfno Zaodel an cuaipceine «1. O neill,7 6 vomhnaill po sab 
Rémann a banc ace popcad ampa vo dol cclomn Riocaintt 7 © po popttad 
lap 1aopide cTainicc Ip na cevlaitib ofppac can Eipne. Ro sab cpne licimel 
bneiphe Ui puainc, vo conntae Shliccig, 00 conncae Roppa comain, 7 can Shuca 
ipceach 1 cclomn connmarg. Habcap lap cigeapna na cipe pin a. Mac oaurn, 
Piacha, mac hobfino buide, mic william mic tomaip. CTanarce Remann ian 
ym. 50 tuait an calaid 1 nuactan ua maine hn cconntaé na Zaullme. Cn can 
act cualaig rapla clomne Riocaipo .1. Uitlfce a bunc an nf pin. Oo cumd pide 
yin cefnn Ton da Tip OpAT(M, 7 Opopcommlcc an Rémann. Can Zac coim(cc 
oa nofpna, vo cod Remann an cpp oidce décc Do MiP Manta Fan ainiuccad, 
Zan ponclopccecc oon ianla, no oa Fonaipib tappa bm cclomn Riocaipo 50 
painice 50 Tuait cenel feicin von caoib tlp do bapuncache Latonoma In 
‘cconntae na saillme. Oo lice Remann an admavain na hoidce pin a cur 
rsermelca po comain sac en baile don Tuait 6 mais slap 50 cpannoig més 


cnaimim, 7 on coll bnic 50 phabh. Oaoi unmon pomaome na tuaite co na 


! John, the son of Gilla Duv.—He was the son 
of Sir Roger O’Shaughnessy by the Liftty Ho- 
nora, daughter of Murrough O’Brien, Earl of 
Thomond, but he had been born four or five 
years before their marriage, for which reason 
he was disturbed in his possession by his pater- 


nal uncle, and, after his death, by his brother — 


Dermot, who was legitimate according to the 
laws of England.—See Genealogies, §c., of Hy- 
Fiachrach, pp. 376, 377, 378. 

™ Tuath-an-Chalaidh: i.e. the tuagh or dis- 
trict of the Callow or Strath. This is now prin- 
cipally comprised in the present barony of Kil- 
connell, in the county of Galway.—See Tribes 


and Customs of Hy-Many, p. 74, note '. 

" Hy-Many is here used to denote O’Kelly’s 
country at this period, not what it was origi- 
nally, for the territory of Caladh is not in ‘the 
upper or southern part of the ancient Hy-Many, 
which extended to the frontiers of Thomond. 

° The district of Kinel-Feichin: i.e. of the tribe 
or race of Feichin, the son of Feradhach, chief 
of Hy-Many, a district extending into the pa- 
rishes of Ballynakill and Tynagh, in the barony 
of Leitrim, and county of Galway.—See Tribes 
and Customs of Hy-Many, p. 15, and the map to 
the same work. 

P Magh-glass: i. e. green plain, now Moyglass, 


1691.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9999 


On this occasion was slain O’Shaughnessy, i.e. John, the son of Gilla-Duv', son 
of Dermot, son of William, who had been banished from his patrimony, as 
indeed had been all those plunderers who were along with the sons of John 
Burke. John Oge, the son of John Burke, was taken prisoner, and conveyed 
to Kilkenny, to be confined. Redménd Burke, and William, together with a 
party of their people, escaped from this affray ; [and] they went from thence 
into Ely, but they did not remain long in that territory, when they proceeded 
into Ulster, leaving the castles which until then they had possessed in East 
Munster under slender guard. On their arrival among the Irish of the North, 
namely, O'Neill and O’Donnell, Redmond proceeded to hire soldiers, to march 
into Clanrickard ; and, as soon as he had mustered [a sufficient number of] 
these, he led them, during the first days of spring, across the Erne, and passed 
along the borders of Breifuy O'Rourke, through the counties of Sligo and Ros- 
common, and across the River Suck, to Clann-Conway. He made a prisoner 
of the lord of this territory, namely, Mac David (Fiach, son of Hubert Boy, son 
of William, son of Thomas); and he afterwards proceeded to Tuath-an-Chalaidh”, 
in the upper part of Hy-Many’, in the county of Galway. When the Earl of 
Clanrickard, i.e. Ulick Burke, heard of this thing, he went to the eastern ex- 
tremity of his country, to await and watch Redmond; but, notwithstanding all 
his vigilance, Redmond, on the thirteenth night of the month of March, without 
being heard or noticed by the Earl or his sentinels, passed by them into Clan- 
rickard, until he arrived in the district of Kinel-Feichin’, in the south of the 
barony of Leitrim, in the county of Galway. Towards the end of that night, 
and by the dawning of day, Redmond sent forth his marauding parties through 
every town of that district, from Magh-glass’ to Crannog-Meg-Cnaimhin‘, and 
from Coill-bhreac‘ to the mountain*®; and before the noon of that day Redmond 


a townland lying to the north-west of Woodford, 
in the parish of Ballynakill, barony of Leitrim, 
and county of Galway.—See the Ordnance Map, 
of that county, sheet 125. 

° Crannog-Meg-Cnaimhin: 1. e. the Crannoge, 
or wooden house of Mac Nevin, now Crannoge- 
Macnevin, a townland in the parish of Tynagh, 
barony of Leitrim, and county of Galway.—See 
Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, p. 68, note ¥, 


and the map to the same work, on which the 
position of this place is shewn, 

T Coill-bhreac: i.e. the Speckled Wood, now 
Kylebrack, a townland in the parish and barony 
of Leitrim, in the same county.—Ordnance Map, . 
sheet 116. 

5 The mountain: i.e. the mountain of Slieve 
Aughty, now sometimes corruptly called Slie- 
baughta. 


ANNdZd RIOShAchtTd EIREGNN. (1601. 


huile mac(p posluaipce an cumay Remain mia moon laot an late pin. Oo 
TAED 1aNam oo dDenam comnaide so collcib baipp na cucnte, 7 baoipide a 
c(taip, no a ctice do Lantib an an luagaill pin, ag tappouns Cuicce o na com- 
appancib 7 acc varnZmuccad na timcell co tzainice lapla clomne Riocaipo 
sup an anmail ap mo va fFRpuain oaéyt na cTucnte a maille mp sup puroig 
campa ay mamnipoin cenél feicin. OGaccap a cltonp, no a cticc vo Laitbh 
fon 1onnap pin, 7 mapbca n(momnol(nca oa noénam (conpa 50 ccamice Tads, 
mac bmam na munta, mic bmaimn ballons, mic cosa ul pucipc oponsa oap- 
actaca ovdccbaid capmnfimnis vo consnam la Remann. O do puccpac an 
oa ploam 1 naoinpect ap an lanla po &:msh on prorlonsponc inpaibe, 7 vo 
cuad can beilsib pteach 1 cclomn Riecamo, Ufnaict prumh € co banle locha 
ach, 6 00 deachad an tiapla co na muinntip uadanb oon cup pin, po cuctp- 
cased, ] po cpnfchloipccead leopom 6 hatopum so hano maolloubain, 7 co 
vonup an Flodin 1 mantan ceneoil aoda. Oa ip can pm do manbad uata 
vTIZeapna Tipe vo mummneacalb 1. Mag oonnchand, vonnchad mac conbmaic 
é1cc, mic conbmaic. ba plo poofna 06 clecmanl ap an cunarp pm 6 néill oa 
bnht 1 mbpagomhap ap im mumain 1 nennac na bliadna po vo Cuaid Topainn, 
5 a bfit1 nullcoib opin alle so po sluaip lap an cclomn pin cSfain a bine, 7 
sur cuit 1 ccoccad clomne hwulliam amlaid pin. 

lap poccam vo Remann 7 oa pcceimelcoib 1 ccopann tTuadmuman po 
puidigf campa led von caob tap vo loc citpa. Cainec ma ¢fnn annpm 
ouine 6cc uapal vo oval ccap 1. Tads, mac cTommpodealbars, mic oomnanll, 
“mic concobain uf bmam, tua comaiple 7 applac annoaoine ecciallarg gan 


atcomapic, Fan Plappaisio oa atanp, né o1apnla clomne plocaipo pip a mbaoi 


‘kinel-Fheichin, pronounced Kinel-éghin. This 
is the monastery called Kinalekin by Archdall 
(Monast. Hib., p. 293), who erroneously places 
it in O’Flaherty’s country. It is more correctly 
called Kinaleghin in an Inquisition dated 22nd 
April, 1636, which places it in Clanrickard. 
The ruins of this abbey, which are of consider- 
able extent, are situated in the parish of Bally- 
nakill, barony of Leitrim, and county of Galway, 
about three miles and a half to the north-east of 
the village of Woodford. 'The abbey church, which 
is now very much shattered, measures one hun- 


dred and twenty-four feet in length. There are 
within it many curious monuments and epitaphs 
to different members of the family of Burke.— 
See the map to Zribes and Customs of Hy-Many, 
on which the exact situation of this monastery 
is shewn under the name ‘ Maimpzip cineil 
peicin.”” 

u Leitrim: i.e. the castle of Leitrim, in the 
parish and barony of the same name, in the 
south of the county of Galway. 

W Ard-Maeldubhain, now Ardmealuane, a cas- 
tle in ruins, in the parish of Beagh, barony of 


1601) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2231 


had in his power the greater part of the property, and all the moveable effects, 
of that territory. He afterwards went to take up his abode in the woods situ- 
ated in the upper part of that district, and continued for four or five days 
moving about in this manner, plundering his neighbours, and strengthening [the 
ramparts] around himself, until the Earl of Clanrickard, accompanied by all the 
troops he had been able to muster in the district, arrived, and pitched his camp 
at the monastery of Kinel-Fheichin’. Thus they remained for four or five days, 
during which time some persons not illustrious were slain between them, until 
Teige, the son of Brian-na-Murtha, son of Brian Ballagh, son of Owen O’Rourke, 
arrived with bold companies of sharp-armed soldiers to assist Redmond. When 
these two parties combined overtook the Earl, he left the camp in which he was, 
and proceeded through the passes into Clanrickard. The others pursued him to 
Loughrea ; and, the Earl and his people escaping from them on this occasion, 
they traversed, plundered, and burned the country from Leitrim" to Ard-Mael- 
dubhain”, and as far as the gate of Feadan*, in the west of Kinelea. At this time 
they lost a Munster lord of a territory, i.e. Mac Donough’, 1. e. Donough, the son 
of Cormac Oge, son of Cormac. What brought him on this expedition was this, 
he had been carried off as a hostage by O'Neill in the spring of the preceding year, 
and had remained in Ulster until [having regained his liberty] he set out with 
those sons of John Burke, and so fell in this war of the Clann- William. 

When Redmond arrived with his marauders on the confines of Thomond, 
they pitched a camp on the western side of Loch-Cutra*. Here he was jomed 
by a young gentleman of the Dal-Cais, namely, Teige, the son of Turlough, son 
of Donnell, son of Conor O’Brien, [who had been induced to join him] through 
the advice and solicitation of bad and foolish men, and without consulting or 
taking counsel of his father or the Earl of Clanrickard, to whom he was related 


Kiltartan, and county of Galway.—See theOrd- Genealogies, Sc., of Hy-Iiachrach, p. 381. 


nance Map of that county, sheet 128, and note 
w, under the year 1579, p. 1713, supra. 

* Feadan, now Fiddaun or Fiddane, a town- 
land containing the ruins of a castle built by 
O’Shaughnessy, chief of Kinelea, in the parish 
of Beagh, barony of Kiltartan, and county of 
Galway.—See the Ordnance Map, sheet 128, 


the map to Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, and 


Y Mac Donough.—He was the head of a pow- 
erful sept of the Mac Carthys, and called, by 
the Irish, Lord of Duhallow, now a barony in 
the north-west of the county of Cork. 

* Lough Cutra, now Lough Cooter, a beautitul 
and celebrated lake in the parish of Beagh, ba- 
rony of Kiltartan, and county of Galway.—See 
O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, part i. c. 1). 


2932 ANNaGZa RIOShachta EIREGNN. (1601, 


a comsaol,7 acapatcpad. O po nam clann cSfain a bupc,7 Cadg 6 bmamn 
a ccomaonta Coccald pe a porte, po lapp Taos a ccfnn tpi laian pin culdveacca 
laip, do con cuanca bn cctl eiccmn vo tuadmumain. Ni po hénad eimum 
mon aipecld pin, uaIp TangZacan opons oo oaomb uaiple an porplongpuipc 
co na cchtfnab lap. Ro bad oibhpém Uiliam mac Sain a bupc, 7 mac 
meic Uilham bune 1. Uacén mac william mic vauid, mic emainn, mic ullice. 
Cn ppaccbanl an poplongpupc ooib do Zabypac vo coiccpich ceneoil aoda, 7 
na heccge,7 do cenel otngarle. Ssaoilic a pp5fimealca an sac caoib oponsar, 
pa 1occan o ppfpmane, 7 pa uaccan clone cunléin. Oo cuaid curd ofob 50 
Somid Tan a nap co na 
neoalaib go cill peaccaip n cclomm cuilém uactcain naoharg pin. As pacc- 
beal an banle pm 0016 an na manac puce oppa ese amac an oa clomn cule 


co na noaoinib uaiple. 


baule uf calle, a@ ppoccup vo cluain pampooa. 


Ruccpatc oppa bop bannada 1apla cuaomuman. 
Oabaice an coip tuadmumneac pin acc oiubnaccad na noibfpceac Fo po 
manbpac opons va noaoinib 6 ca pin F0 miliuc ui FSpaoans 1 nompe(p cenél otn- 
Zale. Impaidio an coin, 7] puccpac an lucc naile an ccnfich sup an ccampa 
lan ppaccbail opuinge oa noaommb uaipli,7 oaopcecanpluas. Ro bad oboe 
an mac pin meric uilliam a oubpamanp 1. Uacen mac william bunc. Ro Zonad 
ona ip Lo céona Cavs mac toinpdealbars uf bmiain ouncon peilein sun bo 
hficcth 06 ap nool von campa oaarmdfon a cicemd aimmanans, 7 a mfiman- 
pao m(pdoana anmain 1 notpaipleaband, 7 ool pa lamanb Ush. 

Cangacap vaome ofpmapa a honaovab eccpamla vo muincin na bam- 
nfogna hi FRUNtacc iapla clone procaino. Ro bao. ovibpide a hoc, n6 a 
naof vo bnacacanb pagoitde 6 ppeproenp oc coiccld muman. Tanaice ann 
mac aniapla pein bai pe hachaid map an can pm hn ppocaip an luptip opons 
buon voccbad anaitmo. Tanaic vin plp roncio Zobepnopa Corceid connacc, 
7] cangacan blop congnam plors on n5callim. lap ccloipceact an cpuinmsce 


* Baile- Ut-Aille, now Ballyally, near Ennis.— 
See it already referred to under the years 1559 
and 1599. 


poets Teige and Maelin Oge Mac Brody were 
born near this church. 


© Miliuc- Ui-Ghrada: 1. e. O’Grady’s Meelick, 


> Cil-Reachtais, now Kilraghtis, an old church 
giving name to a parish situated about four miles 
to the north of the town of Ennis, in the barony 
of Upper Bunratty, and county of Clare. Ac- 
cording to the tradition in the country, the 


now Meelick, a townland in the parish of Clon- 
rush, barony of Leitrim, and county of Galway. 
This townland, and the whole of the parishes 
of Inishcaltra and Clonrush, once belonged to 
O’Grady, as a part of his territory of Cinel 


1601.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2233 


_ and friendly. When the sons of John Burke and Teige O’Brien had entered 
into a confederacy with each other, Teige requested, in three days afterwards, 
that he should get a company to go on an incursion into some angle of Thomond. 
He was not refused this request, for some of the gentlemen of the camp went 
along with him, with their kerns. Among these were William, the son of John 
Burke, and the son of Mac William Burke, 1. e. Walter, the son of William, son 
of David, son of Edmond, son of Ulick. On leaving the camp, they passed along 
the borders of Kinelea, and Echtghe, and Kinel-Dunghaile. They sent off 
marauding parties along both banks of the Fergus, into the lower part of Hy- 
Fearmaic, and the upper part of Clann-Cuilein. Some of them proceeded to 
Baile-Ui-Aulle*, and near Clonroad ; and they returned that night with their 
spoils to Cill-Reachtais’, in Upper Clann-Cwlein. On their leaving this town, 
on the following morning, they were overtaken by the rising-out of the two 
Clann-Cuileins, with their gentlemen. They were also overtaken by the com- 
panies of the Earl of Thomond. These pursuing forces of Thomond proceeded 
to shoot at the insurgents, and killed many of their men, from thence to Miliuc- 
Ui-Ghrada’, in the east of Cenel-Donghaile. The pursuers [then] returned, and 
the others carried off the prey to their camp, after having lost some of their 
gentlemen and common people. Among these was that son of Mac William 
whom we have already mentioned, namely, Walter, the son of Wiliam Burke. 
Teige, the son of Turlough O’Brien, was wounded on the same day by the shot 
of a ball; so that on his arrival at the camp he was obliged, in despite of his 
unbending mind and his impetuous spirit, to betake himself to the bed of sick- 
ness, and go under® the hands of physicians. 

A great number of the Queen’s people came from various places:to assist the 
Earl of Clanrickard. Of these were eight or nine standards of soldiers, [sent] 
from the President of the two provinces of Munster. hither came the Earl’s 
own son, who had been for some time before along with the Lord Justice, with 
a band of foreign soldiers; thither also came the Deputy of the Governor of the 
province of Connaught, and there came also an auxiliary force from Galway. 


Donghaile, in Thomond, and are still in the place is shewn. 

deanery of O-mBloid, in the diocese of Kil- 4 Go under.—An English writer would say : 
laloe.—See the map to Tribes and Customs of ‘‘ And place himself in the hands of physi- 
Hy-Many, on which the exact position of this cians.” 


Ton 


2234 ANNaZa RIOSshachTa EIReECaNn. [1601. 


rin vo clon cS(ain a banc, po atpagpioc can a nap pon LHt le pliab an 
daingnigcib cuaite cenél pfercin, 7 capi ip na phd botaib inpabaccan porme 
yin. Nip bo cian ooib ipurde an can cangaccap clann an iapla a. baptin 
ovine cuillin,7 Sip comap a bunc,7 Zach neach baof mploma oa clon 1 
pemtup na pocarde 50 ploganb lionmana a monlle pa don cuait Ina ccépars- 
eacht, 7 Ro sabad longpont carobreac cfnoalac leo ap uplan na cuarte. 
Ni parbe lapla clone jocaipo pn ipin ppoplonspone pin, ucap vo pala 
thom cinnfpa;7 sabad sep earplainte 06 ipm Treactmain nome pin, co nan 
bo hioncpluang1o an can pin hé. 

lan prop psel opiop 1oncno Zobepmnona cdiccro connact 7 vo banin otine 
cullin tadg o bpican 00 bhe b(osonca 1pm ppoplonsponc pin Remainn a bune, 
po cuipplot ppdotexion a hucc na bampiogna cuicce, 7 taimec plum ola 
pagio. Ro cup an bantn 1odlacad lair 50 baile vo banleib an iapla 1. Liat 
opuim 7 nip b6 cian a paogalpom ipuide vain acbat Zan puinec, 7 po hav- 
naicead €1 mbaile Coca pach, 7 1 mbanle ata an mos vai 1 NoIaId mm aom 
tpeccmain. 6a mance tip o tclpoa an coce plannoa po écc ann pin, uain 
ba commofp an sac tnealam tpova, 7 an Zac aromib ensaile ba snact ecin 
einennchoib viomluad 1 n5unc saipecid. 6a lan oo mine, vo mfnmaim, vo 
lat, vo lamac, vo mine 00 macaomdact, Diompad, 7 DeInech e1pide. 

Oala an Campa pin tucite ceneil peichm bacctap ucc pe huct sac aon 
la ag coméce ap a céile o perl Dacpaice co ofinead mip apmil co nveachard 
ceince 7 tnaochad illomeib 7 hi ppeolmach clomne Slain a bupc, conad ane 
rm po tmallpac an cip opagbarl 7 1ap ppacebaal an cipe vob capla epfch 
ui mavagain cuca 1. oomnall mac Slain, mic bnfpal. Oo cévapn apade cap 
Suca. Gaccap clann aniapla ma Lmam in ajifcc pin, 7 po manbad oaome 
iomoa Coppa oiblimb von cup pin. Clann cSfam a bine vo dol1 ctip conall 
yan pin 1 ecfnn ui Domnanll, 7 clann aniapla opi oa crip, 7 Ora ToIsIb. 
lan ppillead vob via notitang ap amloud puanacan a nacain ip na vé1dMncorb 
layi noenam a tiomna, 1ap cceilebnad va Caipvib collnade, 7 14p ccpfoc- 
nuccad a val nvomanoa von iapla a. Uillece mac Riocaipo, me Uillece na 


° The mountain; i.e. Slieve Aughty, now cor- Lughaidh. chief of Hy-Many. It was the name 
ruptly Sliebaughta. , of a district in the south of the county of Gal- 
" Kinel- Fheichin, Cené\ perc: i.e. the tribe way, comprising a considerable portion of the 
or race of Feichin, the son of Feradhach, son of | barony of Leitrim. The’ name is now applied 


1601.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2935 


When the sons of John Burke heard of this muster, they removed back eastwards, 
along the mountain‘, into the fastnesses of the district of Kinel-Fheichin‘, and re- 
mained in the ready huts inwhich they had been before. They had not been long 
here when the sons of the Earl, namely, the Baron of Dunkellin and Sir Thomas 
Burke, with every one of his sons that was capable of bearing arms, arrived in 
the district in pursuit of them, at the head of very numerous forces, and pitched 
a splendid and well-furnished camp in the very middle of the district. The 
Karl of Clanrickard himself was not in this camp, for he had been attacked by 
a fit of sickness, and a severe, sharp disease, the week before, so that he was 
not able to undertake an expedition at this time. 

When the Deputy of the Governor of Connaught and the Baron of Dunkellin 
received intelligence that Teige O’Brien was lying severely wounded in that 
camp of Redmond Burke, they sent him a protection in behalf of the Queen, 
upon which he repaired to them. The Baron sent an escort with him to Leitrim, 
one of the Earl’s castles. But he did not live long there, for he died shortly 
afterwards®; and he was buried successively at Loughrea and Athenry in one 
_week. Alas to the country that lost this young scion! He was expert at every 
warlike weapon and military engine used by the Irish on the field of battle. 
He was full of energy and animation, [and distinguished for] agility, expertness, 
mildness, comeliness, renown, and hospitality. 

As for the camps in the district of Kinel-Fheichin, they were front to front, 
cuarding against each other daily, from the festival of St. Patrick to the end of 
the month of April, when the provisions and stores of flesh meat of the sons 
of John Burke began to grow scant and to fail; and they, therefore, proceeded 
to quit the territory; and after their departure they carried off a prey from 
O’Madden, i.e. Donnell, the son of John, son of Breasal, and then proceeded 
across the Suck. The sons of the Earl, in the mean time, continued to pursue 
them ; and many persons were slain between them on this occasion. The sons 
of John Burke then went to Tirconnell, to O’Donnell; and the sons of the Earl 
returned to their own country and their houses. Upon their return ‘to their 
patrimony, they found their father, i.e. Ulick, the son of Rickard, son of Ulick- 
na-Ceann, in his last moments, after making his will, and bidding farewell to 


to the monastery only.—See note ‘, p. 2230, sup. & Shortly afterwards: literally, ‘and his lite 
—See Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, p. 15. was not long there, for he died without delay.” 


13: E12 


2936 AQNNaZa RIOSshachTA EIREGNN. (1601. 


ce{nd no écc a mi Map mbanle loca mac, 7 po hadnacht 1 mbaile ata an 
posh co naipmiom morp. Ro baoh vo moippcélonb a armypipe etip epennchoib 
an ti c(poa ann pin, Cisgeapna porpad pipbplcach, 50 ngnuip ashard caom 
ionplata, no biod wp pe a agallaim, tap pe a cTiontacanb, colgda pe a com- 
appain, 7 comtpom a ccoice(pcarbh, pp nap pronnad a maoite na a moipcnige 
1ngupt Zabaid o po sab saipecead sup an lo az bat. Ol mac «1. Riocapno vo 
omonead ma 1onadh. Conad vo bliadnanb bap an lapla ac pubpav. 


Se céd vécc 1p bliadam baupp, 
o téanicc cplopt 1 ccolamn, > 
ha an ccapr gac Tepma da TTICC, 


50 bap an Tanta Unllice. 


O vocantais Sfon d6cc, mac Slain, mic Feilim, mic concobaip canpais 
vecc, 27. lanuanp tciccfpna tmocaict céd mnyi heogain eipide, ni bai eim 
wTIZeapna Tpiocaic cév vo Zaowelaibh ba plpn lam 7 emec, 7 po ba cnooa 
comainle nay. O oomnaill vo Saipm f vocantag operlim occ .1. veapbpataip 


Shain. 


Clann Calin, 7 clann noabfitc oo bneit cataoin mic Slain occ i 


cc{nn gall. 50 voine,7 an senepal Sin henpp oocupia vo Zainm ft docantais de 


an ulca la hua noomnaill. 


» Was appointed, 00 oiponead.—This phrase 
is incorrect, because no election had taken place, 
but Rickard succeeded to his father according 
to the laws of England. 

' Triocha-ched : a cantred, hundred, or barony, 
containing one hundred and twenty quarters of 
land. i 

K The Clann-Ailin: i.e. the Mac Allens, or 
Allens. They are really Campbells. 

' The Clann-Devitt: i.e. the Mac Devitts, of 
whom the celebrated Felim Reagh, who slew 
Captain Martin at Sligo in the year 1595, and 
who afterwards burned Derry, was the chief at 
this period. 

™ Styled him O’ Doherty.—Sir Henry Doewra 
himself has written the following account of 
the death of Sir John O'Doherty ; of the man- 
ner in which he obtained the young Cahir 


O’ Doherty from O’Donnell; and of his attempt 


/ 


to make O’Doherty independent of Niall Garv 
O’Donnell, after the latter had aspired to the 
O’Donnellship : 

‘““ And nowe came a practice of O Donell’s 
to open a discouverie, which ‘had long beene 
mannaged in secret, & as he thought Carried 
Close within the Compass of his owne & his 
associats knowledge ; Captaine Alford, that had 
the keeping of Culmore, fell into priuate fami- 
haritie with Hugh Boy and Phelim Reogh (of 
the Septs of the mac Dauids), two Principall 
men about O Doghertie, & of as good Credite & 
estimation with O Donell. These men requested 
to haue leaue to buy Aquavite, Cloath, & such 
other Comodities as that place afforded, which 
the Captaine & I, hauing our ends in it, as well 
as they theires, gaue them free libertie to doe, 
& with more free access then any other. They 
measuring theire hopes by theire good enter- 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2237 


his earthly friends, and settling his worldly affairs. The Earl died, in the month 
of May, in the town of Loughrea ; and he was interred at Athenry with great 
solemnity. The person who died here was [the subject of] one of the mournful 
news of the time among the Irish. He was a sedate and justly-judging lord ; of 
a mild, august, chief-becoming countenance; affable in conversation, gentle to- 
_wards the people of his territory, fierce to his neighbours, and impartial in all his 
decisions ; a man who had never been known to act a feeble or imbecile part on 
the field of danger, from the day he had first taken up arms to the day of his death. 
His son, Rickard, was appointed” in his place. ‘To commemorate the year of the 
Earl’s death, the following was composed : 


Sixteen hundred years and one besides, 
From the time that Christ came into a body, 
The advocate of our causes at every term, 


To the death of the Earl Ulick. 


O'Doherty (John Oge, the son of John, son of Felim, son of Conor Carragh) 
died on the 27th of January. He was Lord of the triocha-ched' of Inishowen ; 
and there was not among all the Irish of his time a lord of a triocha-ched of 
better hand or hospitality, or of firmer counsel, than he. O’Donnell nominated 
Felim Oge, i.e. the brother of [the deceased] John, the O'Doherty ; but the 
Clann-Ailin* and the Clann-Devitt' took Cahir, the son of John Oge, to the 
English, to Derry ; and the General, Sir Henry Docwra, styled him O'Doherty”, 
to spite O'Donnell. 


tainement, of all presentlie aboard him, to knowe 
if hee would sell the Foarte. Hee seamed not 
vnwilling, soe he might be assured of some good 
& reall reward in hand. Many Meetinges & 
Consultations they had about it, & all with my 
knowledge. In the end it was resolued his Re- 
ward should be a Chaine of Gould in hand, 
which the Kinge of Spaine had formerlie giuen 
to O Donell, & was worth aboute 8 scoore 
poundes, a 1000" in money the first day the 
Treason should be effected, & 3000" a yeare 
pention during his life from the Kinge of Spaine, 
& for this he should onelie deliuer vpp the 


Foarte, with Neale Garvie in it, whome he 


should purposlie invite that Night to Supper. 
The time was sett & all thinges prepared. The 
Chaine, as a reall achiument of theire designe, 
I had deliuered into my handes. But when the 
day canie, they tooke a distast, &, without ad- 
uenture of future loss, were contented to giue 
ouer theire bargaine. And about Christenmas 
this yeare dyed S' John O Doghertie in Tircon- 
nell, being fledd from his owne Countrey, with 
his goods & people ; a man that in shewe seamed 
wonderfull desireous to yeald his obedience to 
the Queene ; but soe as his actions did euer 
argue he was otherwise minded. But it is true 
O Donell had at our first coming Ceazed his 


anNNaza RIOshachta elREGNN. | 


(1601. 


Remann o Gallcobain eppcop doine oo mhapbad la sallaib 1 noineche 


ui cachain 15 manta. « 


Sémup mac Somaiple bude mic Cllapctpamn mic edn catanais, aon 


sonne, afterwards called S' Cahir O Doghertie, 
into his hands, & kepte him as a Pledge vpon 
him, which might iustly serue for some colour 
of excuse, that he was not at libertie to vse the 
freedome of his owne will. Being nowe Deade, 
O Donell set vp in his place one Phelim Oge, 
a brother of his, neglecting the sonne, who had 
bene bredd & fostred by the said Hugh Boye & 


Phelim Reaugh. These men \tooke it as the 


highest iniurie” [that] ‘‘could be done vnto ° 


them, that theire Foster Child should be de- 
priued of that which they thought was his 
cleere & vndoubtible right, & therevpon seri- 
ouslie addressed themselues vnto Mee, and 
made offer, that in case I would maintaine the 
sonne against the vncle, & procure he might 
hold the Countrey, according to the same Let- 
tres Pattents his father had it before him, they 
would worke the meanes to free him out of 
O Donell’s hands ; to bring home the People & 
Catle that were.fledd, & with them, togeather 
with themselues, yeald obedience & seruice to 
the state. Many messages & meetinges wee 
had about it, & none but, to my knowledge, 
O Donell was still made acquainted with, yea, 
& with the very truth of every particuler speach 
that past amongst vs; yet soe was he deluded 
(being himselfe a’ Crafte Master at that arte) 
that in the end a Conclusion was made between 
vs, theire demaunds were graunted by mee, & 
confirmed by my lord Deputie & Councell, hee 
perswaded to sett the young man at libertie, & 
when he had done, the people with theire goods 
retourned into the Countrie, tooke theire Leaves 
of him, & declared themselues for our side, & 
from that day forward wee had many faithfull 
& singuler goode seruices from them; theire 
Churles & Garrans assistinge vs with Car- 
» 


riages, theire Catle, with plentie of fishe, meate, 
& Hugh Boye & Phelime Reaugh with many 
intelligences & other helpes ; without aJl which, 
I must freelie confess a truth, it had beene vt- 
terlie impossible wee could haue made that sure 
& speedie Progress in the Warres that after- ‘ 
wardes wee did. 

‘‘But therevpon begune Neale Garvie’s dis- 
contentment, for presentlie he directed some 
men of his to be cessed vpon this Country. 
O Doghertie & Hugh Boy, with greate indigna- 
tion, refused to accept them. Complainte came 
before mee; I asked him wherevpon it was that 
hee challenged this power ouer annother man’s 
land; he tould mee the land was his owne, for 
the Queene had given him all Tyrconnell, & 
this was parte of it. I aunswered it was true. 
I know well the whole Countrey of Tyrconnell 
was promised him in as large and ample man- 
ner as the O Donnells had beene accustomed to 
hould it; But I tooke it there were many others 
in that Countrey that had lands of their owne 
as well as they, whose intrest I neuer conceiued 
was intended to be giuen to him. Hee replied, 
not onelie the Countrey of Tyrconnell, but into 
Tyrone, Farmanaght, yea, & Connaught, where- 
soeuer any of the O Donnells had, at that time, 
extendéd theire Power, hee made Accompte all 
was his ; hee acknowledged noe other kinde of 
right or intrest in any man else; yea, the very 
persons of the People he challenged to be his; 
& said he had wronge, if any one foote of all 
that land, or any one of the Persons of the Peo- 
ple, were exempted from him. I saide againe 
these Demaunds were, in my Judgement, very 
vnreasonable, but hee should receive noe wronge 
by Mee; Let him haue patience till wee might 
heare from my lord Deputie, & whatsoever his 


- 


1601. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2239 


Redmond O’Gallagher, Bishop of Derry, was killed by the English in 
Oireacht-Ui-Chathain, on the 15th of March. 
James, the son of Sorley Boy", son of Alexander, son of Jehu Cahanagh, 


Judgement was, Imust& would obay. Wounder- 
full impatient he was of any delay, but necessi- 
tie enforceing him, & the case sent to my lord, 
he returned this aunswere, with the aduise of 
the Councell: That the vttermost could be chal- 


lenged vpon the O Dohertyes was but a cheife ° 


Rent, sometimes paide to O Neale, sometimes to 
O Donnell, but that whatsoeuer it were, they 
were of opinion was extinct euer since they 
if Neale 
“Garvie thought otherwise his reasons should be 


held immediatelie from the Crowne; 


heard with fauour when time should serue, & 
noe parte of that was promised him but should 
be made good; In the mean while he must be 
Contented, O Doughertye must & should be 
exempted from him: which hee tooke with a 
greate deale more indignation & furie, then be- 
came'a man that was to raise his fortune onelie 
by the fauour of annother. 

‘But the Springe coming now on, & hauing 
the helpe of this Countrey for Carriages, towards 
the latter end of March I drewe Forth & made 
a lourney vpon mac Swyne Fanaght, whose 
Countrie lyes diuided from o Doghertyes by a 
Bay of the sea. I came vpon him vnawarrs, & 
surprised & gott into my possession about 1000 
of his Cowes, before hee had Leasure to driue 
them away. Himselfe came vnto Mee vpon it, 
& desired his submission to the Queene might 
be accepted of, & vsed the mediation of O Do- 
ghertye & Hugh Boy, that I would restore him 
the Preys Much entreatie & importunitie I was 
prest withall, & thinking with myselfe it might 
be a goode Example to such others as I should 


afterwards haue occasion to deale with, that I 


Sought not their goods soe much as theire obe- 


dience (reseruing a parte onelie for reward of 
the souldiers labour), I was contented & gave 


him backe the rest, taking his oath for his tu- 
ture fidelitie, & six pledges, such as I was ad- 
uised to choose, & was borne in hand, were very 
sufficient to binde him, & whereof his owne 
sonne was one; & to have a tye on him besids, 
I left Captaine Ralph Bingley, with his Compa- 
nye of 150 Men, in Garrison in his Countrey, 
att the Abbay of Ramullan. 


that, not long after, with out Compulsion, he 


It is true, for all 


made his Reconciliation with O Donnell vnder 
hand, promised to betray the Garrison that lay 
vypon him, & secreetlie wrought to gett his 
Pledges out of my hand; But fayling in both, 
& yet resolued to goe on his Course, he draue 
away all his Catle & goods, & openlie declared 
himselfe an Enymy against vs. In reuenge 
whereof I-presentle hunge vpp his Pledges, & 
in September following made annother iourney 
vpon him, burnt & destroyed his houses & 
Corne; wherevpon, Winter approching, insued 
the death of most of his People; & in December 
after, at the earnest entreatie of Neale Garuie, 
I tooke his. Submission againe, & sixe more 
Pledges, & from that forward he continewed in 
good subicction.” 

P. O’Sullevan Beare has the following short 
notice of the same defection of the Mac Devitts 
from O’Donnell, Hist. Cathol. [ber., ¥e., tom. 3, 
lib.,.6,-¢: W. 

“< Odocharta diem obit (vulnus Odonello mag- 
num) Cathirium fiium puerum relinquens, qui 
quod rebus gerendis ineptus erat, Felmius Odo- 
charta Inisone princeps ab Odonello creatur. 
Qua re infensus Hugo Cathirii nutritius, & ca- 
tera factio ab Odonello desciscentes Beartam”’ 
[Burt] ‘“‘arcem Inisone principatus paput An- 
glis tradit.”—Fol. 172. 

n James, the son of Sorley Boy.—Ue was Sir 


2240 


GQNNGta RIOShachTa EIREGHN. | 


[ 1601. 


bapp aig clone vomnall ma pé cid Fp pid, cfod pm coccad vo écc luan 


cays: 


mic vomnaill mic tTarocc. 


Mac uf bmam ana véce a mi pebnu «1. toinpdealbac mac muincficans 
Ni bai a comaopca vo ticc(pna cipe 1 nepinn in 


ovohce actbath. Oume epccaid, lonnpdaisteac, vo bOpead a lonce 1omtan 
leap ay sac cip 1 cchisfo, 7 pob annam aonburidfn ag vol uad pan 1omlame 1 
cTolasoap dia Tip, nc vo copain an (ng 1atZapb, echphio, bat occa co po écc, 


7 a adnacul ina longponc plin1 mbaile an canplein. 


O Rasallig oéce a mi appl 1. Emann, mac maoilmonoda, mic Sain, mic 


James Mac Donnell, Lord of the Route and 
Glynnes, in the north of the present county of 
Antrim.—See note ?, under the year 1590, pp. 
1892, 1896, supra. 

° Baile-an-chaislen : 1.e. town of the castle, 
now Castletown, a townland verging on Lough 
Derg, containing the ruins of a castle and church 
in the territory or barony of Arra or Duharra, 
in the county of Tipperary. 

P Edmond, the son of John.—He was usually 
called Edmond O’Reilly of Kilnacrott.— See 
note °, under the year 1583, p. 1806, supra. The 
O’Reillys, formerly of the Heath House, in the 
Queen’s County, those of Thomastown Castle, 
in the county of Louth, the Counts O’Reilly of 
Spain, and the Reillys of Scarva, in the county 
of Down, are all descended from this Edmond. 
His present senior representative is Myles John 
O'Reilly, Esq., late of the Heath House, in the 
Queen’s County, and now living in France. His 
pedigree runs as follows, as made out by the 
late Chevalier O’Gorman for Count Alexander 
O’Reilly, and as tested by the Editor with va- 
rious original documents, now before him : 

I. Epmonp O’Reriry of Kilnacrott, near Bal- 
lyjamesduff, in the barony of Castlerahin, and 
county of Cavan, was chief of East Breifny, 
and member of the Parliament of 1585.—See 
The 
pedigree of Count Alexander O'Reilly, com- 
piled by the Chevalier O’Gorman, gives this 


note §, under that year, p. 1830, supra. 


Edmond but one wife, namely, Bridget, daugh- 

ter of Richard Nugent, the eighth Baron of 
Delvin ; but it is stated in an old pedigree on 

paper of the Reillys of Scarva, of which the Edi- : 
tor has obtained a copy from James Myles Reilly, 

Ksq., Barrister-at-law, of Scarva, in the county 

of Down, that he was married twice: first, to 

Mary Plunkett, by whom he had three sons, 

Cahir, whose descendants are extinct or un- 

known, John, and Terence Neirinn, ancestor of 
the Reillys of Scarva; and, secondly, to Eliza- 

beth Nugent, by whom he had three sons, Myles, 

Farrell, and Charles. This accords with the 

Genealogy of Lord Dunsany’s family, in which 

it is stated that Robert, the fifth Baron Dun- 

sany, had nine daughters, one of whom mar- 

ried Edmund O’Reilly of Kilnacrott. 

Il. Joun O’Remty. He was evidently the 
second son of Edmond of Kilnacrott by his first 
marriage, though O’Gorman makes him his 
third son by Bridget Nugent. He married 
Catherine, daughter of Sir James Butler, and 
had by her one son. 

III. Brian O’REILLY, who died in 1631, leav- 
ing by his wife, Mary, daughter of the Baron 
of Dunsany, four sons, namely, Maelmora, or 
Myles, No. IV., of whom presently; 2. Cathal; 
3. Owen; 4. Hugh. 

IV. Maztmora O’Reitty. He was a very 
able military leader during the civil wars of 
1641, and is still vividly remembered in the 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2241 


the most distinguished of the Clann-Donnell, either in peace or war, died on 
Easter Monday. 

Mac-I-Brien Ara, namely, Turlough, the son of Murtough, son of Donnell, 
son of Teige, died in the month of February. There was no [other] lord of a 
territory in Ireland so old as he on the night that he died. He was an active, 
warlike man, who had led his followers in safety from every territory into which 
he had gone, and seldom had any troop who had entered his territory returned 
from him scathless; a man who had defended the rugged and hilly district 
which he possessed until his death. He was interred in his own fortified resi- 


dence of Baile-an-chaislen’. 


O'Reilly, i.e. Edmond, the son of Maelmora, son of John’, son of Cathal, died 


traditions of the country under the name of 
‘Myles the Slasher.” He shewed prodigies 
of valour during the years 1641, 1642, and 
1643; but in 1644 being encamped at Granard, 
in the county of Longford, with Lord Castle- 
haven, commander of the army of the Confede- 
rate Catholics, who ordered him to proceed with 
a chosen detachment of horse to defend the 
bridge of Finea against the Scots, then bearing 
down on the main army with a very superior 
force, Maelmora was slain at the head of his 
troops, fighting bravely on the middle of the 
bridge. His body was discovered on the follow- 
ing day, and conveyed to the monastery of Cavan, 
and there interred in the tomb of his dncestors. 
He married Catherine, daughter of Charles 
O’Reilly of Leitrim, colonel of infantry during 
the civil wars. He had by her three sons, 
namely, 1. Colonel John; 2. Edmond; 3. Philip. 

V. CoLoneL Joun Retwiy. He seems to have 
been the first of this family who dropped the 
prefix O. He was formerly of Clonlyn and 
Garryrocock, in the county of Cavan; but is 
mentioned in 1713, as of Ballymacadd, in the 
county of Meath. He was elected knight of the 
shire for the county of Cavan, in the Parlia- 
ment held in Dublin on the 7th of May, 1689. 
He raised a regiment of dragoons at his own 


expense, for the service of James II., and assisted 
at the siege of Londonderry in 1689. He had 
two engagements with Colonel Wolsley, the 
commander of the garrison of Belturbet, whom 
he signally defeated. He fought at the battles 
of the Boyne and Aughrim, and was included 
in the articles of Capitulation of Limerick, 
whereby he preserved his property, and was 
allowed to carry arms. According to An alpha- 
betical List of the Names of such Persons of the 
Popish Religion, within the Kingdom of Ireland, 
who have Licenses to carry Arms, printed by 
Andrew Croke, printer to the Queen’s most 
excellent Majesty, in Copper Alley, Dublin, 
1713, it appears that Lieutenant-Colonel John 
Ryley, late of Clonlyn, in the county of Cavan, 
now of Ballymacadd, in the county of Meath, 
and Garryrocock, in the county of Cavan, had 
license to carry ‘‘l sword, 1 case of pistols, and 
1 gunn.” He married Margaret, daughter of 
Owen O’Reilly, Esq., by whom he had five sons 
and two daughters. The sons were, 1. Captain 
Conor, who died without issue in May, 1723; 
2. Myles Reilly, of the city of Dublin, merchant; 
3. Brian Reilly; 4. Luke Reilly ; 5. Conor Reilly ; 
all of whom died without issue, except Myles 
and Brian. 

Colonel John Reilly, on the intermarriage of 


13 F 


2242 


GQNNaZa RIOSshachTa EIRECNN. 


(1601. 


Catal pp anpavh, apachhiat, cumnech cianaopca, baoi epccond 1omluas- 
callec varpgnead, 7 DINNTINN Ina aofol1d, 7 a adnacul Ip an ccaban 1 moumpoin 


his eldest son and heir, Captain Conor Reilly, 
with Mary, daughter of Luke O’Reilly, Esq., of 
‘Tonogh, in the county of Cavan, on the second 
day of May, 1692, executed articles to limit his 
estates by proper deeds to the uses of the said 
marriage ; and upon the payment of the mar- 
riage portion of Conor, he, on the 23rd of March, 
1702-3, perfected a settlement, limiting the 
estate therein set forth to himself for life ; re- 
mainder to his eldest son, Conor, for life; re- 
mainder to the issue of Conor in tail; remainder 
to his second son, Myles Reilly, for life; re- 
mainder to John Reilly, eldest son of said Myles, 
&c.; with a remainder to Brian, Owen, and 
Thomas, the younger sons of said Colonel John 
Reilly. He died on the 17th day of February, 
1717. He made his Jast will on the 17th day 
of September, 1716, of which the following is 
a faithful copy : 

“In the Name of God, Amen. I, John Reilly, 
of Ranepark, and late of Ballymacad, in the 
County of Meath, Gent., being in perfect sense 
and memory, I thank God, Do Recommend my 
Soul to God, and my body to be buried in 
whatever place my friends shall think fitt or 
Convenient, and in as Decent a manner as the 
sd. friends sliall think fitt. Imprimis, I leave 
to my Grandson, John Reilly, Son to my son, 
Miles Reilly, Mercht. in Dublin, the Fifty 
pounds I am Intitled to at my Death, to Charge 
my Estate with. I leave to my son, Miles 
Reilly, the Mercht. in Dublin, the Remainder 
of the lease of Dromloman, if any there be at 
my Death. Ileave to my Son, Owen Reilly, 
During his Naturall life, the Lease of Der- 
rysherridan ; the Lease of Dulerstowne, Fere- 
more, and Baterstowne, together with the whole 
Lease of Scurlogstowne ; and if any the said 
Leases be unexpired at his Decease, that the 


Reversion and Remainder of them may come to 


the proper use of James Reilly and George 
Reilly, sons to the said Owen Reilly. I leave 
to my son, Bryan Reilly, the Lease of Ranally, 
together with what of the Lands of Dunganny 
lyes by the Boyne Side to the Road that Leads 
from Killeool to Navan, on which Jands are the 
Ganders Mill, and the great white thorn bush 
that is on the Park, next the Bective. I leave 
to my son, Thomas Reilly, the other parte of 
Dunganny, on which the two Farmers Houses 
are that lived there formerly, with Sherlock and 
Sherridan; together with the Peice of Rannally, 
on which James Ginole lived, each of my said 
sons, Bryan and Tho. Reilly, paying the rents 
reserved by the said Leases to the Landlords, as 
my Exrs. shall order, or their Survivors. And 
it is my will that if either of the said Leases to 
my said sons, Bryan and Thomas, be unexpired 
at their Decease, the Remainder and Reversion 
thereof may come to the eldest sons of each of 


' them. I leave also to my son, Thomas, the lease 


of Carrigach. I likewise leave to my son, Bryan 
Reilly, aforsd. the reversion of the lease of Lay- 
thendroanagh and Carnan, and part of Corne- 
creach ; and it is my will that if any of the said 
leases be undetermined at the Death of the 
said Bryan, the Rem’, Reveréon, and profitts 
of them may come to his son, Miles Reilly. I 
leave to my wife 100", Ster. ont of my personall 
Estate, together with six Milch Cows, and my 
riding Grey Nagg, together with what She 
pleases to have of the Houshold Stuff, except 
what is hereafter excepted; as also it is my 
will to leave her the silver Cup that I now have, 
and six Silver spoons. I leave to my sisters, 
Honora and Rose Reilly, sixteen pounds, Ster., 
to be Equally Divided amongst them. I leave 
to my dau”® Katharine Nugent and Mary Connor, 
to be Equally Divided between them, the Sume 
of Eighty pounds, Ster. Ileave to my Brother, 


1601.] 


- ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2243 


in the month of April. He was an aged, grey-headed, long-memoried man, and 
who had been quick and vivacious in his mind and intellect in his youth. He | 


Phillip Reilly, the Sum of ten pounds, Ster. I 
leave to my brother, Edmd. Reilly, to Divide as he 
thinks fitt among some Orphans Entayled upon 
him, the Sum of Fifteen pounds, Ster. I leave 
to my Nephews, Miles, Caheir, & Thomas Reilly, 
the Sume of Twelve pounds, Ster., to be Equally 
Divided between them. I leave to my son, 
Conor Reilly, my watch and one pistole to 
buy aring. I leave twelve pounds, Ster. to be 
Divided amongst the poor widows of Killeagh, 
Killbride, Crosserlogh, Castlerahan, Monter- 
conaght, and Lorgan, as my Exs. Shall Think 
fitt. LIorder to be putt into the hands of my 
wife the Sum of Eight pounds, Ster., to be dis- 
posed of for Good works that I have ordered her 
to get done. I leave all my stock and personal 
effects, after Deducting all the aforesd. Legacies, 
&e., Equally to be Divided between my four 
sons, viz., Miles, Bryan, Owen, and Thomas 
Reilly ; and it is my will that Miles and Owen 
Reilly, my sons, be my Exs. in Chief in Exe- 
cuting this will. _And to this I putt my hand 
& Seal this Seventeenth day of September, one 
Thousand seven hundred and Sixteen. 


“ Joun REILLY (251, 


‘** Witness present at the signing & sealing 
hereof. 
** Epm. REILLY. 
Henry SHERLOCK. 
JOHN PLUNKETT.” 


This Colonel John Reilly was buried in the 
old church of Kill, in the parish of Crosser- 
logh, barony of Castlerahan, and county of 
‘Cavan, where his tomb exhibits the family 
arms: two lions supporting a dexter hand 
proper; the crest, an oak tree on a mount with 
a snake descending its trunk proper ; motto, 
FORTITUDINE ET PRUDENTIA; and the following 
epitaph : 


‘* HERE LIETH INTOMBED THE BODY OF COLLONEL 
JOHN REILLY, WHO WAS ELECTED KNIGHT OF 
THE SHIRE FOR THE COUNTY OF CAVAN, IN THE 
YEAR 1689, AND DEPARTED THIS LIFE THE 17TH 
DAY OF FEBRUARY, 1645, AND LEFT FIVE SONS 
AND TWO DAUGHTERS. 

‘“‘ THIS TOMB WAS ERECTED BY CONOR, MILES, 
BRYAN, OWEN, AND THOMAS REILLY, GENTLE- 
MEN, TO COMMEMORATE THEIR FATHER, COL- 
LONEL JOHN REILLY, WHO DIED FEBRUARY 17TH, 
171, AGED 70 YEARS.” 

_VI. Myzes REILty, of the city of Dublin, mer- 
chant. Upon the decease of his eldest brother, 
Captain Conor Reilly, without issue, in the year 
1723, he succeeded to the estates of Colonel John 
Reilly (by virtue of the settlement of his father) ; 
and, being a successful merchant in Dublin, he 
added to them considerably by purchases of his 
own, made in the names of Protestant friends. 
He died in Dublin in June, 1731. He married, 
in August, 1698, Mary Barnewall, by whom 
he had issue three sons, viz.: 1. John Reilly, 
born on the 17th of June, 1702; 2. Dominick 
Reilly; 3. Francis Reilly, who all died without 
issue. 

VII. Joun Remy, of the Middle Temple, 
Esq., Barrister at Law. On ‘the death of his 
father, Myles Reilly, of Dublin, he succeeded, 
as tenant for life, to the entailed estate of his 
grandfather, Colonel John Reilly, and to his 
He studied the 
English laws, and became a pleader of some 


own paternal inheritance. 


_ eminence. In the year 1731 he was deputed, by 


the Roman Catholics of Ireland, to solicit the 
English ministry for some alleviation wf the 
Penal Laws, under which their industry was 
paralyzed; and he repaired to London, where, it 
is said, he ruined his fortune to support the 
dignity of his embassy. He levied a fine and 
suffered a recovery to bar the remainder-men, 


13 F2 


2244 


S. Fnonreip 7 mac a o(pbnatan 1. Cogan mac Cloda conallargs 


Ma -10nao. 


and in 1765 sold his estate to his cousin, James 
Reilly, son of Thomas Reilly, who was the 
youngest son of Colonel John Reilly, and last 
in remainder in the settlement of his grandfa- 
ther. After this sale he returned to London, 
where he died, without issue, in the year 1767. 
This John was considered chief of his name in 
Ireland, though he never used the prefix O, even 
under his arms, which he had elaborately en- 
graved for his book plates. Let us now return to 

VI. Brian Reruy of Ballinrink, the third 
son of Colonel John Reilly. 
captain in his father’s regiment of dragoons in 
1689, 1690, 1691, and was included in the Ca- 
pitulation of Limerick. * He married Margaret, 
daughter of Luke Mac Dowell, Esq., of Moin- 
teach, now Mantua, in the county of Roscommon. 
He had by her six sons, viz.: 1. Myles Reilly of 
Tullistown, of whom presently ; 2. Alexander 


He served as a 


Reilly, whose issue is extinct; 3. Matthew Reilly, 
who died s. p. in London in 1780; 4. Luke 
Reilly, who died s. p.; 5. Conor Reilly, who 
died s.p.; and Edmond Reilly, who died at the 
age of 16 in 1732. ‘This Brian died on the 6th 
of September, 1748, aged seventy-two years, as 
appears from his epitaph in the church of Kill, 
in the county of Cavan. 

VII. Myces Rerixy, Esq., of Tullistown, in 
the county of Cavan. He married Sarah, daugh- 
ter of William Fitzsimons, Esq., of Garadice, in 
the county of Meath, and had by her three sons, 
namely: 1. John Alexander O’Reilly (who re- 
stored the prefix 0’), colonel of infantry in the 
regiment of Hibernia in Spain, and who lived 
some years in England, where he died, without 
issue, m 1800, in the fifty-fourth year of his 
age. Of this John Alexander O’Reilly, his 
kinsman, Lieut.-Colonel Don Antonio O’Reilly, 
of Cadiz, speaks as follows ina letter to Myles 
John OReilly, Esq., dated June 30th, 1812: “By 


aNNazZa RIOshachca eiReEaNn. 


(1601. 


odommonead 


the small pedigree that you enclosed I see you 
are nephew to John Alexander O’Reylly, cousin- 
german to my father, who, in the year 1767, 
entered the Spanish service, a cadet in Hiber- 
nia’s regiment, and, in the year 1772, bought a . 
company in Ireland’s regiment, retiring from 
service in 1787, being then captain of grena- 
diers, with the degree of lieutenant-colonel, 
and married Miss Mary Lalor. He was very 
much esteemed both by my father and my 
uncles, and even by all of us, &e. &e. His nice 
education and good breeding foretold” [i, e. in- 
dicated] ‘ his origin; and his capacity, bravery, 
and learning, were worthy of higher employ- 
ments and better protection than he met with 
here. I was entirely ignorant of his death un- 
til I was noticed of it by your brother.”—See 
the Gazeta de Madrid, Del Viernes, 5 De Abril, 
De 1793. 2. Dowell OReilly, of whom pre- 
sently ; 3. Mathew O’Reilly, the father of the 
late William O'Reilly, Esq., of Thomastown 
Castle, Member of Parlameng for Dundalk, and 
of Dowell O’Reilly, Esq., Attorney-General of 
Jamaica, and grandfather of Myles O’Reilly, 
Esq., of Thomastown Castle, who is the head of 
the second senior branch of this family. This 
Myles Reilly, of Tullistown, died in Dublin on 
the 4th of February, 1775, aged sixty-seven 
years and nine months, and was buried in the 
family vault at Kill, in the county of Cavan. 
VIL. Dower O’Remzy, Esq., of the Heath 
House, Queen’s County. He was married twice; 
first, in 1775, to Margaret, daughter of John 
O’Conor Faly, of the city of Dublin; and se- 
condly, in 1780, to Elizabeth, daughter of James 
Knox, Esq., of Moyne, in the county of Mayo, 
by whom he had four sons, viz.: 1. Myles John 
O’Reilly, of whom presently ; 2. James Fitzsi- 
mon O'Reilly, a captain in the British army, and 
lieut.-col. in the Spanish service, stationed at Ma- 


1601.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2245 


was buried in the monastery of St. Francis at Cavan; and his brother’s son, 
namely, Owen, the son of Hugh Conallagh*, was elected im his place. 


jorca on the 2nd of April, 1812; 3. Alexander 
O’Reilly, who died young; 4. Dowell O Reilly, 
a captain in the British navy, and first leute- 
nant of La Durvallante of thirty-eight guns, 
who had one son, Lieut. Dowell O’Reilly, who 
died a few years since without issue. 

IX. Mytes Jonn O’Rettty, Esa., late of the 
Heath House in the Queen’s County, and now 
living in France, in the sixty-seventh year of his 
age. He was married, on the 16th of January, 
1829, to Elizabeth Anne Beresford, eldest daugh- 
ter of the Honourable and Reverend George de 
la Poer Beresford, at the church of Fenagh, in 
the county of Leitrim, by the Rev. George Be- 
resford, Junior ; and he had by her three sons, 
now living, viz.: Myles George O’Reilly, born 
October 30th, 1829 ; 2. George Beresford O’ Reilly, 
born March 3lst, 1832; 3. Henry Tristram 
O’Reilly, born November 29th, 1836; and two 
daughters, Susanna Rachel and Elizabeth Ellen. 

This Myles John O’Reilly is the present se- 
nior representative of Edmond O’Reilly of Kil- 
nacrott ; and if the race of Hugh Conallagh be 
extinct, he is the senior of all the O’Reillys. 
Let us now return to 

VI. Tuomas Retry of Baltrasny, the young- 
est son of Colonel John Reilly, Knight of the 
Shire for the county of Cavan in 1689. He was 
lieutenant in his father’s regiment, and served 
in all the campaigns of 1689, 1690, and 1691; 
he was at the siege of Limerick, and had benefit 
of the Articles of Capitulation of that city, A.D. 
1691. He married Rose Mac Dowell, daughter 
of Colonel Luke Mac Dowell of Mointeach, now 
Mantua, in the county of Roscommon, and had 
by her many children, of whom James O’Reilly 
Esq., of Baltrasny, who was born in 1718, the 
ancestor of O’Reilly of Baltrasny, was the eld- 
est, and Alexander Count O’ Reilly, of Spain, the 
youngest. 


VII. ALEXANDER CounT O’REILLY. He was 
born at Baltrasny, neay Oldcastle, in the county 
of Meath, in the year 1722. He was general- 
issimo of His Catholic Majesty’s forces, and in- 
spector-general of the infantry, grand comman- 
der of the Order of Calatrava, captain-general 
of Andalusia, and civil and military governor 
of Cadiz, and the great favourite of Charles III. 
This is the General Count O’Reilly 
referred to by Lord Byron as having attempted 


of Spain. 


to take Algiers. 

In the year 1786 he employed the Chevalier 
Thomas O’Gorman-to, compile for him a genea- 
logical history of the House of OReilly, a work 
undertaken for the purpose of proving the no- 
bility of blood of his family, preparatory to the 
marriage of his eldest son with the Countess 
Buenavista. This genealogy, duly authenti- 
cated by the Ulster King at Arms, splendidly 
emblazoned and engrossed on full-sized vel- 
lum, in the Latin laneuage, and richly bound 
in red morocco, together with a translation in 
English on smaller folio vellum and similarly 
bound, were transmitted to Count O'Reilly in 
Spain by the late Dowell O’Reilly, Esq., of the 
Heath House. 
in the archives of Spain, and the translation’ in 
the Count’s private library. The sum of 1000 
guineas, or £1137 10s., was paid to the Cheva- 
lier O’Gorman as the expense of this work, and 
of the various books, documents, and attesta- 


The larger copy was deposited 


tions therewith transmitted; the original receipt 
for which, with several originals of the corres- 
pondence connected therewith, the property of 
Myles John O’Reilly, Esq., are now in the pos- 
session of the Editor. This receipt, which is 
in the Chevalier O’Gorman’s own handwriting, 
is worded as follows: 

“‘Rece? from His Excellency, General Count 
O'Reilly, by Col. J. A. O’Reilly, five Hundred 


2246 


GQNNGta RIOShachtTa €IREGNN. 


(1601. 


CGip nool von clomn pm cSeaimn a bape 1 ccfmn ui vomnaill (ama po - 


capniopiomm) po sabpac acc mppfim,7 ag posal pop mumnzip na bain- 
josna m Zach cpm a cciasoaip 1 naompecc la hUa nvomnaill. Conad ape 


& seventy-six pounds nineteen shillings & seven 
pence, & by Dowell O’Reilly, Esq., Five Hun- 
dred & sixty pounds ten shillings & five pence 
sterling, making in all the sum of one thousand 
Guineas, being in full of all accounts for com- 
piling the History of the family of the said Ge- 
neral Count O'Reilly. Witness my hand this 
28th day of October, 1790, ninety. 
‘* Le Cuev" O’GoRMAN.” 

A copy of the English translation, duly at- 
tested by the Ulster King at Arms, is deposited 
in the Office of Arms in Birmingham Tower, 
Dublin Castle, from which a transcript in quarto, 
made by the late Kdward O’Reilly, author of 
the Irish Dictionary, with some curious addenda 
by that industrious compiler, is now in the pos- 
session of the Editor. 

This General Count Alexander O’Reilly mar- 
ried Donna Rosa Las Casas, by whom he had 
four sons, viz.: 1. Don Conor O’Reilly, a lieu- 
tenant in the regiment of Hibernia, who died 
in 1751; 2. Don Dominic O’Reilly, lieutenant- 
general, who died in 1796; 3. Peter Paul, who 
suceeeded as Count O’Reilly, of whom pre- 
sently; 4. Don Nicholas O’Reilly, a brigadier- 
general and Governor of Mon Juich, who died 
in Barcelona, in the year 1797, leaving by 
his wife, Anne Mary Tichbourn, Don Antonio 
O'Reilly, lieutenant-colonel, living at la Plaza 
de Cadiz, on the 30th of June, 1812, when he 
wrote a long and interesting letter to Myles 
John O'Reilly, Esq., of the Heath House, giving 
an account of the members of the O’Reilly 
family then existing in Spain. 

VIII. Peter Pau Count O’REILty, living 
at Havanna, the capital of Cuba, in 1812, as 
appears from a letter written at Majorca on the 
Ist of June that year, by Lieutenant-Colonel 
James O'Reilly, to his brother, Myles John 


O’Reilly, Esq. This Count O’Reilly married 
the Countess Buenavista, by whom he had seve- 
ral children, still or lately living in the Island 
of Cuba, where their property principally lies. 

We will now return to Toirdhealbhach-an- 
jarainn, i.e. Turlough, or Terence of the Iron, 
who was the third son of Edmond of Kilnacrott; 
and the founder of the family of Scarva, in the 
county of Down, whose descendants became 
very respectable. O’Gorman does not mention 
this Turlough ; but it appears from a genealogy 
of the O’Reillys, preserved in a manuscript in 
the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, H. 1.15, 
that Edmond of Kilnacrott had two sons of the 
name Turlough, one called Turlough Gallda, 
or the Anglicised, and the other, Turlough-an- 
jarainn, or of the Iron. 

IJ. TERENCE-AN-IARAINN O’ REILLY. 

Id. Brian O’REILty. 

IV. Joun Remy of Belfast. 

V. Myes Retty of Lurgan. 

VI. Joun Reitiy, Esq. He married Lucy 
Savadge, by whom he had James Reilly, who 
died s. p., and 

VIL. Joun REILty, Esq., ‘of Scarva, M.P. for 
Blessington, and who was High Sheriff of the 
county of Down in 1776, and High Sheriff of 
Armagh in1783. He married Jane Lushington, 
by whom he had: 1. John Lushington Reilly, 
of whom presently; 2. William Edmond, High 
Sheriff of Down in 1815, M. P. for Hilsborough, 
who left one son, John Reilly; 3. James Myles 
Reilly, Esq., Barrister-at-law, who married 
Emily Montgomery, by whom he has six sons, 
John, James, Myles, Francis Savadge, William 
Edmond Moyse, and Hugh, and three daughters, 
Emily, Jane Hester, and Theodosia. 

VIII. Jonn Lusuineton Remy. He was 
High Sheriff of the county of Down, and col- 


1601.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2247 


After the sons of John Burke had gone to O'Donnell, as we have already 
stated, they contiued, whithersoever they went, in company with O’Donnell, to 
harass and plunder the Queen’s people ; for which reason the Lord Justice of 


lector of the port of Galway. He married, in 
the year 1807, Louisa Temple, by whom he had 
five sons, viz.: 1. John Temple Reilly, Esq., the 
present head of the Scarva family; 2. Gustavus; 
3. Robert; 4. William Charles ; 5. James Myles ; 
and six daughters: 1. Isabella; 2. Jane; 3. 
Louisa; 4. Mary; 5. Charlotte; 6. Gertrude. 

“8 Owen, the son of Hugh Conallagh.—This 
Owen, who died this year without issue, was the 
third son of Hugh Conallagh. After his death, 
Maelmora, or Myles, the fourth son of Hugh 
Conallagh, succeeded as Chief of East Breifny, 
and enjoyed this dignity till the Plantation of 
Ulster in 1609. He died in 1635, and with 
him ended the succession of the chiefs of East 
Breifny. The descendants of Sir John O’Reilly, 
however, and several other branches, were re- 
stored to considerable tracts of land. The fol- 
lowing persons of the name of O’Reilly are 
mentioned in Pynnar’s Survey of Ulster, as in 
Harris’s Hibernica, pp. 144-153: 

“1, Shane Mc Phillip O-Rellie, nine hundred 
‘acres in the precinct of Castlerahin ; 2. Mull- 
morie Me Phillip O-Reyley, a thousand acres 
called Iterry-Outra, in the precinct of Tullagh- 
garvy. 
called Liscannor, in the precinct of Tullagh- 


3. Captain Reley, a thousand acres, 


garvy; all his Tenants do Plough by the Tail. 
4. Mulmorie Oge O-Relie, three thousand acres, 
&ec., in the same. His tenants do all plough by 
the Tail.« 5. Mullmory Me Hugh O-Reley, 
2000 acres, called Commet, in the precinct of 
6. Phillip Me Tirlagh, 300 
acres, called Wateragh, in the same.” 


e 
Clonemahown. 


The descendants of some of these persons 
became very distinguished military leaders dur- 
ing the civil wars. Philip, the son of Huzh, 
son of Sir John, son of Hugh Conallagh O'Reilly, 


raised a brigade of twelve hundred -men, com- 


posed chiefly of his own name and family, and 
served with distinction as Lieutenant-General 
in the service of the Confederate Catholics of 
Ireland during the civil wars of 1641. After 
the reduction of Ireland by Cromwell, A. D. 
1652, he retired with his brigade into the Spa- 
nish service in the Netherlands, where he died, 
and was buried in the Monastery of St. Dominic, 
His only son, Hugh Roe O’ Reilly, ) 
by his wife, Rose ONeill, was slain by the 
Cromwellians, in the county of Cavan, in the 


at Louvain. 


year 1651, leaving by his wife, Margaret, daugh- 
ter of Conor O’Brien, Lord Viscount Clare, an 
infant son, Hugh Junior O’Reilly, who was 
After his 
death the next branch of the descendants of Sir 
John O’Reilly, namely, ‘Edmond Boy, the son 


drowned on his passage from Spain. 


of Maelmora, son of Hugh, son of Sir John, was 
considered the O’Reilly. 
in his youth, and served in the King’s lite- 
guards ; but returned to Ireland in 1688, with 


He went to France 


James II., by whom he was appointed governor 
of the county of Cavan. After the capitula- 
tion of Limerick in 1691, he foilowed King 
James into France, where he died in the year 
1693, leaving issue by his wife, Joan, the daugh- 
ter of Brian O’Farrell of Moat, an only son, 
Owen, who married the’ daughter of Colonel 
Felix O’ Neill, by whom he had a son, Edmond 
O’Reilly, who at the beginning of the revolu- 
tion in France, was living at Paris, with the 
rank of Lieutenant-Colonel of Dillon’s regiment, 
and knight of the order of St. Louis. This is 
the last of the race of Sir John O’Reilly that 
the Editor ever heard of. Andrew Count 
O’Reilly, general of cavalry in the Austrian 
service, who died in 1832, was the second son of 
James O’Reilly, Esq., of Ballinlough, county of 
Westmeath. 


2248 GNNadza RIOSshachtd EIREGNN. (1601. 


ym po poncail Apo tupcip na hepeann pop lapla upmuman, of(pbpacaip na 
clome pin .1. Sfan 6g a bayic (a OUbpamap vo Fabarl la opuing vo oaomib 
uaiple buicilepac 1 nouchaigs uf meachaip 1 nub conpin 1pin ccéd peaccmain 
von bliadain pr) 00 bapuccad. Oo ponad ino pin a mi Tun vo pomnpadh. 

Concoban mac muipcfptargs sainb, mic bmam, mic cands ul bmnain vo Ecc 
pa belcaime hi ccpaice concpam, 7 a adnacal 1 maimpoip mnyt. 

Maine msM cumn f vomnaill btn i baoigill cadce dec, mac Tadcc mic 
coippoealbars vecc 6. nouembep 4 a hadnacal 1 noun na ngallt. 

O concobain Sliccigh vonnchad mac cacail oicc vo Zabail la hua noom- 
naill Cod puad mac acda mc Magnupa. Oa hé pocann na sabala rpm 
a. Ua vormaill an ppasbaal a plpa co mbaof ua concobain via Bhat, 7 1a 
caipecélad von Tupcip 7 00 sallaib oublimne ap po tingealtl an lupcip acharo 
jap an tan pin co ppuiccbead a tip budém dua concobain on mbainpiogain, 
7 co léiccpide iapla écc ofpmuman 1. Semup mac spose (baoi 1 larm hy 
lonvain) 00 paiceid a atanda ap ba hi mataip an Janla ice hipin ba bann- 
péitis Dua Concobain. O po ba ponpérl, 7 o po ba veanb la hua noomnanlt 
mnyin, Ro hepsabad ua concobain laip,7 pob ercc(n baile an mocalg vo pao 
pom oua concobaipn map an can pin, 7 cal maoile vo tabaapc vua vomnaill 
DopDdIPE 7 po cuinead ua concobaip dia 1omcoiméce Fo hoilén loca hhapecans 
hi coin conaill. 

Cin ciapla 6ce po clomne mocaipd po aipnidpman doiponead 1 monace a 
atap 1. Riocapo a bine. Ro poncongaip lupcip na heneann .. Cond mountiop 
paippioe coce 50 Lion ploicch 7 poche co mamypcip na buille; 7 appive 
co Slicclé mad o1a cciopad oviob. Cangaccap ap popalfm an lupcip vo 
parcchid an lapla oponga oipime vo na gZallaib baccap In ppopbany: on 
mbainniogain bn mbouloib mépa na mumar®.1. Cuimneac, cill mo ceallocc, 
Eap seibcine, et cetepna. CTangaccapn ona 1pm toiceaptal cevna pochaiwe 
vo paigoimpib na saillme 7 baile ata lucin. Ap tcocc ooibpide wile Fo 
haon barle vo paiccrd an iapla ba ho a mnnitiom ule dol co maimptip na 


about three miles to the north-east of the town 
of Donegal. 


' Their brother John: literally, ‘the brother 


of these sons, 1. e. John Oge Burke.” On a map of parts of the coasts of 


° Craig-Chorcrain, now Cahercorcrane, in the 
parish of Rath, barony of Inchiquin, and county 
of Clare.—See note ’, under 1584, p. 1822, supra. 

* Loch-Eascaigh, now Lough Esk, situated 


the counties of Mayo, Sligo, and Donegal, pre- 
served in the State Papers Office, London, a 
castle is shewn on an island in this lake, oppo- 
site which is written “‘Lo: Eske, where Sir 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2249 


Ireland ordered the Earl of Ormond to put to death their brother, John’ Oge 
Burke, whom we have mentioned as having been taken prisoner in the first 
week of this year, in O’Meagher’s country of Ikerrin, by some of the gentlemen 
of the Butlers. This was accordingly done in the month of June. 

Conor, the son of Murtough Garv, son of Brien, son of Teige O'Brian, died 
about May-day, at Craig-Chorcrain*®, and was buried in the monastery of Ennis. 

Mary, daughter of Con O’Donnell, and wife of O’Boyle (Teige Oge, son of 
Teige, son of Turlough), died on the 6th of November, and was buried at 
Donegal. 

O’Conor Sligo (Donough, the son of Cathal Oge) was taken prisoner by 
O’Donnell (Hugh Roe, the son of Hugh, son of Manus). The cause of this 
capture was this: O’Donnell had received intelligence that O’Conor was spying 
upon and betraying him to the Lord Justice and the English of Dublin; for the 
Lord Justice had promised some time before that he would obtain his own 
territory again for O’Conor from the Queen, and that the young Earl of Des- 
mond (whose mother was the wife of O’Conor), namely, James, the son of 
Garrett, who was in custody,in London, would be let home to his patrimony. 
When this fact was clear and certain to O’Donnell, he took O’Conor prisoner ; 
and Ballymote, which he had previously given to O’Conor, and Cul-Maoile 
[Collooney], were obliged to be again surrendered up to O'Donnell; and 
O’Conor was then sent into imprisonment in an island on Loch-Eascaigh' in 
Tirconnell. 

The young Earl of Clanrickard, whom we have mentioned as having been 
appointed in the place of his father, was ordered by the Lord Justice of Ireland, 
i.e. Lord Mountjoy, to march with all his host and forces to the, monastery of 
Boyle, and from thence, if he could, to Sligo. At the command of the Lord 
Justice, countless numbers of the English, who were in garrison for the Queen 
in the towns of Munster, namely, in Limerick, Kilmallock, Askeaton, &c., came 
to join the Earl; [and] numbers of the soldiers of Galway and Athlone came 
to join the same hosting. When all these had collected together to the Earl, 


Neale Garve chieflie resided.” Ona small islet by a considerable extent of wood, and partly 
near the southern shore of this lough are still _embosomed by the wild craggy hills which here 
to be seen the crumbled ruins of this castle. form the commencement of the great mountain 
This lough is now adorned, on its western shore, district of Barnismore. 


LaLG 


2250 GNNGZa RIOshachta eEiRECann. (1601. 


buille 7 co pliccfe, 7 ap nool 0616 cap puca, appl po cinnyfec apecnam 
foip Fac noineac a pooaib naoinoinse macaine connacc 50 pangaccap co 
hailpmn a ccoiccmé marge luinec, 7 ua mbmam na pmna clomne cata, 7 
Moige haoi an pinnb(noas. 

O Ro clor la hua noomnaill an coicfpcal plois lanmoin pin vo toct Sup 
an maigm pemebeptman po cancclamad a plorg via parsid,7 ni po amppide 
co pamice cap coipppliab 7 can bull 1 mais luince co po puidig a Longpont 
emeac a moncaib pp. Gaccap achad amlod pin cul a ccul ace path 
Robtap 1omda a noeabta 7 a nounoipccne, a 
momapubad, 7 a mmfponccain m ainfcc bacctan a ppoicill pon a pole co po 
palasic on pluag sall,7 50 po paiplec po mtméla o1a cosIb. 

Rangaccan 1apzcain pecéla 50 hua noomnaill Niall sanb mac cuimn, mic 
an calbaig co na sallaib, 7 co na saowelaib 00 tocc anon cap bfpnap 50 
po sab Lonsponc 1 noun na ngall 1 noint(n tine haooa. lan prioy pecél 
oUa oomnaull gZoill oo cocte an 08 pin ba Dos mon lap midiac na maimpcpe, 
7 soll vo bit acca hionaccacc, 7 aga hartpeabad mon na mac mbfchad 4 
na ccéiled noé oian 66 pmol(p {cd pin, 7 ni po,oaman 06 gan ool 1a PFUP- 
Tact MAD DIa TCfopad de. ba hod do poine pum bnusada,7 braccals cenél 
cconaill co na ceftpaib 47 co na mnmlib opagbail plcnoin 10ccaip connacc, 4 
anal o1a amparb acca momcoméce ap cuanaib, 7 chiteapnaib, 7 eaccap- 
cenélanb. Cwd peipm so nupmon a plogs lap oan Slicceac van omb, can 
opobaoip 7 capp an eipne ba cuaid Fo po Zab longpont 1 monad inmll ace an 
ccappaicce do ponnnad ba moa oloace oi mile cfimeann 6 din na ngall bail a 
mbaoi mall sanbua oomnaill co na sallarb. Iméupa uf domnonll po poncons- 
pod ploe pop Opectaib veapmana ora ploganb maple beité occ 1ompude na 
maimiptpe 00 lo7 oaoharg an na cioptarp soll p(cconn a mapaib oaidmillead ° 
nac nat pin cip. 


| acc poncoiméo anorle. 


Nip 66 pomm(c aipfpda po caitpiot an vf pocnaitce [a 
naimyip| ap po bai manbad,7 muducchad veaband,7 o1wbpaccad acc clecap- 


nae oiob pon anole. Oaccap na soll a ccurmse, 7 a ccfnnca moin lap an 


“ Hy-Briuin-na-Sinna: i.e. the race of Brian 
of the Shannon. ‘This was the tribe-name of 
the O’Monahans, who were seated in the county 
of Roscommon, between Elphin and Jamestown ; 
but at this period the O’Beirnes were the chiefs 
of this territory. 


* Clann-Cathail.—This was the tribe-name of 
the O’Flanagans, who were seated in the district 
lying between Belanagare and Elphin, in the 
county of Roscommon. 

 Magh-Aoi-an-Fhinnbheannaigh.—This was 
another name of Machaire-Chonnacht, i.e. Cam- 


1601. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9951 


they determined to march to the monastery of Boyle and to Sligo; and after 
having crossed the Suck they agreed to march directly eastwards along the 
straight roads of Machaire-Chonnacht until they arrived at Elphin of Moylurg, 
Hy-Briuin-na-Sinna", Clann-Chathail’, and Magh-Aoi-an-Fhinnbheannaigh”. 

. As soon as O'Donnell heard of the arrival of this numerous army at the 
place which we have before mentioned, he assembled his forces, and did not 
halt until he crossed the Curlieus, and the [River] Boyle, into Moylurg; and 
pitched his camp directly opposite them [his enemies]. They remained thus 
for some time face to face, spying and watching each other. Many were the 
conflicts, manslaughters, and aflrays which took place between them while they 
remained thus in readiness for each other, until [at length] the English army 
became wearied, and returned in sorrow to their houses. 

After this, news reached O’Donnell, that Niall Garv, the son of Con, son of 
Calvagh, with his [O’Donnell’s] English and Irish, had come from the east [of 
Tirconnell], across Bearnas, and encamped at Donegal, in the east of Tirhugh. 
When O'Donnell received the news that the English had arrived at that place 
he felt grieved for the misfortune of the monastery, and that the English 
should occupy and inhabit it instead of the Sons of Life and the Culdees, 
whose rightful property it was till then; and he could not forbear from going 
to try if he could relieve them. What he did was this: he left the farmers 
and betaghs of Tirconnell, with their herds and flocks throughout Lower 
Connaught, with some of his soldiers to protect them against [invaders from] 
the harbours, kerns, and foreign tribes, [and] he himself proceeded with the 
greater part of his army, across the [rivers] Sligo, Duff, Drowes, and Erne, 
northwards, and pitched his camp in strong position exactly at Carraig, which 
is upwards of two thousand paces from Donegal, where Niall Garv O’Donnell 
and his English were [stationed]. As for O'Donnell he ordered great numbers 
of his forces alternately to blockade the monastery by day and night, so as to 
prevent the English from coming outside its walls to destroy anything in the 
country. Neither of the armies did by any means pass their time happily or 
pleasantly, for killing and destroying, conflict and shooting, were carried on by 
each party against the other. The English were reduced to great straits and 


pus Connacie, now popularly called theMaghery, Strokestown and Castlerea, in the county of 
and applied to an extensive plain lying between Roscommon. ' 


ita G2 


2959 anNaza RIoshachta ElReEann. £1601. 


caltip Clanpoda in po cungaibpec muinzion f vomnaill 1acc, 7 nd elmoir 
anaill vib ma noe1p1b,7 ina ccmaparb Fo Lonsponc 1 vomnall Lap in adailece 
7 lap an ccuimpge a pabaccan of bad ainb{pca bic. Ro tocazypiot pamlard 
50 o11d Sepcemben 50 po deonag o1ia a dfogail 7 a aicbe pon na Zallanb 
an mfo1ac 7 an miimint vo bentpac pop peicclépanb 7 cubaclaib na ppmclo 
pralmefecloag 3a. Meampeip otin na ngall,7 mampcipn na macaipe bicce 1 
mbaccan na Zoill accpubnaman a pponbaup 7 a ppoplonspope mncib,7 apaill 
ele hi cearplén otn na ngall. Gappead oiogal vo bfnc o1a poparb cecib cput 
ac pala 1. cene vo dol 1pm paoap baof led (pm pornorn an coccard) 1 mammpep 
oun na ngall co po loipccead cubacla clanpuaisce, 7 cumoaigte cloc 7 
clanad na mamptpe ancMa. O po amspiocc an Lucc ponaine 7 poncommeéecca 
baot 6 ua noomnaill an na sallarb an ooigsean donnnuadh veapslappnac, jan 
Smuic ced oviad, 7 ofchaige po meabaio uap an mampon po sabpace az 
v1abpaccad a nubcallmioll lucnde, 4 a ccaon cchinnzige an ods 50 TTfopad 
ua oomnanll via paiccid a TTpaicce do Puabaine na ngall, an ba cian led 
aapipiom Fp teactaib do Cop ma docom. Nip 66 héiplevac po pnecenad an 


~ Machajre-beg: i.e. the Little Plain, now 
Magherabeg, a townland verging on the bay, 
about a quarter of a mile to the south of the 
. town of Donegal. Some of the ruins of this 
nunnery are still to be seen. 

* The vengeance.—P. O’Sullevan Beare thus 
notices the burning of the monastery of Done- 
gal on this occasion, in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. 
tom. 3, lib. 6, c. 5, fol. 173: “ Ac regii quidem 
violati monasterij penas luerunt: namque noctu 
sulphur, vel opera alicuius ab Odonello adhibiti, 
vel casu, vel diuinitus accensum monasterium 
subito comburit, partim per wrem tollens. Pro- 
pugnatores partim igne consumuntur, partim 
tecto, & pariete labante obruuntur.” 

Sir Henry Doecwra given the following ac- 
count of these transactions in his Narration: 

‘Now had O Donnell, O Caine, Cormocke 
mac Baron, & all the Cheifes of the Countrie 
thereabout, made all the forces they were able, 
to attend the issue of this intended Meeting of 
my lord & Mee, and had drawne themselues to- 


geather about Cormocke mac Barron’s country, 
where they might be readie to fall vpon either 
of vs as they should see theire best advantage; 
&, conferring with Neale Garuie, I then found, 


_ by O’Donnell’s absence, the countrie behinde 


him was left without guard, the Abbay of Dun- 
nagall was kepte onelie by a fewe fryers, the si- 
tuation of it close to the Sea, & very Convenient 
for many seruices, especiallie for a stepp to take 
Ballyshannon with, which was a worke, the 
manifould attempts & chargeable Preparations 
the Queene had beene att to accomplish, & my 
lord himselfe had soe latelie aymed att, & valued 
equall to this other of meeting him at Black- 
water, did argue would be of, speciall import- 
ance & good acceptation, I concluded, therefore, 
& sent him away (the said Neale Garvie), with 
500 English souldiers, to put themselues into 
this place, which they did on the second of 
August. ~ 

“On the 6th August I receiued a supplie of 
200 Bundells of Match from Sir Arthur Chi- 


1601. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2253 
\ 


distress by the long siege in which they were kept by O’Donnell’s people ; and 
some of them used to desert to O’Donnell’s camp in twos and threes, in, conse- 
quence of the distress and straits in which they were from the want of a proper 
ration of food. Thus they passed the time until the end of September, when 
God willed to take revenge and satisfaction of the English for the profanation 
and abuse which they had offered to the churches and apartments of the 
psalm-singing ecclesiastics, namely, of the monastery of Donegal, and the monas- 
tery of Machaire-beg”, in which the English whom we have mentioned were 
quartered and encamped,and others of them who were in the castle of Donegal. 
The vengeance* which God wreaked upon them was this, however it came to 
pass, viz., fire fell among the powder which they had in the monastery of Donegal 
for carrying on the war; so that the boarded apartments, and all the stone and 
. wooden buildings of the entire monastery, were burned. As soon as the spies 
and sentinels, whom O'Donnell had posted to spy and watch the English, per- 
ceived the brown-red mass of flames, and the dense cloud of vapour and smoke 
that rose up over the monastery, they began to discharge their leaden bullets 
and their fiery flashes, in order that O’Donnell might [hear them, and] imme- 
diately come to them, to attack the English, for they thought it would occasion 
too long a delay to send him messengers. This signal was not slowly responded 


chester, from Knockfergus, & my lord, hauing 
shorthe after performed at Blackwater what 
his intentions were, according to the opportuni- 
tie of that time, withdrewe his Army, And then 
O Donnell, with those forces he had, returned 
& laide seige to these men, which Continewed 
at least a moneth; &, in the meane time, on the 
19th of September, the Abbay tooke fire, by 
accident or of purpose, I could neuer learne, 
but burnt it was, all save one Corner, into 
which our men made Retreate, & through the 
middest of the fire were forced to remoue theire 
Provisions of victuell, & the very barrells of 
Powder they had in store. Captaine Lewis Oriell 
comanded in chiefe. The face of this nights 
worke (for the fire beganne in the Eueninge) is 
easilie to imagination to behould ; O Donnell’s 
men assayling, & ours defendinge, the one with 


as much hope, the other with as good a resolu- 
tion, as the accident on the one side, & the ne- 
cessitie on the other gaue occasion for. The next 
day, when the fllame was spent, & that it ap- 
peared our men had gott a Corner of the house 
which nowe stood by it selfe, & out of Danger 
to be further annoyed by the fire, O Donnell 
sent Messengers of sumons vnto them, offered 
them faire Conditions to departe, terrified them 
with his strength, & their impossibilitie to be 
releeued, but all in vaine; theire passage to the 
sea was still theire owne, by land they sent mee 
word of their estate, & violentlie repelled his 
Messenger. Heere againe I must confess Neale 
Garuy behaued himselfe deseruinghe, for though 
I had, at that time, many informations against 
him that could not but breed some iealousies of 
his fidelitie, yet wee sawe hee Continewed to 


2254 annaza rioshachta E€lREaNN. (1601. 


uppoccya pin la hua noomnanll co na plog ap po cingpiote 50 Dian Denm- 
nfscac amail ap oéine po Péopat ina nopongonb, 7 ma nofonmanb 50 haipm 
abactap a mumncip sur an mampep. 6a pulid porpmaca an puabarnt vo 
b(pcpac pon na sallaib 7 pop a ccaipoib, 7 pon a ccompuilioib po baot can. 
6a owls ofcumams 00 muimntip f Somnall pnfpcal orubpaicte na noce 
baccap pm mamipeip hi ccenpciall ot na ngall, 7 1pm luing bai pon an 
ccuan pon a moncaib. Cec cfna pobcap iacc mucin f domnenll baccan 
poncille 5é po viotaigice pocaide diob. ba vo na huaylib oo pocaip 
6 ua noomnall Mpuide tadce mac catail dice mec DIapMatTa, carptin 
oipveanc vo pfol maolpuancd.erpde. Oo pocain oon Lhe ele com écc, mac 
cuim veanbnacain neil uf oomnaill co ctcmb céoaib anaon mp 1pm opceain 
pin. O po amg mall sapb o vomnaill an eiccfnocil a mbaccan a mumcip 7 
na Zo01ll vo deachaid Zan aimuccad pran la hon an cuca sup an macaipe 
mbfce 50 haapm hi mbaccap opong mop do na Zallanb, 7 vo blpc Lap iace ap 
m cconaip ccétna opuptact na ngall ele baccan 1 ccfnnca ag ua noomnaill 
co na muimncip, 7 po sabpac poinfnn na lunge ag veabaid, 7 as o1ubpaccad 
cap a ccfin Fo poccamn oo1b tap na mopar’ mfoonchanb ipteac 1pin maamperp. 

Cin can do pat ua Domnall via uid vans inmlle an 1onaice a mbaccan, 
7 an ponlion ploig 00 paccaccan 1 TToOIptin na ngall po poncongaip pon a 
mifoaib véinse na veabta, 7 poad pon ccilaib an nip bo mad lap a 
muducéad 1 neccomlann. Oo pdnad po Céd6IN parppiom mnpmn, 7 00 bent a 
longpopc ni ba soipe biucc Don marmptip 7 po cup aponll o1a MuInneip pM 
macaipe mbfce aipmi mbaccan na soll pucc mall sanb lap opuncacc a 
muincipe. La feile micil 00 ponpad po loipccead an maimipcip, 7 00 ponad 
mnpin. 

baoi 6 vomnanll pamlard ipin 1ompurde pin pon sallarb, 7 acca tcabarpt 
a ccfnnca, ] a momcuimse 6 deipead pepcemben 50 dM octoben Zan nac 
n5niom noimveape vo dénam (conna in aip(cc pin 50 ace plop pcél cuca an 
coblac Spamneac vo nangatcan oon taoib badeap oéipimn ofuptzact na 
n5ao1oeal baccap ipin ccoccay. 
the last, tooke such parte as our men did, had of the Counts O’Donnell of Spain and Austria, 
many of his men slaine at this seige, & amongst as shall be shewn in the Appendix. 
the rest a brother of his owne.” 2 A Spanish flee.—Docwra has the following 


¥ Con Oge, the son of Con.—Heis the ancestor notice of the same event : 
of Manus O’ Donnell, Esq., of Castlebar, and also ‘* But now came the Newes of the Spanyards 


1601.] - ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9955 


to by O'Donnell and his army, for they vehemently and rapidly advanced with 
their utmost speed, in troops and squadrons, to where their people were at the 
monastery. Bloody and furious was the attack which they made upon the 
English and their own friends and kinsmen who were there. It was difficult 
and [almost] impossible for O’Donnell’s people to withstand the fire of the sol- 
diers who were in the monastery and the castle of Donegal, and in a ship which 
was in the harbour opposite them ; yet, however, O’Donnell’s people had the 
better of it, although many of them were cut off. Among the gentlemen who 
fell here on the side of O’Donnell was Teige, the son of Cathal Oge Mac Der- 
mot, a distinguished captain of the Sil-Mulrony. On the other side fell Con 
Oge, the son of Con’, the brother of Niall Garv O’Donnell, with three hundred 
others, in that slaughter. 

As soon as Niall Garv O’Donnell perceived the great jeopardy in which his 
people and the English were, he passed unnoticed westwards, along the margin 
of the harbour, to Machaire-beg, where a great number of the English were 
[stationed]; and he took them with him to the relief of the other party of 
_ English, who were reduced to distress by O’Donnell and his people; and the 
crew of the ship proceeded to fight, and kept up a fire in defence of them, until 
they had passed inside the central walls of the monastery. 

When O’Donnell observed the great strength of the place in which they 
were, and the great force that had come to the relief of the English, he ordered 
his soldiers to withdraw from the conflict and to return back; for he did not 
deem it meet that they should be cut off in an unequal contest. This was 
done at his bidding; and he removed his camp nearer to the monastery, and 
sent some of his people to Machaire-beg, where the English whom Niall Garv 
had brought with him to assist his people were [stationed]. The burning of 
the monastery, and this occurrence, happened precisely on Michaelmas-day. 

O'Donnell remained thus blockading the English, and reducing them to 
great straits and exigencies, from the end of September to the end of October, 
without any deed of note being achieved between them during that time, until 
news [at length] reached them that a Spanish fleet’ had arrived in the south 
of Ireland, to assist the Irish who were at war. 


arrival] at Kinsaile, whereupon O Donnell broke made hast the same way, and soe alsoe did my 
upp the seige to march towards them. Tyrone Lord Deputie; and it is true the Countrey was 


2256 GQNNaZa RIOSshachta €lREGNN. 


(1601. 


Sluaicchead la hapo lupcip na hepeann Cond mounciop n mf lun do dul 
No 
Ro, mactaitt 7 po 
muohaigic vaoime 1omda, 7 po paccbad pocaide véccoib Zall 7 saoiwdel 1 
ccimcell am bealais pin ecip Ua néill, 7 Soll F0 mimic 50 peuaip an lupcip 
poaall 7 elang na hucipe pm poop (an nf nob annam laip) 50 mbaof ciumpa 4 
efpclan an bealang pop a cumap oon chup pin. Ro Zab campa ipm ionad ba 
hadailee Laip von Conaip pin. Oo ponad canplen enfpaolca 1 nfnach epoalca 
bai pop an cconain pin lap. 


inullcob. Ni hatmpcfp a mtecca co pamic co bealac an maishne. 
biod copnam 4 comfcc vo gnat o Ua nell an of pin. 


lap cepiocnuccad an caiplém 06 a ccionn mip 
po paccarb va ced paugoiinp ina banoachc. Oo vechad pfin pome ian pin 
50 Shab puaio, 50 hApomaca, 7 cap abhamn mop ipceach vo dol sup an 
bpopt mon do coccbad la hano luptip na heneann Cond bupough chtne 
bhaona wap an tan pm, 7 po bad ag cup Lom iypin bpunt pin bn cefnn cml 
lan na coccbail canaice tTimodibe paosanl an luptip pin budfin la hua neal. 
Ro bth blp Ua néll an pone céona (po cfnn mbliadna 1ap mbap an rupesp) 
do muincip na bamposna ian ccabaipc ain pip 7 ponvead ponpa aga bin 
ofob, 7 baa an banle acc Ua neill 6 pin anall sup an can po a ccainice an 
lurcip nua po via paisio. lan nool 00 1 ccompoccup don pont pin po paccanb- 
plot mumneip Ui neil an boule obél oplarcte nal clon a namazt 7 a nfmcanac 
amail pob amminic leo 56 pin. 

Ip na céolantibh ian ngabcail Campa oon luptip 1pm bpopt pin oo dea- 
chad vo mofmam, 7 00 moimpdecain, 7 00 bpht padaine ap an cin ina 
cimcell. 
vo beilgib an cine, anaill vo citipn ut néill 50 maca naimoide, 50 Spuamoa, 


sntnpoonpoda, 7 po plpad 1omanpfce uatmapn angio Ccoppa aoit 7 anall 50 


(pn nool 06 an ba na bene buipbe vo pala 06 pon bpt bealais 


po manbaice pocade ile an oa pin. Cléc nama po bad mé vo mapbad vo 
muincip an lupcip oloap odccband uf néill. 


Ro puf an lupcip vaimofoin Zac anppoplaimn va prucaip sup m ccampa 


nowe left voide, and noe powerful enymy to en- 
counter withall, more than the pars and the 
difficulties of the passage of the ways.” 

* Bealach-an-Mhaighre. — This is called by 


”» and 


Fynes Moryson ‘the pace of the Moyry, 
on an old map of Ulster, preserved in the State 


Papers Office, London, the fortifications erected 


by Lord Mountjoy on this occasion are marked 
under the name of ‘‘ The Castle and Forte of the 
Moierie Pace,” and a part of the road “ The 


causie of Moierie.” The castle was standing in 


_good preservation in 1834, when the Editor ex- 


amined this locality with great care. The road 
is now called Bothar a Mhaighre, and is still 


1601.]. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2257 


A hosting was made by the Lord Justice of Ireland, Lord Mountjoy, in the 
month of June, to proceed into Ulster. Nothing is related of his progress until 
he arrived at Bealach-an-Mhaighre*. This place was defended and watched 
by O’Neill’s guards: Many men and troops of the English and Irish had been 
often lamentably slain and slaughtered about that pass between O’Neill and 
the English. But-the Lord Justice got an opportunity and advantage of him 
[O’Neill] at this time, a thing which seldom had happened [previously]; so 
that the borders and very centre of the pass were in his power on this occa- 
sion. He then pitched his camp on the spot which he thought proper on that 
road, [and] erected a castle of lime and stone upon a certain part of that road. 
Having finished this castle in the course of a month, he left two hundred 
soldiers to guard it, [and] proceeded forward, with the remainder of his forces 
to Sliabh Fuaid, to Armagh, and across the Abhainn-mor’, he went to Portmore, 
a fortress which had been built four years before by the Lord Justice Borogh, 
who, shortly after its erection, while attempting to lay up provisions in it, came 
to a premature death by O’Neill. Moreover, O’Neill had taken the same fort from 
the Queen’s people (about a year after the death of the Lord Justice); having 
in taking it from them made a slaughter of their men and heroes; and the fort 
had remained-in O’Neill’s possession thenceforward until this time that this new 
Justice came to it. When he came near this fort, O’Neill’s people left it wide 
open to their foes and enemies, a thing that was unusual with them till then. 

On the first days after the Lord Justice had’ encamped in this fortress, he 
set out to view, reconnoitre, and explore the country around. On arriving at 
the borders of Benburb‘, he was encountered near one of the passes of the 
country by some of O’Neill’s kerns, in a heroic and hostile manner, with fierce 
and grim visages, and a frightful fierce battle was fought between them, in 
which many were slain on both sides, at that place ; but, however, there were 
more of the Lord Justice’s slain than of O’Neill’s soldiers. 

The Lord Justice returned back to the camp, in despite of all the over- 

@ 
traceable at Jonesborough, near the boundary as it is translated by P. O’Sullevan Beare, 
between the counties of Louth and Armagh. Pinna superba; now Benburb, a castle standing 
® Abhainn-mhor : i.e. the Great River, always in ruins ona remarkable cliff over the Black- 


called the Blackwater River by English writers. water river, on the borders of the counties of 
© Beann-borb: i.e. the bold ben or cliff, or, Tyrone and Armagh. 


13H 


2258 GQNNQwa RIOshachta EiReEaNN. (1601. 


na ptNS, 7 an cucipim mfopa 50 Lac bat 1pin bpont pin ni veachard aon 
via plogaib ead aoin mile tap pm ipteac 1 ccip Eogain, co po Fill can a 
app hi ppm sall,7 50 bale ata chat a mi Augupc, 1an ppaccbonl gapapun 
ran pont mop, 1 nApomaca, 1 macaipe na cpanncha, 1 mbealach an maigne, 
1 ceappaice pipsupa, 1pm rubap hi cccaplinn, pin ctppaobaile, 1 nopoicle ata 
et cetena. Eo bad méovuccad anma J onéona von luptip a foo, 7 a mcfine 
vo dDeachald 1 Trip E6§am don chun pin, amail na po cumaing plp a ronard ool 
le pé acpi, no a clap oo bhadnoib sup an tan pin. 

lanla op eppex pip poipeill, pGomLdoip, asmap, aiteapac a hucc ppionn- 
ya Saran, pip no snatarccead bht ma pemtoipeac pogla 7 sabalcaip ace 
pfpaib Saran 1 naile cmocaib, bafppde ona Lit bliadam mamm, 7 m 1onco 
an pplompa 1 nepimn amail pemebepcomap. Ro cmallproe ip ccfiomi von 
bhadainy) cap 7 Tapcaipne vo tabarpt don pmonnpa 7 artf(ppac cup do con 
von condin. O Ro has an meabal pin la ppb lonnoan, Ro fing fecan 
50 haclam uplam 1 naghaio m iapla 50 no coipnead, 7] 50 po cospaimlo € 6 
Rac ionad via poile cné ppaoib an barle, 7 ona cap an mbarle amac sup bo 
hficc(n 06 vol 50 zsh epper dia mmodfoth. Nin b6 cian 06 an 04 pin an can 
po popconsnad pop an éicc(n é pon opdccna 7 opupcal(m ma daoipeimid 
oiainm vO muInncip na banpiogna. Ro cupead epoe 1apam o1a Comoa Fo 
THécunda oon Top, 7 Hac aon aga mbaof curv no comaiple, buain, no bad pip 
an ppeilgmom pin po malaptnaisgead 1a0 ma ccltpamnaib compomnte an 
sfcavhai 7 ap ooippib an bale. Ro oféfnnad an tiapla 1pm occmad la 


1 Name and renown.—Mountjoy had certainly 
affected more for the Queen by this expedition 
than either Bagnal, Norris, or Essex, who were 
thought to be more able generals. For a mi- 
nute account of Mountjoy’s expedition into Ul- 
ster this year, the reader is referred to Moryson’s 
History of Ireland, book ii. ¢. 1. 
ing to see how little the Four Masters knew 
about the private political intrigues of Mount- 
joy on this occasion. He proclaimed Tyrone 
twice, and offered £2000 to any one who should 
bring him in alive, and £1000 to any one who 
should bring in his head. The English histo- 
rians of the time remark, with some anger at 


It is astonish- 


the fact, ‘that, so much revered was O Neale 
in the North, that none could be induced to be- 
tray him.” 

Mr. Moore, who had access to the State papers, 
which, however, he very sparingly and cautiously 
quotes, has the following account of an attempt 
made by an Englishman to assassinate the Arch- 
rebel, in his History of Ireland, vol. iv. p. 129: 

“The large reward held out by the Queen 
for Tyrone’s head had hitherto failed, in spite 
of the medly mob of adventurers he had around 
him, to induce a single desperate arm to aim at 
the chieftain’s life. He was far more in danger, 
however, from another and more civilized quar- 


1601.] . ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2259 


whelming opposition which he met ; but, during the period of about a month 
and a half that he remained in that fortress; not one of his forces advanced the 
distance of one mile beyond that place into Tyrone ; so that he returned to 
Fingal and to Dublin in the month of August, having left garrisons at Portmore, 
Armagh, Machaire-na-Cranncha [Magheracranagh], Bealach-an-Mhaighre, Car- 
rickfergus, Newry, Carlingford, Dundalk, Drogheda, &c. It was an exaltation 
of the name and renown of the Lord Justice to have gone that length and dis- 
tance into Tyrone on this occasion, such as his predecessors had not been able 
to do for the three or four years before. 

The Earl of Essex, a brave, energetic, warlike, and victorious man, in the 
service of the Sovereign of England ; a man who had been appointed chief 
leader of plundering and invasion by the men of England in other countries, 
and who had*been in the name and place of the Sovereign in Ireland for half 
a year, as we have said before, began, in the first month of this year, to offer 
insult and indignity to the Sovereign, and [to exert himself] to transfer the 
As soon as this treachery was perceived by the men of London, they 
quickly and actively rose up against the Earl, and chased and pursued him from 


crown. 


one place to another, through the streets of the town, and also outside the town, 
so that he was compelled to go into Essex-house to defend himself: He had 
not been long there when he was summoned and compelled to deliver and sur- 
He'was after- 
wards sent to be confined, as a traitor, to the Tower ; and all those who had any 


render himself up an unarmed prisoner to the Queen’s people. 


share, counsel, participation, or alliance, in this act of treachery’, were quartered, 
and [their members] placed on the gates and portals of the town. The Earl 


ter. In the month of August this year, an En- 
glishman, whose name is not mentioned, went 
and offered to Sir Charles Davers, the new Go- 
vernor of Armagh, to take the life of Tyrone. 
He gave this officer no intimation as to the 
manner in which he intended to effect his pur- 
pose, nor required from him any assistance; and 
the only help he appears to have received was 
the leave given him, at his own request, by the 
Governor, to pass by the English sentries when 
When 
brought, afterwards, before the Lord Deputy, 


going at night into Tyrone’s camp. 


at Knockfergus, he acknowledged having once 
drawn his sword to kill the chief, and was pro- 
nounced to be of unsound mind, ‘though,’ as 
the Lord Deputy gravely added, ‘not the less 
fit, on that account, for such a purpose.’”’. 

© Act of treachery.—An English writer would 
say, ‘act of treason” or ‘high treason.” For a 
full account of the trial and execution of Essex 
the reader is referred to Camden’s Annal. Reg. 
Ellis., A. D. 1601: ‘* Deo gratias egit, quod nun- 
quam fuit Atheus aut Papista, sed spem totam 
in Christi meritis defixerat.” 


13 H2 


2260 ANNaza RIOShachca eiReann. - (1601. 


ves do mi pebnu. Ro bapasead map an ccéona 1pm ccoin pempaice Captin | 
lee oume uarpal eipde bat ag poncongna pop an lapla, ag curoiuccad 7 acc 
comaipliuccad an smom hipin vo denamh. 

Semup, mac cémaip pucd, mic Semuip, mic Slam, mic an lala (ora po- 
saipfoh lapla ofpmuman a huct gaoiwel amal pemebepcmap) vo con a 
ofpbpatap Sfan, mac Tomcup pucd, 7] Merc mump ciapparse, tomar mac 
pacpaiccin, mic Tomaip, Mic Eman, mic TOmany’, 7 pianupa vo lép 50 hull- 
cob 1a nool 1 nemipte, 7 1 nonnlarcce 06 1pm cclht coccaid 1 mbof pm 
salloib, o1appajo cabna 7 conganca pop saoidelaib an cuaipceeipt 7 po anrom 
budfin co nuacthad buidne a manlle pip aga oiclit, 7 axa oucatmuccad etin 
a Ploncampoibh 1 nuapbotaib uaiccneaca, 7 1 nuamtollaib calman. Gaipum 
achaid amlaid pin 50 ppuain an Rioipe pionn peact ann (.1.€ mann mac Sam) 
bnat an Shémup 00 bAt 1 nuamaid pamplohang hi ccompocpaib a Tipe, conad 
é nf vo nome a bnatain saoil 7 senelais 7 a ticc(pna 1 ccpécuipeacht peal 
vo bliadnaib pfime pm vo panuccad mon mbloid mbice cipe 1 mbof, uam 


* Was beheaded.—‘“‘ Caput tertio ictu erat am- 
putatum, primus autem sensum etmotum ab- 
stulit.””— Camden. 

& Captain Lee-—He was the intimate friend 
of Hugh O’N eill, Earl of Tyrone, and the author 
addressed to Queen Elizabeth, en- 
titled, ‘‘ A Brief Declaration of the Government 
of Ireland,” &c.—See p. 1697, and also note ¢, 
under the year 1600, p. 2144, supra. 

» And he resolved, literally, “so that the thing 
he did was.” 

i His relation by kindred: i, e. his blood rela- 
tion. 


of a memo 


K For the small portion of lgnd.—This is an iron- 
ical mode of expressing the White Knight’s petty 
mot#ve for taking the Sugane Earl. It appears, 
however, from the Pacata Hibernia, book ii. ¢. ili., 
that the White Knight had a weightier reason 
than this for seizing on the pseudo Earl of Des- 
mond, After sending his brother John and Pierce 
Lacy to the north of Ireland, the Sugane Earl at- 
tempted to elude his pursuers by taking refuge 


among the glens and fastnesses of Eatharlach, in 


the south-west of the county of Tipperary, where 
he could change, as occasion required, from one 
lurking-place to another; and a poor harper, 
named Dermot O’ Dugan, was now the only one, 
of all his followers, who ventured to afford him 
shelter. It was under this harper’s humble. roof, 
at a place called Garryduff, that a party of sol- 
diers, one night, nearly surprised him as he was 
about sitting down to supper; and his mantle, 
which he,left behind when taking flight, dis- 
covered to them that he had been of the party, 
and followed in chase of him. The harper, and 
two other companions, conveyed the Sugane 
Earl into the thickest part of the fastness, and 
then discovered themselves to the soldiers, and 
left the wood, ‘with the lapwing’s policie,” 
that the soldiers might pursue them, and leave 
the other secure within his fastness. This stra- 
tagem was successful, for the soldiers, supposing 
that the Sugane Earl was one of the three, pur- 
sued them till evening, by which time they had 
arrived in the White Knight's country, where, 
losing sight of their game, they returned to 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 296] 


was beheaded‘ on the 18th of February. Captain Lee’, a gentleman who had 
incited the Earl, and-who was aiding and advising in him this [traitorous] act, 
was likewise executed in a similar manner for the aforesaid crime. 

James, the son of Thomas Roe, sen of James, son of John, son of the Earl 
(who had been styled Earl of Desmond by the Irish, as we have said before), 
having become weak and powerless in the eliath of war in which he was en- 
- gaged against the English, he sent his brother, John, the son of Thomas Roe, and 
Mac Maurice of Kerry (Thomas, the son of Patrickin, son of Thomas, son of 
Edmond, son of Thomas), and Pierce De Lacy, to Ulster, to request aid and 
assistance from the Irish of the North, and remained himself with a small 
party, concealing and hiding himself among his true friends in sequestered 
huts and caverns underground. He remained thus for some time, until, upon 
a certain occasion, the White Knight (Edmond, the son of John) was informed 
that James was in a certain cave on the borders of his (the Knight’s) country: 
and he resolved" to lay violent hands on his-relative by kindred! and pedigree, 


and his lord in treason for some years before, for the small portion of land* 


Barry’s Court, and informed the Lord Barry of 
all that had occurred. On the next morning, 
the Lord Barry, right glad to have so plausible 
a cause of complaint against the White Knight, 
whom he detested, proceeded forthwith to the 
Lord President, to whom he related all the par- 
ticulars of the pursuit of the great rebel; re- 
- marking, that if the White Knight’s people 
had assisted the soldiers, he could not possibly 
have escaped them. The Lord President imme- 
diately sent for the White Knight, who, being 
rebuked by his Lordship with sharp words and 
bitter reprehensions for his negligence in so 
important a business, and menaced that, as he 
had undertaken to be responsible for the loy- 
alty of his whole tribe, he was answerable, 
both with life and lands, for any default made 
by any of them. The White Knight, taking 
these threatenings to heart, humbly entreated 
the President to suspend his judgment for a 
few days, promising that if the said Sugane 
Desmond was now in his territory, or should 


hereafter repair thither, he would give the 
President a good account of him, alive or dead ; 
that otherwise he was satisfied that both his 
lands and goods should remain at the Queen’s 
mercy. With thesé protestations he departed 3 
and having, at length, received intimation that 
the Sugane Earl had taken shelter in a cave in 
the mountainof Slieve Grot [ Sliab 5-Cpoc ], over 
the glen of Aherlow, and was there lurking, with 
a small party, the White Knight proceeded, in 
company with Redmond Burke, of Muscraighe 
Chuire, to perform his task. Coming to the 
mouth of the cavern he called upon the Earl, 
in a loud-voice, to come out and surrender 
himself. The Sugane Earl, however, ‘*pre- 
suming on the greatness of his quality,” came 
forward to the mouth of the cavern, assumed 
command over the whole party, and boldly or- 
dered that the White Knight should be seized 
and secured. Instead, however, of attending to 
his command, they instantly disarmed and se- 


eured himself and his foster-brother, and con- 


aNNaza RIOSshachta €lREGNN. (1601. 


m paibe ma peilb oon mumain act an ucnm pin ina tcapla oon chun pom. 
Ro lamaigeao Sémup lap an Rioime impipide so no sabad lap € 7 00 bit 
iapam 50 concars hi cc{nd an ppeploenrp san papnotn, Zan ppotexion d1appar 
00. O vo puace Sémup fon lam an pnepoenp, puaip a 1omcomm(e san eiplip 
50 mi lal vo ponnad. Oa ipin mi ceona caimcec Pingm mac vonnchaw més 
cantaig (ap a ctcucccaoi Mag cantas mop an can pin) hi ccf an ppepr- 
deny 50 concarg, 7 amanl ap ofine paimcc oon baile po sabdod € ina bnasarce 
von bainpiogain 7 po sab Fingin acca focena op apo Zan ofclhc, 5up b6 an 
bneicthip 7 ap ppotexion na bampiogna po bap aga gabal. Nip 66 conba 
Dopom InnyIn, ap po cuinead pom, 7] Sémup mac tomaip so Saxoib a mi Augupe 
vo ponnad. O do puactatan 1 ppladnaly comaiple Saran po ponconsnad 
an top do taipenad man TesZoaip caitme, 7 cooulta ooib o pm amach so 
cpich a mbaup, né a mbfchand vo pfin toile 0é, 7 a bpmonnpa. 

lonaoh gsobepnona vo be ace lapla ctuadmuman (oonnchad mac Conco- 
bap uf Briain) hi cconntaé an clcipn 616 mapbéa Zobepnona coiceid connact 
(Sin conepp chpoptc) la hUa noomnaall ap in ccompppliab. Ro consmao 
Seppion céice la noécc lap 1 meampetip mnypi mm Feil bnisve na bliaona po 50 
po cpochad pe pin décc an m peppion pm lap. An ctianla céona vo dol i 
Saxoibh hi mip manta co na ofpbnatain oomnall a maille ppp, 7 comnall 
vo teact anoip im Cusnapad, 7 an tiapla oanmain oie é1p1 50 Lficc. 

Cin mianla doce ofpmuman po a oubpamap vo tocc a Saxoib ma lapla hi 
prosman na bliadna po do cud conan .1. Sémup mac Heapnoicc mic Semuip 
mic Sain, do Cuald proe In Saxoib 1 neappac na bliadna po,7 po bat top sup 


ducted them to the White Knight’s castle. For 
this capture the White Knight, who was once 
the intimate friend and most zealous adherent 
to the cause of the Sugane Desmond, received a 
reward of 1000 pounds. The subsequent history 
of the Sugane Earl is painful. Carew, after he had 
read his own very humble and degrading narra- 
tion (in which he attempts to exculpate himself 
by accusing his brother John, and expresses a 
hope that, as the saving of his life is more bene- 
ficial to Her Majesty than his death, it may please 
Her Majesty to be gracious unto him), discovered 
that, in addition to other acts of treason, he had 


written letters to the King of Spain in the year 


1599, assuring him that Nero, in his time, ‘‘ was 
far inferior to the Queen of England in cruelty,” 
and imploring aid ‘“‘in money and munition” to 
enable the Irish to crush her power. Being in- 
dicted for treason at Cork, he was convicted, and 
condemned to be executed. But a motive of 
policy, which he himself, with considerable as- 
tuteness, suggested to the Government, was the 
means of preserving his life.. He reminded them 
that, as long as he lived, his brother John could 
not succeed to the title, and as this appeared, of 
the two, the lesser danger, he was permitted to 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2263 


which he then had; for he possessed not of Munster at that time but that cave 
in which he then was! For this [cave] he seized upon James, and made him 
a prisoner, and afterwards took him to Cork to the President, without asking 
pardon or protection for him. When James was delivered up into the hands 
of the President, he was carefully kept in confinement until the month of July. 
It was in the same month that Fineen, son of Donough Mac Carthy (who was 
at this time called Mac Carthy More), went before the President at Cork; but 
as soon as he had arrived in the town he was made a prisoner for the Queen ; 
but Fineen began to declare aloud, and without reserve, that he had been 
taken against the word and protection. This was of no avail to him; for he 
and James, the son of Thomas, were sent to England in the month of August, 
precisely ; and on their appearance before the English council, it was ordered 
that they be shewn the Tower as their house of eating and sleeping from that 
forward to the time of their deaths, or end of their lives, according to the will 
of God' and of their Sovereign. The office of Governor in the county of 
Clare was held by the Earl of Thomond (Donough, the son of Conor O’Brien ) 
from the day on which the Governor-of the Province of Connaught, Sir Con- 
yers Clifford, was slain by O’Donnell on Coirrshliabh. About the festival of 
St. Bridget of this year, he held a session for fifteen days, in the monastery of 
Ennis, and he hanged sixteen men at that session. The same Earl went to 
England in the month of March, accompanied by his brother Donnell; and 
Donnell returned home about the following Lammas, and the Earl still re- 
mained there after him. 

The young Earl of Desmond, namely, James, the son of Garret, son of 
James, son of John, whom we have made mention of as having come from Eng- 
land as an Earl in the autumn of the past year, went over to England in the 

e 


a lunatic, as their Earl ! 
| According to the will of God.—This sentence 


live. This reason, however, was of little moment, 


for, by the same power which King O’ Neill ex- 


ercised in making him Earl, while the true heir, 
James fitz Garrett, was living a State prisoner 
in the Tower of London, he could now appoint 
his brother John prince of the Geraldines, by 
inauguration, without any regard to the English 
laws of primogeniture, which would compel this 
warlike race to submit to acripple, a coward, or 


was written for Farrell O’Gara, who was very 
loyal to his Sovereign, Charles I.; but the Four 
Masters could not have been sincere in saying 
that the will of God and the pleasure of Eliza- 
beth were concurrent, unless they were fata- 
lists, and believed that ‘‘ whatever is is right.” 
Or else that they believed that heretical princes, 


2264 aNNaza RIOSshachtda ElREANN. (1601. 


an ccéid mf Do seImpead 50 po Ecc an tonbard pin, 7 munbad cuizIM a atap 
1 nashaid na bainmogna, 7 amail po viotaigic a oaoine, 7] a ofSlucc lfhamna 
la salloib, nd biad 0a Chiccead muman ina hen cumn bpom, 7 bapgaipe, 
DoOppa, 7 vogailpi 1 noeavharo in dice mAc hipm, aoin aoibel bea na pneme 
pop vatcapa, 5épeca viappma glaincmid an spéice cemedil sfpalcms, 7 ap 
moaioe pob adban impnioma a oldEad, Fan o1ope mfic, no bnatan uavh pin, no 
via pralup pe @ oiponead ina lonav, ACT Mad uaAtad 4 an tuatad pin pfin 
covappna oo pect an pnionnypa. 

Capzin tmal Ripoepo mac tomaip mic Ripofino vo bht 1 pranpao 
ui néill pe hf na bliadna po anall. Cn Captin pm vo tocc.pa lugnapao 
na bhadna po cocchtfpnaib congmala 6 Ua neill lorp bn ccoiccead lagfn. Ni 
pore piom, capnfp, no capf(m ma nofpna an captin pm vo cpfcarb vo manbeanb, 
DO sabaal bale, 7} daoine, oaipcemb, 7 ceoalaib nm cconncaé chcfplach, hi 
ceonncae chille oapa, hi cconncae ua ppailse 7 hi cconntaé cTioppac anann 


6 lLusnapad Zur an ccfio mi vo SAmpead ap ccionn. 


bupcarsh roccapacha 1. Mac wmluam bune tcepoicc mac Uaceéip crotaig 


baof hn cclfit ui domnall,7 o1a po sop ticcfina pectpiam, 7 tepoite na 


excommunicated by the Pope, as well as anointed 
Catholic sovereigns, ‘‘ were God’s Ministers and 
Agents upon earth,” and that what they do “is 
beyond the limits of subjects to looke into.” 

™ Grecian, recte Trojan. 

» Those few.—James Fitzthomas, the Sugane 
Earl of Desmond, in his Relation to Sir George 
Carew, written immediately before the death of 
this young Earl (Pacata Hibernia, book ii. ¢. 3), 
states that there were then living three others of 
his sept and race, ‘“‘ one in England, my Vncle 
Garrets Sonne, James, set at liberty by Her 
Majestie, and in hope to obtain Her Majesties 
favour ; my brother” [John] ‘in Vlster; and 
my cosen, Maurice fits lohn, in Spaine.” In his 
letter to the King of Spaine, dated 14th March, 
1599, the same James, alias the Sugane Earl, 
tells His Majesty that he was the rightful heir 
to the Earldom of Desmond: 

“TI referre the consideration hereof to your 
Majesties high judgement; for that Nero, in 


his time, was farre inferior to that Queene in 
cruelty. Wherefore, and for the respects thereof, 
high, mighty Potentate, my selfe, with my Fol- 
lowers and Retainers, And being also requested 
by the Bishops, Prelates, and religious men of 
my countrey, have drawen my sword, and pro- 
claimed warres against them for the recovery, 
first of Christ’s Catholike religion, and next for 
the maintenance of my own right, which, of long 
time, hath beene wrongfully detained from mee 
and my father, who, by right succession, was 
lawfull Heire to the Earldome of Desmond, for 
hee was eldest sonne to Iames, my grandfather, 
who was Earle of Desmond ; and for that Vnele 
Gerald (being the younger brother) tooke part 
with the wicked proceedings of the Queene of 
England, to farther the unlawfull claime of su- 
premacie, vsurped the name of Earle of Des- 
mond in my father’s true title; yet, notwith- 
standing, hee had not long enjoyed his name of 
Earle, when the wicked English annoyed him, 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2265 


spring of this year, and remained there until the first month of winter, when 
he died. Had it not been that his father fell [in his war] against the Queen, 
- and that his people and faithful followers were cut off by the English, the two | 
provinces of Munster would have been one scene of sorrow, lamentation, grief, 
and affliction after [i. e. for the loss of] this youth. He was the only living 
heir of the genuine stock; the last [in a direct line] of the remnant of that 
illustrious Grecian” tribe, the Geraldines; and his death was the more to be 
lamented, because there was no heir of either son or brother of his own, or of 
his family, to be appointed in his place, except a few, and those few" eoeeres 
to the law of the Sovereign. 

Captain Tyrrell (Richard, the son of Thomas, son of Richard) had remained 
with O'Neill during the preceding part of this year. This captain came about 
the Lammas of this year, with some retained kerns [which he obtained] from 
O'Neill, into Leinster. It would be impossible to reckon, describe, or enume- 
rate the preys he made’, the deaths he caused, the castles he took, the men he 
made prisoners, or the plunders and spoils he obtained throughout the county 
of Carlow, in the county of Kildare, [and] in the county of Offaly and Tippe- 
rary, from Lammas to the first month of the following winter. 

The Lower Burkes, namely, Mac William Burke (Theobald, the son of 
Walter Kittagh), who was confederated with O'Donnell, and who had been 


and prosecuted wars, that hee, with the most part taunt so commonly bandied about at this time, 


of those that held of his side, was slaine, and his 
country thereby planted with Englishmen.” 

Carew, or his secretary, remarks, on this let- 
ter, that James Fitz Thomas was “ the Impe of 
a borne Bastard,” who had no portion or inhe- 
ritance in any part of Desmond; and yet he ac- 
knowledges that ‘‘hee was, within one year 
before his apprehension, the most mightie and 
potent Geraldine that had been of any of the 
Earles of Desmond, his predecessors. For it is 
certainly. reported that he had eight thousand 
men, well-armed, under his command at one 
time, all which he imployed against his lawfull 
Soveraigne.” 

As to the Sugane Earl being styled “the Impe 
of a borne Bastard,” by Carew, bastardy was a 


to serve political purposes and law fictions, that 
it is hard to believe it on the authority of a bit- 
ter enemy, without very clear evidence. The 
Irish firmly believed that Queen Elizabeth her- 
self was an excommunicated bastard, and there- 
fore should not be submitted to as Sovereign of 
England; while, on the other hand, her English 
suhjects, who believed that her sister Mary was 


-a bastard and an incestuous offspring, were con- 


vinced, we are told, that Elizabeth was ‘“‘themost 
virtuous prince, the meekestand mildest that ever 
reigned; whose beautie” [statis 69!] “adornes 
the world.”—Pacata Hibernia, book iii. ¢. xiii. 
° Enumerate the preys he made.—The original 
could not be literally translated into English, 
because there is only one verb used. The 


131 


2266 QNNAZa RIOSHhachTA eIREGNN. (1601. | 


long mac Ripofipd an iapainn, bai ag mint oo spép a hucc na bainpiogna, 
béoap piodac pocantanac pm anole (cid On Tan po narom o vomnaill cooace 
7] capaccnad fcoppa) sup an cco mi ofppac na bliadna po. Ro é1mg com- 
PUACAD coccald, 7 atcuImmuccad aincplde (conpa, 7 ba he ctepoitc na long 
po ba pota pe vapccad na d1lomdald, 7 pe FadSD na Fippinse 7 pe popaitm(c 
na pala po haccpad fconpa, 50 nofpnpac pliocc wllicc a banc aénbao 1 
nashai Mhfic wlliam cepéicc mac uacéip 50 po atcuippiot 7 50 po 
lonnapbrac ap a atapda é, Sup bo hficcih 06 vol vo pangsid uf oomnailt. Ro 
hommonead Mac wlham ele hi ccfnnnap an cine via é1y) lat pliocc willice, 
7 la cfpoicc na long 1. Ripoffo mac Riocaino (1. ofman an coppam) 7 ap 
eMppium acbfint: mac ofmain an conpann. 

O vo deachard tna Mac wllam tepoicc mac uacéip i ccf uf vomnarll 
po acafin a imnfo 7 a éccualang ppp, 7 amail po corpnead ap a tip. ba 
yaéch la hUa noomnanll an ni pin, an a aot ni po péd a PorIMohin 1 ccpacce, 
uain bai poe co na plogaib, 7 co na pocnaicce hi ppommoin 4 In pporcill na 
nsall vo nangacan dia tip, co na caémnacaip oul 1 neccaincpich opuptacec 
Caefm,na coiccele Lap an anppoplann bai par ma cip budftin. bai Mac ulliam 
ma Fappads on cce1o mi ofppac 50 perl Michilt an ceinv. Ro paoiwh 6 vom- 
nolL an can pin an lion ap ha po Péd vo pocnaicce lap vo dol opiop a 
atapoa hi nann Mhfic wllam. lap nool 06 co na corefpcal 1 nOoipmfoon 
an tine oo pala an Mac wmlhiam pm po hoiponead la pliocc uillice a bunc, 4 
la tepoicc mac Ripofipd an ianaim vo pige 7 00 Eplpabna puippium pop a 
chionn an conaip vo deachand. Ro pisfoh 1omanpfce canctp(nnca Ccopna 
c{écapnae, 7 po sab caé diob as popmitmle a plnsom 7 a nuapalad ora 
pole, 50 po pnaoinead po oforoh pon Ripofpo mac Riocaipo a bupce Fo pio 
manbad'é buolin ipm mbpeypim pin. 
plaic(pa. 


Conad amlaid pin vo cord cpioch a 


Cobhlach Spaimneach vo tecc von ctaeb badfp ofipmn. Oon John ve 


nearest that could be understood in English is 
as follows : 

“There is no reckoning, narrating, or enu- 
merating of what that Captain effected of preys, 


of killings, of town-and-people-taking, of plun- 


ders, and of spoils, in the county of Carlow,” 


&e., &e. 


P Combined, literally, “‘ made ‘one alliance 
against Mac William.” 

4 The son of Deamhan-an-chorrain: i.e. the 
Demon of the Reaping-hook, called by Sir Henry 
Doewra, ‘the Deviil’s Hook Son ;” and by P. 
O’Sullevan Beare (Hist. Cathol. [ber., tol. 180), 


* Richardus Burkus Demonis Faleati filius.”’ 


1601. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2267 


styled Lord by him some time before, and Theobald-na-Long, the son of 
Richard-an-Iarainn, who had always acted on behalf of the Queen, remained 
peaceable and amicable towards each other from the time that O'Donnell 
established friendship and amity between them, to the first month of the 
spring of this year, when commotion of war and revival of animosity arose 
between them; and Theobald-na-Long was the cause of the resuscitation of 
the enmity, and the rekindling of the strife, and the revival of the hatred, that 
[now] arose between them. The descendants of Ulick Burke combined? 
against Mac William (Theobald, the son of Walter), and expelled and banished 
him from his patrimony; so that he was compelled to go to O’Donnell. 
Another Mac William was appointed after him for the government of the ter- 
ritory by the descendants of Ulick and by Theobald-na-Long, namely, Richard, 
the son of Rickard, usually called the son of Deamhan-an-Chorrain‘. 

When Mac William (Theobald, the son of Walter) came to O’Donnell, he 
complained to him of his sufferings and difficulties, and [told him] how he had 
been banished from his country. This circumstance was grievous to Donnell; 
but, however, he was not able to relieve him immediately ; for he was engaged, 
with his troops and forces, watching and restraining the movements of the 
English, who had arrived in his territory; so that he was not able to move 
into any external territory to relieve friend or ally, by reason of the over- 
whelming force that oppressed him in his own territory. Mac William | 
remained with him from the first month of spring to the Michaelmas following, 
at which time O’Donnell sent with him, to visit his patrimony in Mac William’s 
country, as many men as he could [spare]. On his arrival with his muster in 
the very middle of the territory, he was met on the road through which he 
was marching by the other Mac William, who had been set up against him as 
his rival and opponent, by the descendants of Ulick Burke, and by Theobald, 
the son of Rickard-an-Iarainn ; and a fierce battle was fought between them, in 
which they were mutually mindful of their ancient grudges and recent enmities, 
until at leneth Richard, son of Rickard Burke, was defeated, and he himself 
killed in the conflict, and thus came the end of this chieftainship. 

A Spanish fleet’ arrived in the south of Ireland. Don Juan de Aguila was 


tA Spanish fleet.—For a list of the names of the reader is referred to the Pacata Hiberna, 
commanders and captains that came in this fleet, book 2, c. x. P. O’Sullivan Beare gives the 


Toute 


2268 


aNNaz~a RIOShachTd EIREGNN. 


(1601. 


Cola canm an corps po bad Senepal vob. ba he 1onav m po Zabpac pope 
hn ccuan chinn cule ag bun slarplinne bannoan hn ccorccpich cpiche cappach 
vo taob, 7 Cmeorl aoda 1. Odchagy an bappars dice von caoib ap all. An 
ccecc voibsum 50 clnn typaile po téccanbpioc vans fh, 7 ofofn, copnam, 7 
cotuccad an baile cuca pin o na haicctpeabrachaib baccan acca 1onacache 


following account of the arrival of this fleet in 
his Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 6, 
C. Vil. : 

‘‘ Hee in Ibernia dum geruntur, Philippo III. 
Regi Catholico cure fuit Ibernis ferre opem, 
qui iustum exercitum comparari fecit, quemad- 
modum Onellus, & Odonellus petierant. Is ex- 
ercitus cum in Iberniam traijciendus fuisse 
sperabatur, regia classis mittitur in Terceras 
insulas, vt, & Anglorum classi, que ed adijsse 
ferebatur, obuiam iret, & nauibus Indicum au- 
rum, & argentum asportantibus presidio esset. 
Qua mora efficitur, vt exercitus Ibernia desig- 
natus maiori parte sit dissipatus, militibus 
morientibus, & fugientibus. Reliquo preficitur 
Imperator Iohannes Aquila eques Hispanus rei 
militaris peritus, qui in Gallia Armorica contra 
Di- 
dacus Brocherus splendidus eques Hispanus ex 


Gallos, & Anglos magna virtute prestitit. 


Religione Diui Tohannis artibus rei bellice 
terra, marique clarus ex Terceris reuersus regia 
classe, cui preerat, Aquilam accipiens in Iber- 
niam soluit, qui in altum cum fuisset prouectus, 
orta tempestate classis in duas partes diuiditur. 
Altera pars septem nauium Petri Zubiauris 
Propretoris navim sequens, & pelago diu errans 
in Gronium Galletize oppidum ventorum vi de- 
fertur. Altera pars, que maior erat, Preto- 
riam nauem secuta anno millesimo sexcentesimo 
primo mense Septembri in Keansaliam appulit 
Momoniarum oppidum, quod heret portui mag- 
no, & tutissimo meridiem spectanti. Cui etiam 
imminent duo castella hinc, inde, exstructa, 
quibus, si tormentis firmata teneantur, inuitis, 
Ab altera 
parte tumulus surgit, vnde machinamentis dis- 


haud facilis est aditus in portum. 


positis oppidum potest commodius vel oppug- 
nari, vel propugnari. Ab occidente flumen ab- 
luit importando subsidio idoneum. Oppidani 
animo libentissimo, & obuijs (vt aiunt manibus) 
Aquilam Hispanum imperatorem, & eius exer- 
citum (duo millia & quingenti pedites erant) 
expulso Anglorum presidio, in oppidum intu- 
lerunt. In quo Aquila se diu non mansurum 
putans, in Rincarrano altero ex duobus castel- 
lis, que portui imminent, cohortem vnam pre- 
sidij causa ponit: bellicum machinamentum 
vnum é nauibus exponit, causatus illis nauibus, 
quas Zabiaur ducebat, machinamenta sibi de- 
creta portari Inter illum, & cohortium duces, 
Matheumque Ouetensem Dubhlinne Archie- 
piscopum simultates, & dissensiones oriuntur. 
Daniel Osulleuanus Bearre, & Beantrie prin- 
ceps Aquile nunciatum mittit, sibi, & amicis 
suis milites mille armatos esse, & totidem iner- 
mes conscribendos, modo ille suppeditet arma, 
quibus instruantur, eoque numéro se Proregi 
iter occlusurum, & obsidionem prohibiturum, 
donec Onellus, & Odonellus auxilio veniant. 
Aquila respondit (vt Osulleuanus mihi retulit) 
armorum copiam sibi non esse, quod a Zubiaure 
ferebantur, & aliorum etiam Momoniorum ani- 
mos minimé solicitat, Onelli, & Odonelli consi- 
lium expectans. 

‘‘ Bluntus Ibernie Prorex erat tunc temporis 
Anthloniew, quod copias suas accersiuerat, non 
ignatus Hispanos in Iberniam expeditionem 
facturos fuisse, vt exploratores Angli monue- 
runt. Vnde Keansaliam petens cum Comite 
Clanricharde, Angloibernis, Iberniz consilio 
regio, regijsque copijs omnibus, qua hominum 
septem millia continebant, Aquilam obsidione 


1601. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2969) 


the name of the chief who was general over them. The place at which they 
put‘in was the harbour of Kinsale, at the mouth of the green river of Bandon, 
on the confines of Courcy’s country* on the one side, and Kinalea, the country 
of Barry Oge, on the other. On their arrival at Kinsale they took to them- 
selves the fortifications, shelter, defence, and maintenance of the town from 


the inhabitants’ who occupied them till then. 


vallat. Rincarranum haud magno negocio ex- 
pugnat. Keansaliam dispositis in tumulo tormen- 
tis acriter oppugnat. Illi Comes Tomonius, qui 
tunc temporis in Anglia erat, cum octo millibus 
tyronum Anglorum auxilio mittitur. Altera 
parte Regine classis portum occupans oppidum 
tormentorum ictibus discutit. Hispami nihil 
animis consternati properant oppidum propug- 
nare, eo tormento, quod ipsi é nauibus exposue- 
runt, & duobus, que erant in oppido, hinc an- 
glicas naues oppugnatione remouere, inde hos- 
tium castra infestare, & tabernacula diruere 
interdiu pro muro fortiter, & animosé dimicare, 
noctu facere crebras eruptiones, excubitores, & 
eircitores interficere, tormentis clauos infigere, 
quo modo maiore Anglorum, quam Hispanorum 
clade dimicatur: nam in conserenda manu est 
Hispani peditatus nota firmitas. Carolus Mac- 
carrha Iberne cohortis, que ex Hispania pro- 
fecta erat, dux contra Anglos fortiter przlians 
cecidit occisis prius duobus Anglis ducibus, & 
clauis tormento infixis. Principio obsidionis 
Osulleuanus Bearre princeps a Prorege euocatus 
imperio non paruit, causatus oportere se domi 
spectare, vt fines suos 4 finitimis hostibus de- 
fendat, cum quibusdam familiaribus suis fictum, 
atque simulatum bellum gerere incipiens.” 

° Courcy’s country, now the barony of Courcies, 
in the south of the county of Cork, where a 
branch of the family of De Courcy settled early 
in the thirteenth century.—See note ", under 
the year 1204, p. 140, supra. It is stated in 
a manuscript at Lambeth (Carew collection, 
No. 635, fol. 139), that ‘* the Baron Courcie, of 


They quartered their gentle- 


Pobble Courcies, in the county of Cork, is de- 
scended from a second brother to Courcye, 
Earle of Ulster,” and that, “‘ by the marriage 
of the daughter and heir of Cogan, he was of 
great possessions in Munster.” It may be here 
remarked that this notice of the descent of the 
De Courcys was written before the claim to 
the privilege of being covered in the royal pre- 
sence had been set up by the Barons of Kinsale, 
a privilege claimed by this family on the grounds 
that they are the heirs and descendants, in the 
direct line, from the great Sir John De Courcy, 
Earl of Ulster; but they are not his descendants, 
nor had he aught to which they could succeed 
as heirs at the time of his death, except his 
high-mindedness and inflexible valour. 

* From the inhabitants.—“ The Spaniards being 
close at the Haven’s mouth, the wind suddainely 
scanted, whereupon they tacked about and made 
for Kinsale. Within the Towne Captaine Wil- 
liam Saxey’s Company lay then in garison; but 
because the town was of small strength, unable 
to withstand so powerfull an Enemy, order was 
given to Sir Charles Wilmot that they should 
quit the same, and retraite to Corke. Vpon the 
three and twentieth of this instant” [September | 
‘the Enemy landed their forces in the haven of 
Kinsale, and marched, with five and twentie co- 
lours, towards the Towne; upon their approach, 
the Townsmen, not being able to make resistance 
(if they had been willing thereunto), set open 
their Gates, and permitted them, without im- 
peachment or contradiction, to enter the Towne; 
the Soveraigne, with his White rod in his hand, 


QNNA¢a RIOshachtTa eiRECNN. (1601. 


50pm. Ro pannpaz a noaome uaple, 7 a ccaiptm, 7 a naép conganca an 


gach obaip cnomn 7 cloice baof 1pm mbanle. Ro taippnsead leo von bale 
ap a lomsgfp a bpnourpon bivh 7 wshe, opoanaip, pudaip, lucnde, 7° 5ach 
nadanlece anchfna bai leo. Ro cumppioc a lonp(p uata cap a@ naip o1a coi. 
Ro pudighprot a ngonnavha mona, a nadme cartme 7 copanta in Zac 1oncao 
m no bad voig leo a nfpecamve via monnpaighid. Ro opoaispiot beop net 
pane, 7 popcomfeca uadaib imapeach ina nuamb cecca amail po ba 
snaicbéep dob pe ccoce an ou pin, uain ba ofpb ofimm leo gs0 criucpad an 
luptip 50 napmanl na bainpiogna ora ppuabaipc an can po pop a pecela 
via parshio. 

bai monna bale ele don taoib Top vo Cuan chinn tpaile Dian bo hamm 
inn conpain 1 nouchengs an bappag dice hrecenelL Goda vo ponnpaoh. Ro 
cuinplot na Spanish onong oa noagoaomb ipin mbaile pm oa bandache 
map an ccéona. | 

lan cclop na pecel pin vo luptip na hepeann, ni po camp 50 place go cfnn 
craile sup an lon ap lia po péd doneoch baf umal von bammogam 1 nepimn. 
_ Oo mact ann pheprvenp 0a coiccld MumMan so pocnaicte na muman a mantle 
Emp. Co mace iapla clomne procamnd,7 sach cfnn plorg, 7 pocanve bat 
umal oaitne an luptip iy Zconnachtoib co na croic(ptal amanlle pd sup 
in maigm ceéona. Cangacan blop lagshmpsh,7 modish peib po poncongnao 
poppe 6n lupcip on mod pemnaice. 

lan poccain dvoib Fo haoin 1onad po pudigh(d 47 po pamaisf> campa leo 
le haghaio chinn cpaale. Oo paovpac ashad ap pimn coppain appide,7 ni po 
lfcepiot citnap, na comnade, Tatam, no Tionnabnad ooib le hachand poova, 
acc veabra diana, ammaip pippda aga ccabaint doib o1a pole sup bo 
hficcM vo na bapomb rap gach nicchhoaal va ppucappiot Tocc DiaipM fon 


goimg to billet and cease them in severall houses 
more ready then if they had been the Queen’s 
forces.”—Pacata Hibernia, b. 2, ¢. X. 

“ Before their arrival at that place: that is, as 
they had always done at home in Spain, and in 
the Low Countries, where Don Juan de Aguila 
had fought for some time. 

* With the forces of Munster along with him.— 
An English writer would say: “ Thither arrived 


the President of Munster, accompanied by the 
forces of that province.” 

* To come out unarmed.—Moryson states that 
the Spanish captain, who defended Rincorran, 
had his leg broken, and that the Alfiero offered 
to surrender, if he himself alone were permitted 
to hold his arms; that, this being refused, he re- 
solutely resolved ‘‘ to bury himself in the castle, 
but that his company, seeing him desperately 


1601.} ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2971 


men, captains, and auxiliaries, throughout the habitations of wood and stone, 
which were in the town. They conveyed from their ships into the town their 
stores of viands and drink, [their] ordnance, powder, lead, and all the other 
necessaries which they had; and then they sent their ships back again to their 
[own] country. They planted their great guns, and their other projectile and 
defensive engines, at every point on which they thought the enemy would 
They also appoiated guards and sentinels, who should be 
relieved at regular hours, as had been their constant custom before their arrival 
at that place"; for they were very sure that the Lord Justice would come to 
attack them with the Queen’s army, as soon as the news [of their arrival] should 
reach him. 

There was another castle, on the east side of the harbour of Kinsale, called 
Rinn-Corrain, situate in Kinelea, the territory of Barry Oge ; in this town the 
Spaniards placed a garrison of some of their distinguished men, to guard it in 


approach them. 


hke manner. ; 

When the Lord Justice of Ireland heard these news, he did not delay until 
he arrived at Kinsale, with all the forces he was able to muster of those who 
were obedient to the Queen in Ireland. Thither arrived the President of the 
two provinces of Munster, with the forces of Munster along with him“. The 
Earl of Clanrickard, and every head of a host and troop that was obedient to 
the command of the Lord Justice in Connaught, together with their forces, 
arrived at the same place. Thither in manner aforesaid came the Leinstermen 
and Meathmen, as they had been commanded by the Lord Justice. 

After they had come together at one place, they pitched and arranged a 
camp before Kinsale, and from this they faced Rinn-Corrain; and they allowed 
them [the garrison there] neither quiet, rest, sleep, nor repose, for a long time; 
and they gave each other violent conflicts and manly onsets, until the warders, 
after all the hardships they encountered, were forced to come out unarmed”, 


bent not to yield, did threaten to cast him out 
of the breach, so as they might be received to 
mercy; that he consented, at length, to yield; 
that all his people should be disarmed in the 
castle, and that he himself should wear his sword 
till he came to the Lord President, to whom he 
should render it up.” The Spaniards, who thus 


yielded, were eighty-six in number, and four 
women, besides a great multitude of Irish 
churls, women, and children, but no swords- 
men. About thirty Spaniards were slain in the 
defence of this castle, those in Kinsale not making 
one shot at the besiegers, but standing as men 


amazed! P. O’Sullevan Beare asserts that the 


2972 GQNNdZa RIOSshachta elREaHNN. (1601. 


ratpam an lupcfp ap ppaccbcl a mumppiom, 7 a nopoanaip. Ro pann an 
lupcip iaopide ap benlcib mopa na muman go prlrad cionnap no biad a 
ering lo pip an luce naile o1ob baccap m cefnn tpale. 6a don chup pin 
po mapbad Coaupppe 6cc, mac Cainppe mic aedaccam bai na fplp bnacaige 
az mac Japla upmuman. 
Cn laycip cpa baiyde co na plogaib,7 Spainmish chinn cpanle ag cantfm 
5 acc combdiubpaccad anole 1pm ced m{ vo Seimpead go no comaipléice 
an bampriosham 7 an comaple olapla cuadmuman toct so momac longs 4 
laoitns, 50 noaoimb, 7 50 nofsanmanl, 7 50 Lon lap vo cabaip 4 00 compup- 
cacT MuUInTIpE aN pmlonnpa 1 nepinn. lap cceche von lapla 7 von coblac so 
cuan chim tpaile tangaccap 1 ccip vo taob muintipe an lupcip von calao- 
ponc. Chitpe mile pp ba pé an lion bof po mamup lapla tuadmuman oon 
apmanl pm. = OAcbfpac a pole munbud med na mfhmannaige 7 na mfipnige 
po sab an Jupcip ma nlapla cuadmuman, 7 map an pocpaicte pin 50 FRuic- 
pead an porlonsponc pap polam, 7 50 pecaoilpf soll ap a mbantcib mona 


ap a hatte. 


Ro sab lapla cuaomuman campa ap Lot lop pan yin wllinn 


ba soipe vo chionn tpanle vo campa an lupcir. 


Oo biptpac Spanish an can pin ionnpaigio orohche an ¢{chnamain vo 
campa an luptip 50 po manbad pocaive leo, 7 vo bf(pzpac clocha 7 semnte 


English took Rincorran without much trouble; 
but Fynes Moryson, who was present, states 
that they had much to do in taking it.—See 
his History of Ireland, book i. ¢. 2, edition of 
1735, vol. i. pp. 345, 349. 

¥ Advised, po Comainléicc,—This is a very 
strange verb to use. It should be po popcon- 
Bain, or po Fonail, requested or ordered. 

* Many ships.—The Earl of Thomond sailed 
from England with thirteen ships, in which he 
transported one thousand foot and one hundred 
horse.—See the Pacata Hibernia, b. ii. ¢. 15 and 
16, and Moryson’s /istory of Ireland, book ii. 
e. 2, edition of 1735, p. 362. 

* Four thousand men.—It would appear from 
the English authorities that this number is ex- 
aggerated ; but it is highly probable that it was 
reported by spies among the Irish, with a view 


to terrify them, that the Earl of Thomond had 
four thousand men under his command. 

> Taken by.—An English writer would say, 
‘“‘were it not for the great courage and high 
spirits with which the Lord Deputy was in- 
spired, at the arrival of the Earl of Thomond 
with these forces,” &c. 

© Wedges.—P. O’Sullevan Beare expresses it 
better, though more briefly, thus: ‘* Noctu fa- 
cere crebras eruptiones, excubitores, et circitores 
interficere, tormentis clauos infigere,” &e.; and 
Fynes Moryson, who gives a very minute ac- 
count of the siege of Kinsale in his History of 
Ireland, book ii. ¢. 2, has the following refer- 
ence to this irruption, in which the Spaniards 
attempted to cloy the cannon of the English: 
“This Night the Trenches where the Cannon 
was planted, on the East side of the Town, were 


1601.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2273 


and surrender at the mercy of the Lord Justice, leaving their ordnance and their 
ammunition behind them. The Lord Justice billeted these throughout the 
towns of Munster, until he should see what would be the result of his contest 
with the other party who were at Kinsale. It was on this occasion that Carbry 
Oge, the son of Carbry Mac Egan, who was ensign to the son of the Earl of 
Ormond, was slain. 

The Lord Justice, and his forces, and the Spaniards at Kinsale, continued 
to shoot and fire at each other during the first month of winter, until the Queen 
and Council advised’ the Earl of Thomond to go with many ships’ and vessels, 
with men, good arms, and stores, to relieve and succour the Sovereign’s people 
in Ireland. On the Earl’s arrival with the fleet in the harbour of Kinsale, they 
landed on that side of the harbour at which the Lord Justice’s people were. 
Four thousand men? was the number under the Earl of Thomond’s command, 
of this army. Some say that, were it not for the great spirit and courage taken 
by? the Lord Justice at the arrival of the Earl of Thomond and this force, he 
would have left the camp void and empty, and afterwards would have distri- 
buted the English [forces] among the great towns of Munster. The Earl of 
Thomond pitched a camp apart to himself, at that angle of the Lord Justice’s 
camp which was nearest to Kinsale. 

At this time the Spaniards made an assault by night upon a quarter of the 
Lord Justice’s camp, and slew many men ; and they thrust stones and wedges® 


manned with the Lord Deputy’s Guard (com- 
manded by Captain James Blount), with Sir 
Thomas Bourk’s Company, and Sir Benjamin 
Berry’s Company (both commanded by their 
Lieutenants), by Capt. Rotheram’s Company 
(commanded by himself), by Capt. Hobby’s 
Company (commanded by himself), Capt. Nuse’s 
(commanded by his Lieutenant), and by Capt. 
Roger Harvey his Company (himself command- 
ing in chief as Captain of the Watch there at 
Night, for as every Colonel watched each third 
Night, so every Captain watched, in one Place 
or other, each second Night). Also, this Night, 
the Fort on the West side near the Town, be- 
tween the two Camps, which was cast up the 
Day before, was manned by Capt. Flower (com- 


manding in chief) and his Company, by Capt. 
Spencer and his Company, by Capt. Dillon and 
his Company, and by the Companies of Sir Ar- 
thur Savage, Sir John Dowdal, Captain Mas- 
terson, and Sir William Warren (commanded 
by their Lieutenants), together with certain 
Squadrons out of the Earl of Thomond’s Quar- 
ter in our second Camp, which stood in Guard 
without the Trenches. Now, within an Hour 
after night, and some two Hours before the 
Moon rose, it being very dark and rainy, the 
Spaniards, impatient of the Forts building [on a 
Rath on the west side of the town, to guard the 
Artillery |, the day before so close to the Towne’s 
West-gate, and resolving to attempt bravely on 
our Ordnance, planted on the East-side, made » 


eis 


AQNNazZa RIOShachTa ElIREGNN. (1601. 


1 n5onna Mop dopdanap na bamprogna ap oarg Fo po Toipmipccedir imo mbiod- 
badcnib a nobpaccad app, 7 no muippiccip ni ba mo munbad lapla clomne 
Riocenpo ucap ba hepide sup an luct tcapla ma timcell po Fill na Spoanngs 
Ni bai erm oppad aén uaine vo Lo, no vowche 
etvip an oa campa pin san pull aga ooncad (conpa on céd lo po purdig an 


Tap anaip 50 cnn tcraile. 


lupcip a Campa pe hagaid chinn tpaile 50 pecanpat pe pole amanl acpiadan 
plopana. 

O po clop pecela an coblaig Spainnig pm ta hUa neill la hUa noomnanll 
5 la saowdealaib Late cumn ancfna, ba plo po chmnpiot (s10n so nveachpac 
a noisy a nucaple 1 naom 1onao opopbaoh a momaccallma 4 vo €och- 
nuccad a ccomaiple) oaon aiccnfo, 7 vaén mfhmam, Zac TIZeapna cine aca 
opaccbaal 1omchoim(cca, 7 mo(Sla pon a cpich, 7 pop a caoimpfponn, 7 vol 
doib co na pann,7 co na pocnaitte Zan anad, Zan camypium vo cabaip 7 do 
Compupcacc na Spamneach cangacap pop a ccosaipm 7 pop a ccapparns, 
uain ba cpdd cmde, 7 ba m(pccbucmopead mfnman teo a mbt 1pm ane 7 
yn eicefhocal 1 mbaccan aga mbiovbadaib, gan a ccompuptact dia ccaom- 
paicip. | 

Ua Oomnaill ona ba hepide céctup do monnyccain tToct an tTupup yin. 
O po paccand poe luct comfcta pon a Caopaisecc, 7 pop a muincip ule In 
cconntaé Shliceis po apecna1 nuptopac ZGmpid a bonle an mocaiz. baccap 
iad Dponsa Do na maicib baccap ina Papnad O pucape Opian cc, mac bniam, 
Clann cSfam a bine, Mac o1anpmaca marge luincc, Siol cconcubaip puarw, 
O ceallaig, 7 na mate baccan pon ionnapbad ma fpocaipplum a mumain 
pp an mbliadam pm anall 1. Mac mupip crapparge Tomap mac pactpaiccin, 


brave sally with some 2000 Men, and first gave 
slightly towards the Trenches on the West-side: 
but presently, with a Gross, and their chief 
Strength, fell upon the Trenches in which the 
Artillery lay, on the east side, continuing their 
Resolution to force it with exceeding fury, 
having brought with them Tools of divers Sorts 
to pull down the Gabbions and the Trenches, 





as also spikes to cloy the ordnance.”—See edi- 
tion of 1735, vol. ii..p. 20. 
Again: ‘* The Enemy sallying on our Fort, 


guarding our Cannon, cloyed a Demi-Culverin 


of ours, which, being a little crased, was left 
without the Fort, but the next morning it was 
Some of them were 
killed upon the Cannon and upon the powder, 


made serviceable again. 


and the Trenches about the Cannon were, in 
some places, filled with dead Bodies ; for, in 
that particular Attempt, they left 72 Bodies 
dead in the Place, and those of their best Men, 
whereof some were found having spikes and 
Hammers to cloy the Cannon. And, in general, 
among the bodies, many were found to have 
spells, Characters, and hallowed Medals, which 


1601.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 22795 


into a great gun of the Queen’s ordnance, in order that they might prevent their 
enemies from firing on them out of it ; and they would have slain more, were it 
not for the Earl of Clanrickard‘, for it was he and those around him that drove 
the Spaniards back to Kinsale. There was not one hour's cessation, by day or 
night, between these two camps, without blood being shed between them, from 
the first day on which the Lord Justice sat before Kinsale until they [ultimately] 
separated, as shall be related in the sequel. - 

When O’Neill, O'Donnell, and the Irish of Leath-Chuinn in general, heard 
the news of [the arrival of] this Spanish fleet, the resolution they came to, with 
one mind and one intention-(although their chieftains and gentlemen did not 
assemble together to hold their consultation or conclude their counsel), was. 
that each lord of a territory among them should leave a guard and protection 
over his territory and fair land, and proceed, without dallying or delaying, to 
aid and assist the Spaniards, who had come at. their call and instance ; for it 
was distress of heart and disturbance of mind to them that they should be in 
such strait and jeopardy as they were placed in by their enemies, without 
relieving them, if they could. 

O’Donnell was the first who prepared to go on this expedition. Having 
left guards over his creaghts and all his people in the county of Sligo, he set 
out from Ballymote in the very beginning of winter. The following were some 
of the chiefs who were along with him: O'Rourke (Brian Oge, the son of Brian); 
the sons of John Burke; Mac Dermot of Moylurg ; the sept of O’Conor Roe ; 
O’Kelly*; and the chiefs who had been banished from Munster, and were with 
him during the preceding part of this year, namely, Mac Maurice of Kerry 
(Thomas, the son of Patrickin); the Knight of Glin (Edmond, the son of 'Tho- 


it. This Fort his Lordship and his Company 


they wore as Preservations against Death; and 
made good, till he was relieved from” [by | 


most of them, when they were stripped, were 


seen to have scars of Venus Warfare.”—/d. p. 22. 

4 The Earl of Clanrickard.—This perfectly 
agrees with Moryson, who writes: ‘Then his 
Lordship” [The Earl of Clanrickard] ‘and the 
rest charged the Enemy’s Gross, being without 
the Fort, and break them, and did Execution 
upon them, falling towards the Town, and so 
returning thence, entered the West Fort again, 
with little Resistance, for the Enemy abandoned 


13 


‘“‘the Lord Deputy,” &c., &e. 

© O' Kelly.— He was O’ Kelly of Aughrim. The 
head of the O’ Kellys of Screen, now represented 
by Denis Henry Kelly, Esq. of Castlekelly, in 
the county of Galway, served as captain of foot 
under Richard Earl of Clanrickard, and fought 
against the disaffected Irish and Spaniards at 
Kinsale.—See Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, 
p. Ld: 


ee 


2276 AQNNaGZa RIOBhachTA EIREGHN. (1601. 


Rioipe an slfioa Emann mac cémaip, Tadg caoc mac coippdealbargs mic 
matsamna,} o1apmaic mael mac vonnchad még captaish. Coccan na plorg 
yin tna conntae Roppa comain, vointfp conntaé na gaillme, tpra Shiol 
nanmchada, 7 50 Sionainn. Ro caipmiomcuipfoh 1 nach cpoch iaopioe tap 
Sionammn, appide vo1b 00 velbhna még cochlain, 50 pfpaib ceall, 50 mumchinn 
plebe blaoma, 7 50 huib carpin. 

Ro anO vomnaill a ngan opichic la an cnoc opdma parleac m uib caupin 
acc iompuipec ta hUa neill bat acc cocomlad co honmall na deaohaiw. No 
biod munczip Uf oomnaill ag cneaclopecad, 7 acc mopead an Tipe ina 
criméeall m alc baccap bi ppopp in 04 pm, co na baof cfpbad nhe pob 
adailcc do plog Ina lonspoptpom cian Zsaimcc baccan hipuide. 

Oc cualag Apo lupcip na hepeann O vomnall vo bit ag apeenam oia 
nlonnpaigid po cup ppeploent da Coiccld muman .1. Sip Seoinp: Capp go 
ecfitne mlb pargorap a malle pp, 1 naplp oa la pop a conn ap omg 
commfpecta in uipctmalla baoi pon mfmam 06,7 vo sabarl na conaipe coit- 
cmne pain. O po Poin o vomnanll an pnepoeny co na monplog vo teacc 
hi ccompocpaib Charl po apeena pide co na pocnaitce 6 wb caipin pan 


f Ath-Croch.—This was the name of a ford on 
the Shannon, near the place now called Shannon 
Harbour.—See Tribes and Customs of Hy-Many, 
note &, p.5; also note j, under the year 1547, 
p- 1600, supra. 

5 Druim-Saileach : i.e. dorsum salicum.—This 
is mentioned in O’Heerin’s Topographical poem 
as on the confines of Corca-Thine, now the parish 
of Templemore, in the county of Tipperary. It 
is now called Moydrum, and is a conspicuous 
ridge, or long hill, in the barony of Ikerrin, in 
the north of the county of Tipperary, and about 
five miles to the south of the town of Roscrea. 
The following account of O’ Donnell’s movements 
is given in the Pacata Hibernia, book ii. ¢. xiv : 

‘“O’Donnell fearing our forces, &e., &e., durst 
not enter farther into the countrey, because hee 
could not avoyd us, and, at that time, hee had 
no other way to passe, for the mountaine of Slew- 
phelim (which, in Summer time, is good ground 
to passe over) was, by reason of great raines, so 


wett and boggye, as that no Carriage or Horse 
could passe it. 

‘This mountaine is in the county of 'Tippe- 
rarie, towards the Shenan, and from thence to 
come into the county of Limerick, the pas- 
sage is through a straight, neere to the Abbey 
of Ownhy, which Abbey, from the place where 
O’Donnell incamped, in Omagher’s countrey, is, 
at the least, twentie Irish miles. Having (as wee 
thought, by lodging where wee did) prevented 
his passage, there hapned a great frost, the like 
whereof hath been seldome seene in Ireland, and 
the enemy being desirous to avoid us, taking 
the advantage of the time, rose in the night and 
marched over the Mountaine aforesaid; whereof, 
as soone as wee were advertised, wee likewise 
rose from Cassell, whither wee were drawen (mis- ~ 
trusting that they would take the advantage of 
the frost), fower howers before day, in hope to 
crosse him before he should passe the Abbey of 
Ownhy, supposing that it had not been possible 


- 1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2277 


mas); Teige Caech, the son of Turlough Mac Mahon; and Dermot Mael, the 
son of Donough Mac Carthy. These forces marched through the county of 
Roscommon, through the east of the county of Galway, and through Sil-Anm- 
chadha, and to the Shannon. They were ferried over the Shannon at Ath- 
Croch'; and they proceeded from thence into Delvin-Mac-Coghlan, into Fircall, 
as far as the upper part of Sheve-Bloom, and into Ikerrin. 

O’Donnell remained near twenty days on the hill of Druim-Saileach®, in 
Ikerrin, awaiting O'Neill, who was marching slowly after him ; and, while sta- 
tioned at that place, O’Donnell’s people continued plundering, burning, and 
ravaging the country around them, so that there was no want of anything 
necessary for an army in his camp, for any period, short or long. 

As soon as the Lord Justice of Ireland heard that O’Donnell was marching 
towards him, he sent the President of the two provinces of Munster, namely, 
Sir George Carew, with four thousand soldiers", to meet him, in order to prevent 
him from making the journey on which his mind was bent, by blocking up the 
common road against him. When O’Donnell discovered that the President had 
arrived with his great host in the vicinity of Cashel, he proceeded with his- 


for him to have marched farther (with his ca- 
riage) without resting. The next morning, by 
eleaven of the clock, wee were hard by the Ab- 
bey, but then wee understood that O’Donnell 
made no stay there, but hastned to a house of 
the Countesse of Kildares, called Crome, twelve 
miles from the Abbey of Ownhy, so as his march 
from Omagher’s countrey to Crome (by the way 
which hee tooke), without any rest, was above 
two and thirtie Irish miles, the greatest march, 
with cariage (whereof he left much upon the 
way), that hath beene heard of. To overtake 
him we marched, the same day, from Cashell to 


Kilmallock, more than twentie Irish miles, but .” 


our labour was lost. 
Odonnell, with all his forces, rose from Crome, 
and lodged that night in the straight of Conne- 
loghe, where hee rested a few days to rest his 
tired and surbated Troopes. The president, see- 
ing that this lightfooted Generall could not be 
overtaken, thought it meete to hasten to the 


The morning following, 


campe at Kinsale to prevent his coming thither,” 
&e., &e. 

Moryson remarks on the samesubject: ‘ This - 
day (Nov. 23) the Lord President advertised that 
O’Donnell, by advantage of a frost (so great as 
seldom had been seen in Ireland), had passed a 
mountain, and so had stolen by him into Mun- 
ster.” —Hist. of Irel. book ii. c. ii. vol. ii. p. 14. 

» Four thousand soldiers.—Philip O’Sullevan 
Beare’s account fairly enough agrees with the 
Four Masters, where he writes : 

‘“* His Caruus Anglus Momoniarum prefectus 
peditum quatuor millia & equites quingentos, 
ex Proregis castris ductitans in Vrmoniz Comi- 
tatum obviam tetendit: vbi calles, & viarum 
angustias intereluadit.”’—Hist. Cathol., tom. 3, 
lib. 6, c. ix. 

But it is quite clear that the Irish had this 
number from flying report only, for we learn 
from the Pacata Hibernia, book 2, c. xiv., that 
Carew had not half this number of forces. 


~ 


2278 AQNNata RIOshachtd EiREGNnN. (1601. 


duactap upmuman do Mainptip uaitne, do clomn william bpuaie na 
pronna 50 donup luimnis, 7 prap badly co paimicc Zan anad Zan aimypiom 
a lo né6m avhans can mas ipceac 1 nub conaill sabna.. O po pachars an 
Ppeproenp 6 vomnall vo dol camp 1 noansmseib an cipe,7 an po bad 
m(nmanc laip oo dol pop nemnf, pomp co na plog can a ap bn ccfneo an 
luptip. Fo léiccead mac muipip don cup pin la hua noomnaill 50 nopuins 
von ctploce amaille pip oploppuccad, 7 opéccad cloinne muiip. Ccc pinto 
na cine oobpoe Puapaccap cud vo bailaib na cpice in (oanbaogsal 50 po 
Zabaicc leo. Robtapniac a nanmanna fe pnama, caaplén s(pp anova pica, 
7 baile f caola. Ro cuipjioc banoada uataib ip na baulaib tpn. 6a don 
cup céona vo Zabad la hua cconcobain cianppaise (Sfan mac concobain 
ui concobain) a baile pin a. cappace an pull baof ag sallanb cwllfo an 
bhadam map an tan pin 7 vo cod PEIN co na barle 1 ccommand uf oomnarll. 

baoi tna 6 vomnall a ngap vo plccmamn ip na homp(paib pm 6 cconanll 
sabna ag cneachad 7 ac comlomad, ag mopnad, 7 acc onceain Tipe Fac aom 
baof ma compocpaib aga mbaof buain no bad lé sallaib. Oo cuaid ona 
ua vomnaill 1ap pm cap muincinn pleibe Luacna oo cloimn Amlaoibh oo mup- 
ccnaise, 7 co bannoain hn ccaipbpeachanb. Cangaccap imonpo Zao1oil muman 
wle via paigio an ou pin cen mota Mag cantais prabac 1. vomnall mac 
conbmaic na haoine,7 conbmac mac vlapmada, mic Taloce TIZeapna mup- 
cpaige. Ro geallpac na saodil pin wile bit oaon pann 4 oaon aonta loanp 
6 rin amac. ; . 

Imtupa f nell 1. aod mac PIpdopca mic cuinn bacans po pasa’ pide 
(pfccmuin 1ap pamain) cip eogain do dol vo cabaip na Spcimneac pempaice. 
lap nvol 06 can boinn po sab ag cplclopccad cpice bneag 7 mide. Cmd ian 
yin dlantan mde, 7 DoINtean muman can pap Pan 7 noca notpipteap a 
Imteacta Fo poccain 06 50 bannoain ainm 1 mbaoi o comnaill. aot beop 
Sfan mac tomaip puad mic an lapla 1 frocaip ui nell an an cupup pin. 


i The Maigue: a river flowing by Adare in greatest march, with the encumbrance of car- 
the county of Limerick.—See it already men- riage, of which there exists any record.” 
tioned at the years 1464, 1581, and 1600. ‘ Ballykealy : a castle in ruins in the parish 

K That his intention: literally, “that what of Kilmoyly, barony of Clanmaurice, and county 
was intended by him came to nothing;” i.e, of Kerry.—See note ®, under the year 1582, 
that he could not intercept or overtake O’Don-  p. 1781, supra. ‘ 


nell, who performed on this occasion ‘ the ™ Clann-Aulije: a district in the barony of 


1601.) “ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 79 


forces from Ikerrin westwards, through the upper part of Ormond, by the 
monastery of Owny, through Clanwilliam, on the borders of the Shannon, to 
the gates of Limerick, and south-westwards, without halting or delaying by 
day or night, until he crossed the Maigue', into Hy-Connell-Gaura. As 
soon as the President perceived that O'Donnell had passed him by into the 
fastnesses of the country, and that his intention‘ was frustrated, he returned 
back with his force to the Lord Justice. On this occasion Mac Maurice was 
permitted by O'Donnell to go with a part of the army to visit and see 
Clanmaurice. As they were traversing the country, they got an advantage of 
some of the castles of the territory, and took them. These were their names : 
Lixnaw, the Short-castle of Ardfert, and Ballykealy'. In these they placed 
warders of their own. It was on the same occasion that O’Conor Kerry (John, 
the son of Conor) took his own castle, namely, Carraic-an-phuill, which had 
been upwards of a year before that time in the possession of the English, and 
that he himself, with the people of his castle, joined in alliance with O’ Donnell. 

O’Donnell remained nearly a week in these districts of Hy-Connell-Gaura, 
plundering, devastating, ravaging, and destroying the territories of every person 
in his neighbourhood who had any connexion or alliance with the English. 
After this O’Donnell proceeded over the upper part of Sliabh-Luachra, through 
Clann-Auliffe”, through Muskerry, and to the Bandon in the Carberys. All 
the Irish of Munster came to him there, except Mac Carthy Reagh (Donnell, 
the son of Cormac-na-h-Aaoine) and Cormac, the son of Dermot, son of Teige, 
Lord of Muskerry. All these Irishmen promised to be in alliance and in 
unison with him from thenceforward. 

As for O'Neill, i.e. Hugh, the son of Ferdorcha, son of Con Bacagh, he left 
Tyrone a week after Allhallowtide, to go to assist the aforesaid Spaniards. 
After he had crossed the Boyne he proceeded to plunder and burn the territories 
of Bregia and Meath. He afterwards marched through the west of Meath, and 
through the east of Munster, westwards across the Suir; but his adventures are 
not related until he arrived at the [River] Bandon, where O’Donnell was. John, 
son of Thomas Roe, son of the Earl [of Desmond], was along with O’ Neill on 
this expedition. 


Duhallow, in the north-west of the county of who were at this period tributary to Mac 
Cork. It was the country of the Mac Auliffes, Donough Mac Carthy, Chief of Duhallow, 


2980 aNNaza RIOSshachta ElREANN. [1601. 


O do puactatcan mote Zao1del co na pocnaive 50 haon bale po sabpacc 
longpopt oon caob ba tuaid biucc do longpone an lupcip 1 mbél suala Wn 
ccenel aoda. Ro badiomda om clin ploig 7 pocaide, ciZeapna tine, 7 Taoipeac 
cuaite hi ppanpad ui néill, 7 ui comnaill pin maigm pin. Ro bad mon tna 
mfhma 7 mfipneac, 5éppaicceacc 7 sZaipccead an locca baccap an ov yin 
co na baot ano no aincfnn hi ccoice corccfoonb eneann pop nan lapacc pide 
no Dpons Eig oiob a naduat 7 a nupspam, a nuaman, 7 a nm(ccla vo gallanb, 
7 do Zaoiwelaib baccap bn ppmcbipt pss Fup an can ym. Robcan mince 
lomova a Ccata, a ccompama, a ccpeaca, a Ccompuataip, a neccta, a naobina 
pon a mbioobadanb 1 naile cmochaib 50 hale na huaine pm. Ni capla pp 
ona then cap na Tiopcaup, na poplion an napbaod pontanl an cefin baot an 
colmde, ] aN conac as consnam ppit, 7 m can(cc do ponyacc col a cciseanna 
dia 7 po comaillpioc a atta, 7 a comna. Ro bad oaslion cabanta 
cacaip ] cloite cata via neccnatcib cid anal oo na poipmb baccap ipin 
ERoplonsponc yin cen co mbiccip péin mle as consnam pm apole, oa 
nveonaiccead dia vob catuccad co péitpeac pion calma oaoin mfhmann, 4 
daon aonta can c{nd a mppl,7 a natapoa ipin ofd(nocal cinnta 1 cfcomnac- 
cap a mbiodbava aca don cup pin. 

Oo paccpac tna Zaodil 1omcumsa mop pon sallonb op nip léiceproc 
Féep, apbap, no uipcce, Tulse, no Teme dO parsid Campa an lupup. Oaccan 
acthai amlaid yin ag iomcomect pop anole 50 po paotd von lohn sZenenal 
na ppaimneac pepibeann co hincleite vo parszhd Zao1deal o1a aplac ponpa 
anonll vo Campa an lupziy dionnpaiccid aon do1dcib, 7 Fo poicpead pem an 
curv ele de 1pm o1dce cédna Uap baccan pémm 1 Momcumpa mon ag Fallon 
peib po baccap na Zoll a noicumans as Zaodealarb. 

Ro sabpac amis cenél cconall, 7 eoccain ace pppivad a ccomainle 
imon ccaingin pin 7 baccan Cpaoncadars pm pé im cinnfo ap aon comaiple 


uain ba pi aiple uf nell san a monnparcerd iecip PO cedoip act Zabarl poppa 


" Bel-Guala, now Belgooly, a village in the 
townlands of Lybe and Ballindeenisk, in the 
parish of Kilmonoge, barony of Kinelea, and 
county of Cork. 

° The tribes, or the hosts. This seems to have 
been copied nearly word for word from the Life 
of Hugh Roe O'Donnell, by Cucogry O’Clery. 


® Not to attack.—Had O’Neill been permitted 
to fight the English after his own fashion, on 
this occasion, he would, most undoubtedly, 
have gained such another victory as he had al- 
ready acheived at Ath-buidhe, in Ulster. But 
the impatience of the insolent and inefficient 
Spanish commander at Kinsale, the self-sufti- 


2 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2281 


When the Irish chiefs and their forces met together at one place, they 
encamped a short distance to the north of the camp of the Lord Justice at Bel- 
Guala", in Kinelea. Many a host and troop, and lord of a territory, and chief 
of a cantred, were along with O’Neill and O’Donnell at this place. Great were 
the spirit, courage, prowess, and valour, of the people who were there. There 
was not a spot or quarter in the five provinces of Ireland where these, or some 
party of them, had not impressed a horror and hatred, awe and dread of them- 
selves among the English and Irish who were in opposition to them, till that 
time. Frequent and numerous had been their battles, their exploits, their 
depredations, their conflicts, their deeds, their achievements over enemies in 
other territories, up to this very hour. They met no mighty man whom they 
did not subdue, and no force over which they did not prevail, so long as the 
Lord and fortune favoured, that 1s, so long as they did the will of their Lord 
God, and kept his commandments and his will. Efficient for giving the onset, 
and gaining the battle over their enemies, were the tribes® who were in this 
camp (although some of them did not assist one another), had God permitted 
them to fight stoutly with one mind and one accord, in defence of their religion 
and their patrimony, in the strait difficulty in which they had the enemy on 
this occasion. 

The Irish reduced the English to great straits, for they did not permit hay, 
corn, or water, straw or fuel, to be taken into the Lord Justice's camp. They 
remained thus for some time watching each other, until Don Juan, the General 
of the Spaniards, sent a letter privately to the Irish, requesting them to attack 
a part of the Lord Justice’s camp on a certain night, and [adding] that he him- 
self would attack the other part of it on the same night; for they [the Spaniards] 
were reduced to great straits by the English, as the English were distressed by 
the Irish. = 

The chiefs of the Kinel-Connell and Kinel-Owen began to deliberate in 
council on this suggestion; and they were for some time dissentient on adopting 
this resolution, for it was O'Neill’s advice not to attack? them immediately by 


ciency of the Spaniards, and the impetuous ar- and Fynes Moryson, will shew that O’Neill 
dour of young O’Donnell, all united to overrule could have defeated the English without much 
the counsels of the wary O’Neill. The two fighting on this occasion : 

passages following, from the Pacata Hibernia “Our Artillery still played upon the Towne 


Bag 


2982 QNNaza RIOShachta €lREGNN. (1601. 


ipm cinta 1 mbaccan 50 neiblivip la gopta,7 veapbaid sac ardilcce po bad 
clpbad vob amanl acbat anall ora noaomb, 7 o1a neocab ancha 56 pm. 
Ua vomnaill ona ba cnad cmde,7 ba hadnan laippide coipceact Ppl copaofo 
7 pM hficcfnocal na ppoinneac san a ppuptacc ap a neccualang 1 mbaccap 
vlamad a écc, NO A O1DEAD, NO DIT a DaOIne Tiopad de, conad pain vEI;o Leo 
pO des1D campa an luptip vo Fuabaipt amail po hfpbad pyiu. 

Cn can po compoiccp1g an ordce endalca m po cimnpios an nopalgio pin 
sabarcc Zaoiil a n{ppada ag 7 manyfee F0 p(ppda ponppaoilig 50 mbaccan 
eplam immiteacca. bactcan mplpnags a naps pM apoile ag 1omcopnam 
coppals lounpaiste na hooce pin vo bhit ag sac opoms oiob. Conad amlad 
po cémmnigpioc na copib coipiseib comnanca cata, 7 ma ccpib lopccbuiomb 
Ufpda, Yonmana guatainn pm sualainmn, 7 wllinn pp huillinn oap mmealbopo 
a Longponc amac, Ua neill go ccenél eoccain sup an lion cTappuytaip ma 
pappad oo ampsiallonb, 7 oo wb eacoach ulad ina ccipe comnape pop Lic. 
Ua vomnaill co ccenél cconaill,7 co na uppadaib, 7 co ccomnaccaibh anctna 
pn cerpe anonll. Ina mbaot ouaiplb muman, lagfh,7 pean mide co na poc- 
paride (doeneoc po éipi5 1 ccommbard coccond Zaoidel o1ob,7 po baoi Pon 
ionnanbad1 nullcoib pmp an mbliadainy: anall) baccan pide ipin tplp cipe 
50 cobparg céimpigin Fan cumaye Pon plos nate. 

lan napecnam 0616 van an Longpont peaccoap amlaid pm, oo pala popoal 
-conaine 7 Sfepan pliccid vo na yloccaib la voban dopca na howce co nan 
upmanp(ccan a neolang paigid Zup an 1onad cinnce baofs pon 1onchaib campa 
an lupcip 50 polly) laofan abanac. Acbeanac anaile go po cup neac paint 
vo Zaoelaib pabad 7 pémaipneip sup an-lupcip 50 mbaccapn Zaooil 7 


(as it had done all that while) that they might 
see wee went on with our businesse, as if we 
cared not for Tyrone’s comming ; but it was 
withall carried on in such a fashion, as wee had 
no meaning to make a breach, because we 
thought it not fit to offer to enter, and so put 
all in hazard untill wee might better discover 
what T'yrone meant to do, whose strength was 
assured to be very great, and wee found, by let- 
ters of Don Iohn’s (which wee had newly inter- 
cepted), that hee had advised Tyrone to set upon 
our Campes, telling him that it could not bee 


chosen, but- our men were much decayed by the 
Winter’s siege, and so that wee could hardly be 


able to maintaine so much ground (as wee had 


taken) when our strength was greater, if we 
were well put to on the one side by them, and 
on the other side by him, which he would not 
faile for his part to doe soundly.”—Pacata Hi- 
bernia, book ii. c. xx. 

‘If Tyrone had laine still, and not suffered 
himself to be drawn to thé plaine Ground by 
the Spaniards Importunity, all our Horse must 
needs have been sent away or starved.”—Mory- 


1601.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2283 


any means, but to keep them still in the strait in which they were, until they 
should perish of famine, and the want of all the necessaries of which they stood 
in need, as some of their men and horses had already perished. O’Donnell, 
however, was oppressed at heart and ashamed to hear the complaint and distress 
of the Spaniards without relieving’ them from the difficulty in which they 
were, even if his death or destruction, or the loss of his people, should result 
from it; so that the resolution they finally agreed to was, to y attack the Lord 
Justice’s camp, as they had been ordered. 

‘When the particular night upon which it was agreed they should make this 
attack arrived, the Irish cheerfully and manfully put on their dresses of battle 
and conflict, and were prepared for marching. Their chiefs were at variance, 
each of them contending that he himself should go foremost in the night’s 
attack ; so that the manner in which they set out from the borders of their 

camp was in three strong battalions, three extensive and numerous hosts, 
shoulder to shoulder, and elbow to elbow. . O'Neill, with the Kinel-Owen, and 
such of the people of Oriel and Iveagh-of-Uladh as adhered to him, were in a 
strong battalion apart; O'Donnell, with the Kinel-Connell, his sub-chieftains, 
and the Connaughtmen in general, formed the second battalion ; [and] those 
gentlemen of Munster, Leinster, and Meath, with their forces, who had risen 
up in the confederacy of the Irish war, and who had been in banishment in 
Ulster during the preceding part of this year, were in the third battalion, [and 
marched] steadily and slowly, without mixing with any other host. 

After they had marched outside their camp in this manner, the forces mis- 
took their road and lost their way, in consequence of the great darkness of the 
night, so that their guides were not able to make their way to the appointed 
place, opposite the camp of the Lord Justice, until clear daylight next morning: 
Some assert that a certain Irishman’ had sent word and information to the Lord 


/ 


son’s History of Ireland, book ii. ¢. ii. 

4 Without relieving.—The construction of the 
originalis here clumsy. It should be: “ O’Don- 
nell was grieved at heart on hearing of the 
distress of the Spaniards, and replied boldly to 
O’Neill, at the council, that it was shameful 
to listen so long to the complaints and re- 
' proaches of the Spaniards without going to 


their relief; and added, that it was his opinion, 
that they were bound in honour to accede to 
the proposal of the Spanish general, even if they 
foresaw a certainty of losing their own lives, 
and of the annihilation of their forces.” 

. A certain Irishman.—lIt is stated in the Pa- 
cata Hibernia, book ii. c. xxi., that this infor- 
mation was sent to the Lord President of Mun- ~ 


Pas 


2284 aNNaza RIOshachta eiRedann. [1601. 


ppanms ag cabainc amaup pain an avhong fp conad cape pin baot an lupcip 
J anmanl na bainmogna an a mbfpnadenb baosanl, 7 an a nfnagib enoalca 
Do copnam an Campa pm a mbioohbaoab. O vo deachmd dopcata na 
hoidce pon cculaib, 7 6 po bad ponerl polly an laoi vo Cac 1 ccoitcimne ba 
hann clccomnaccain 00 muincip ut nell coct 1 ccompocnaib muinnzipe an 
luptip san patuccad vo na saoidealaib iccip, 7] o pobcap anppuimte vo 
beancyac caob piu ace ammipium ppt a nopouccad, 7 FM a nimnell, 7 Oanmain 
pa ua noomnanll 7 pmy an luce nanle oo pala pon popoal amail pemebepc- 
mat. 

Od connaine an luptip an ni pin no léicc Dionmada diana ofinmnfoaca via 
monnpaiccid 50 po mfpecpace pop mumncip ui néill Fo mbavan asa manbav, 
| aga muduccad aca tcpaothad, 7 acca tranuccad 50 no binad a ctice nd 


a pé vo bnacachaib o10b 7 50 po manbad oaoine 1omda uaochanb. 


ster by Brian Mac Hugh Oge Mac Mahon, a 
principal commander in the Irish army. The 
statement is as follows, as printed by Stafford, 
who was present at the time: 

‘* Tuesday the two and twentieth of Decem- 
ber, Brian Mac Hugh Oge Mac Mahon, a princi- 
pall Commander in the Irish Army, whose eldest 
sonne, Brian, had many yeares before been a 
Page in England, with the Lord President, sent 
a Boy unto Captaine William Taaffe, praying 
him to speake unto the Lord President to be- 
stow upon him a bottle of Aquavite, which the 
President for old acquaintance sent unto him. 
The next night, being the three and twentieth, 
by the same Messenger, hee sent him a Letter, 
praying him to recommend his Loue vnto the 
President, thanks for his Aquavite, and to wish 
him the next night following to stand well upon 
his Guard, for himselfe was at the Councell, 
wherein it was resolved that on the night afore- 
said (towards the break of day), the Lord De- 
putie’s Campe would be assaulted both by Ty- 
rone’s Armie (which lay at their backes), and by 
the Spanyards from the Towne, who, upon the 
first Allarme, would bee in readiness to sally.” 

The same fact, and the straying of the Irish 


forces, are mentioned by Fynes Moryson, book ii. 
¢. l., in the following words : 

“This evening one of the chief Commanders 
in Tyrone’s Army, having some Obligations to 
the Lord President, sent a Messenger to him 
for a Bottle of Usquebaugh ; and by a letter 
wished him that the English Army should that 
Night be well upon their Guard, for Tyrone 
meant to give upon one Camp, and the Spaniards 
upon the other; meaning to spare no man’s life, 
but the Lord Deputy’s and his. Don Jean del 
Aguila after confessed to the Lord President, 
that, notwithstanding our Sentinels, he and Ty- 
rone the night following had three Messengers 
the one from the other. All the Night was 
clear with Lightning (as in the former Nights 
were great Lightnings with Thunder) to the 
Astonishment of Many, in respect of the Season 
of the year. And I have heard by many Horse- 
men of good credit, and, namely, by Captain 
Pikeman, Coronet to the Lord Deputy’s Troop, 
a Gentleman of good estimation in the Army, 
that this Night our Horsemen set to watch,: to 
their seeming, did see Lamps burn at the points 
of their staves or spears, in the midst of these 


Lightning Flashes. Tyrone’s Guides missed 


1601.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2985 


Justice, that the Irish and Spaniards were to attack him that night, and that, 
therefore, the Lord Justice and the Queen’s army stationed themselves in the 
gaps of danger, and certain other passes, to defend the camp against their ene- 
mies. When the darkness of the night had disappeared, and the light of the day 
was clear* to all in general, it happened that O’Neill’s people, without being aware 
of it, had advanced near the Lord Justice’s people ; but, as they were not pre- 
pared, they turned aside from them to be drawn up in battle array and order, and 
to wait for O'Donnell and the other party, who had lost their way, as we have 


before stated. 

As soon as the Lord Justice perceived this thing, he sent forth vehement 
and vigorous troops to engage them, so that they fell uponO’Neill’s people, and 
proceeded to kill, slaughter, subdue, and thin them, until five or six ensigns‘ were 
taken from them, and many of their men were slain. 


the way, so as he came not up to our Camp by _ been, we had then cut the Throats of all the 
Night, as the Spaniards ready in Arms hourly Rebels there assembled, for they never made 
expected, but early about the Break of next’ Head against them that followed the Execution, 
day.” nor scarce ever looked behind them, but every 
° The light of the day was clear.—“ Cum clare Man shifted for himself, casting of his Arms, 
illuxisset admirans Onellus Aquilam nonirrum- and running for Life, insomuch as Tyrone after 
pere, nec pugne signum dare,” &c.—O’Sullevan. ' confessed himself to be overthrown by a sixth 
' Five or six ensigns.—Moryson writes: “The Part of his Number, which he ascribed (as we 
Irish Rebels left 1200 bodies dead on the field, must and do) to God’s great Work, beyond 
besides those there killed in 2 miles chase; we Man’s capacity, and withal acknowledged that 
took nine of their Ensigns, all their Drums he lost above 1000 in the Field, besides some 
and Powder, and got more than 2000 Arms. 800 hurt. This we understood by the faithful 
And had not our men been greedy of the Spa- Report of one who came from him some few 
niard’s Spoil, being very rich; had not our days after, and told the Lord Deputy moreover, 
Foot been tired with continual watchings long that he tormented himself exceedingly for this 
before in this hard Winter’s Siege; had not our _ his overthrow. 
Horse especially been spent by ill keeping and ‘« After the Battle the Lord Deputy, in the 
Want of all Meat for many Days before (by midst of the dead bodies, caused Thanks to be 
Reason of Tyrone’s Nearness, so as the Day be- given to God for this victory ; and there pre- 
fore this Battle it had been resolved in Council _ sently knighted the Earl of Clanrickard in the 
to send the Horse from the Camp for Want of Field, who had many fair Escapes, his garments 
Means to feed them; and if Tyrone had lain _ being often pierced with shot and other Weapons, 
still, and not suffered himself to be drawn to and with his own Hand killed about 20 Irish 
the plain Ground by the Spaniards’ Importu- Kerne, and cried out to spare no rebel. The 
nity, all our Horse must needs have been sent Captiue Spanish Commander, Alonzo del Campo, 
away, or starved); had not these Impediments avowed that the Rebels were 6000 Foot and 500 


2286 


GQNNGCa RIOShachTa EIRECGNN. 


(1601. 


Ua vomnaill ona do place prde do Lecaorb mumncipe uf neil rap ppaom- 
ead poppa, 7 po sabpioe pon aplac 1ompurs pon lucc an teichd ag nfpcad 


Horse ; whereas the Lord Deputy had but some 
1200 Foot and less than 400 Horse. So before 
Noon his Lordship returned to the Camp, where 
commanding Vollies of Shot for joy of the Vic- 
tory, the Spaniards, perhaps mistaking the 
Cause, and dreaming of the Rebels’ Approach, 
presently sallied out, but were soon beaten 
into the Town, especially when they saw our 
Triumph, and perceived our Horsemen from the 
Hill on the West-side to wave the, Colours we 
had taken in the Battle, and among the rest 
especially the Spanish Colours (for such most 
of them were, the Rebels in woods not using 
that martial Bravery). ‘The same day an old 
written Book was shewed to the Lord Deputy, 
wherein was a Prophesy naming the Ford and 
Hill where this Battle was given, and foretel- 
ling a great Overthrow to befal the Irish in 
that place.”-—Book ii. ¢. i. 

P. O’Sullevan Beare gives the following brief 
account of the defeat of the Irish at Kinsale, 
Hist. Cathol. Iber., tom. 3, lib. 6, ¢. iv: 

‘** Odonellus, & eius socij Orruarkus, Macdi- 
armuda, Macsuinnius Tuethius, Okealla, Ray- 
mundus Baro, Rothericus, & Capharius fratres, 
Daniel Ochonchuris Sligachi frater, Gulielmus 
Burkus Raymundi Baronis frater tria militum 
millia, quorum equites quandringenti erant, 
mouent, vt Aquile ferant opem. His Caruus 
Anglus Momoniarum prefectus peditum qua- 
tuor millia, & quingentos, & equites quingentos 
ex Proregis castris ductitans in Vrmonize Comi- 
tatum obuiam tetendit: vbi calles, & viarum 
angustias intercludit. Odonellus magnis ignibus 
accensis, vt castrorum speciem ostenderet, pre- 
ter Caruum exercitum noctu incolumem duxit 
& diuersis in locis Onellum quadraginta dies 
spectat. Caruus voti minimé compos copias suas 
ad Proregem ad Keansaliam reducit. Onellus 
occasionem nactus Midhiam inuadit, vbi Anglos, 


& Angloibernos longé, Jatéque depredatus do- 
mum spolijs onustus reuertitur, occiso Darsio 
Platine domino, qui secutus ad prelium laces- 
sebat- Inde Keansaliam media hyeme petit. 
Eum comitabantur Macmagaunus, Macguier 
occisi in Coreachano agro frater nomine Cucon- 
nachtus, Raynaldus Macdonellus Glinnie prin- 
ceps, Macmoris Lacsnae Baro, Richardus Tirel- 
lus, & alij ex sua familia, qui omnes duo millia, 
sexcentosque pedites, & equites quadringentos 
expeditos ductitabant. Cum quibus Onellus in 
Vnde 
ambo in ea Carbris parte, que Kenealmeka di- 
citur, castra collocant. 


Oriria Barria Odonellum assequitur. 


E6 venit Osulleuanus 
Bearrus ducens copias suas, cum quibus Portu- 
castelli fuit, & Hispanos trecentos 4 Zubiaure 
acceptos duce Alfonso Ocampo. Osulleuanum 
secuti sunt Oconchur Kierrius, Daniel Osulle- 
uani Magni filius, Magnus, & Daniel Macsuin- 
nij, & alii equites. Hine omnes profecti apud 
Culcarrinnam syluam mille passibus ab hoste 
Vbi inter 


se, & Hispanos Anglos medios magnis difficul- 


locata castra vallo circummuniunt. 


tatibus continent, prohibentes, ne ad eos ex op- 
pidis, & ciuitatibus, aut vila parte frumentum, 
commeatusué supportetur, & intercipientes eos, 
qui castris pabulandi causa exibant. Quamo- 
brem Angli non longo spacio progressi, vt ha- 
beant celerem receptum, in angustijs minus 
libere, & audacter pabulantur, & accepto modico 
detrimento, vel hoste procul viso sarcinas proij- 
cientes fugiunt: inde dies omittentes noctu 
pabulantur: postremd nullo modo pabulatum 
castris egeredi audent: & quidquid antea com- 
meatus habuerunt, totum pené consumunt. Ita 
eos primum inedia, ‘mox fames, tandem pesti- 
lentia inuasit. Ibernorum exercitus copia rerum 
abundabat. Hispani quoque in plures dies victu 
minimeé carept, quem, vel ipsi ex Hispania vex- 
erant, vel oppidum prebet, ab hostium irrup- 


/ 


1601.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2287 


O’Donnell advanced to the side of O’Neill’s people after they were discom- 
fitted, and proceeded to call out to those who were flying, to stand their ground, 


tionibus tuti, & sua virtute, & munitionibus, 
quas fecerant. Optimates Momonij, qui edvsque 
neutram partem iuuabant, se Catholice religioni, 
patrieque defenderide non defuturos, auxilio 
quam celerrimé venturos pollicentur. Iberni 
milites legionarij, & auxiliares, quorum virtute 
fretus Anglus locum tenebat, Onello per inter- 
nuncios promittunt ad eum ante triduum se 
transituros, fidemque ceeperunt implere, bini, 
terni, & deni Anglum deserentes. “Quod sl om- 
nium transitio spectaretur, iam de Anglo fuisset 
actum: nam ex quindecim millibus militum, 
quos habebat obsidionis initio,octo millia, ferro, 
fame, frigore, morbo occubuerunt, quorum pars 
maior erant ex Anglia nuper auxilio missi ty- 
rones inertes, periculi, & laboris impatientes. 
Reliquorum vix duo millia erant Angli, ceteri 
Iberni, & Angloiberni. Quibus periculis Pro- 
rex perculsus statuit obsidio excedere, Cor- 
cacham se recipere, & dumtaxat menia defen- 
dere, quo modo sine conflictu, & vulnere Catholici 
victoriam possent obtinere. Cui rei peccata 
nostra obstiterunt. Imprimis Aquila missis 
crebro litteris iterum, atque iterum vehementer 
contendit, vt Onellus se cum ipso coniungat. 
Onellus, Osulleuanus, & alij ne rem eo discri- 
minis deducant, sentiunt, sed potius Ibernorum 
transitionem, & hostis fugam spectent. Odonel- 
lus, & alij plures contrarium censent. Itaque 
vicit maior pars prudentiorem. Dies constitui- 
tur, qua Onellus sub matutinum crepusculum 
iuxta hostium castra consistat, vt Aquila fa- 
ciens ex altera parte eruptionem se cum illo 
coniungat. Qua de re Aquile littere ad Onel- 
Onellus 


triplici acie mstructa in eum locum ire con- 


lum date 4 Prorege intercipiuntur. 


tendit. Angli, qui Catholicorum consilium mi- 
nimé ignorabant, adhuc noctu eo in loco, in 
quem Onellus venire constituit, tympanorum 
militarium strepitu, tubarum clangore, -bom- 


bardarum sonitu falsam, fictamque pugnam 
ineunt. Aquile exploratores missi simulatam 
speciem pugne fuisse retulisse traduntur. Odon- 
ellus cum acie sua totam noctem imperitia du- 
Onelli, & 


Osulleuani acies pugne classicum audientes, & 


cum itineris errans procul aberat. 


arbitrate Aquilam esse egressum in destinatum 
Vnde 


hostibus in munimenta regressis, cum in quiete 


locum celeri cursu noctu perueniunt. 


summa, & silentio castra vidissent, stratagemma 
intellexerunt: & paululum sub armis moratz 
cxlo iam albente vitra prefixum sibi locum 
paulo pereunt, & primi ordines Osulleuani aciei, 
qu prima erat, non longé a vallo subsistunt, 
non tamen ab hoste visi humili tumulo conspec- 
tum prohibente. Cum claré illuxisset, admirans 
Onellus Aquilam nec erumpere, nec pugne siy- 
num dare, cum Osulleuano, Hispanis cohortinm 
ductoribus, & paucis alijs in tumuli cacumen 
ascendit. Wnde hostis castra intentissima medi- 
tatione contemplatur. Ea vallo, fossa, turribus, 
tormentis erant munitissima, milites m armis, 
equi frenati. Ibernos etiam numero seperabant: 
nam multi ex castris, precipué Momonij pabu- 
latum, & frumentatum, pridié illius diei pro- 
fecti aberant. Odonellus cum acie tertia non 
peruenerat.- Quamobrem Onellus ex ducum 
sententia rem in alium diem differens, agmina 
pedem referre iubet. Que quingentos passus 
reuersa Odonellum offenderunt, & eodem mo- 
mento temporis Proregis equitatus adfuit, quem 
vadum proximi fluminis traiectum Odonellus 
cum equitatu suo adcurrens per idem vadum 
repulsum in fugam vertit. Rursus Proregis 
equitatus reuersus vadum traijcere tentat. 
Odonellus ratus illum inter se, & vadum tacilé 
opprimi posse, loco sensim cedit, quod dum 
facit pars ipsius equitatus vel casu, vel alicuius 
dolo, & perfidia agmen ipsius Odonelli auersis 
equis ingressa pedites cogit ordines laxare. In- 


ANNQGza RIOshachTa ElREGNN. [1601. 


na hiopgaile pon a muinncin badém. 50 po meaband pon a slop, 7 pop a Fut 
la hoandble na haccallma 7 na haposapma bao occa pon cac a ccotcmne 
ay cungid pon a paonclannaib camplum ma pocain ace 1ombualad fp 
mbiodbadaib. Acbeipead pra ona sup b6 nap, meabal orb an ni nfmsgnac 
po tnallpac 1. a nopomanna vo cabaipt ppl a naimoib amanl nan bo bép ora. 
mbunad pném mam 56 pin. =Olcec cfna nion b6 conba vépom 1 nofinsfine ucon 
6 no meabaid don cécna bom po meabaid oa Zac onuing ele O1a1d a@ Nod. 
(cc nama sé po ppaoinead popna nip bo hadbal an lion po manbad o10b an 
uaite Locta a tTospama im caitpéccad ina mbaor peampa. 

6a pollup diomda dE 7 a& naInpPén Fon Zao1delaib slan Poola oon cup pa, 
op po bad mfince paon madma pia nu&tad oibpioe pon ilcéocib vo sallanb 
map a nopuim vo tabaine pp a naimoib 1 ngopc sliad, 7 1 mbApn baosail (in 
sac ainm a ccompnaicoip) sup an late hipin. 6a haobal, 7 ba ofpim in po 
pacebad ipin margin pin 5€p bs vedbal an Won. vo pocpaccap ann, uc po 
paccbad Féppaiveact 7 saipecead, 4 pact 7 poconac, uaiple 7 1onnpaiccid, 
oupleacap 7 aipbeant, emeadc, 7 eangnam, cpdodacc 7 copnam, cpabao 4 caoin 
mp npr Zaoideal 1pm romain(ce pin. e 

Cangaccap an saoidealpl6s im ua néill, 7 1m va noomnaill can a nop 
plan co himyp eoccanam an aoharg pm. Wonuan cpa ni hamanl po paoilpioc 
cToct on tupup yin baccan in avhaag pin an pob 1omda aitbfp rom aicbfhp, 
Meaingnf{c 7 month, ouba,7 oosailp: po baof peacnon a longponc m sac 
capo, 7 ni po tuilpiot a paime, 7 nf mon ma po ppomnispioc. 6a huccmall 
anbpaid camapmancac a ccomainle ap poccam 1 cclnn anole vob conad fo 
po cimnpiot po ded O nell 7 Rudpaise ofpbnacain ui vomnaill co na nup- » 
paohaib,7 mate lite cum ancfhna do poad tan a nap dia TTIMb Ormolsarl 
a cence, ] a ppfpaince an eaccain cenelaib, O vomnaill aod puad, Remann 
Idem Onellus, & Odonellus 


compositi pedites sese fugz mandant. seque illis fore auxilio. 
p if g 


facit Onelli agmen, & etiam Osulleuani hostibus 
minimé cogentibus, & principibus frustra recla- 
mantibus. Ita panico terrore omnes perculsi 
sunt, vel potius diuina vindicta fugati. Fugien- 
tibus regius equitatus nihil audaciter heret, 
putans in insidias se trahi, Multi equites Iberni, 
qui ab Anglorum parte stabant, Catholicos frus- 


tra confirmant, suadentes, vt in prelium redeant, 


eos in pugnam reducere non potuerunt Osulle- 


r 


uanus 'Tirellus Hispani duces cum paucis re- 
uersi hostis impetum partim sustinuerunt. Hoc 
die succubuerunt ex Onelli exercitu pedites 
ducenti. Ex Anglis tres viri nobiles. Comes 
Clanrichardus ob virtutem equitis Auratinomine 
a Prorege donatur.” 


“ Generosity,—The word eanznam has two 
| 5 


1601.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2289 


and to rouse his own people to battle [and so continued], until his voice and 
speech were strained by the vehemence and loudness of the language in which 
he addressed all in general, requesting his nobles to stand by him to fight their 
enemies. He said to them, that this unusual thing which they were about to 
do, was a shame and a guile, namely : to turn their backs to their enemies, as 
was not the wont of their race ever till then. But, however, all he did was of 
no avail to him, for, as the first battalion was defeated, so were the others also 
in succession. But, although they were routed, the number slain was not very 
great, on account of the fewness of the pursuers, in comparison with those 
[flying] before them. 

Manifest was the displeasure of God, and misfortune to the Irish of fine 
Fodhla, on this occasion ; for, previous to this day, a small number of them had 
more frequently routed many hundreds of the English, than they had fled from 
them, in the field of battle, in the gap of danger (in every place they had en- 
countered), up to this day. Immense and countless was the loss in that place, 
although the number slain was trifling ; for the prowess and valour, prosperity, 
and affluence, nobleness and chivalry, dignity and renown, hospitality and gene- 
rosity", bravery and protection, devotion and pure religion, of the Island, were 
lost in this engagement. 

The Irish forces returned that night, with O'Neill and O'Donnell, to Inis- 
Koghanain”. Alas! the condition in which they were that night was not as 
they had expected to return from that expedition, for there prevailed much 
reproach on reproach, moaning and dejection, melancholy and anguish, in every 
quarter throughout the camp. They slept not soundly, and scarcely did they 
take any refreshment. When they met together their counsel was hasty, un- 
steady, and precipitate, so that what they at length resolved upon was, that 
O’Neill and Rury, the brother of O'Donnell, with sub-chieftains, and the chiefs 
of Leath-Chuinn in general, should return back to their countries, to defend 
their territories and lands against foreign tribes ; [and] that O’Donnell (Hugh 


meanings, prowess and bounty; and as it is W Inis-Eoghanain: i. e. Eoghanan’s Island 
here used as a synonime with eineac, hospi- (Eoghanan, a diminutive of Eoghan, being a 
tality, it is quite clear that it is intended to be man’s name common amongst the ancient Irish), 
used in the latter sense, although it has been now Inishannon, a small town near Bandon, in 
hitherto almost invariably used in the sense of the county of Cork.—See note‘, under the year 
prowess. 1560, p. 1581, supra. 


13M 


2290 ANNaZia RIOshachta elREaNn. [1602. 


mac plain a bune, Capt aod mur mac Roibfinod vo dol don Spamtt dac- 
caoine @ nmnig, 7 a necculaing la pig na Spcimne. 

Ro paccaibpioct na mate pn opong via panncarb coiccpice 1pm mumain 
asa hadmillead o1a néip 1. Captm tipial, 7 an curio ele vo clomn ctrlam 
a bine, apall vo dacimb uenple cen mo tac. Ro onomspiocc na hapo 
gaol pm a. Ua néill,7 ua oomnall a ccfmnap,7 a nuaccapanacc pm 
oua Suilleban beippe 1. 00 domnall mac oomnaill mic vianmacca an ba 
heipoe cinnpopt clnnaip ba pip via pannpom 1pm mumam, an cell 7 an 
cnodact an tan pm. : 

An tnfp la 00 mi Januann po mfbaid an maiom pin pon Zaoiwdealarb. 


COIS CRIOST, 1602. 
Cloip Cmoyc, Mile, Se céo, a 06. 


lan ppaomld madma cinn cpale la sallaib pon saoiealaib (amanil po 
pemobao cna) an cpfp la vo mi Tanuann, 7 pop an uatad Spainnfe vo 
mumcip pis na Spoainne vo pala a maille pa an can pin, Ro sab ofinmne, J 
oapact, 7 ucmorlle mon mfhman Ua vomnaill (od puad) co na po cul 4 
na po loms hn pamme pm pé cm la 4 ceopa nowdce 1anam go po bm ceill via 
cabaip 1 nepinn conad {i caple po cinn1 nfcmaing na pee pin (tne comaiple 
ui neill gion Sup bo lainn Laipprde a comaipléccad 00) Ene ovpaccbarl, 7 ool 
von Spamn oionnpalgio an ms an 3. Pilip vo cuingio puillead pocnaicce, 7 
compuptacca uadaib, uain po bad 0615 Laippiom sun bo he pi na Spaimne 
aon po bad m6 comcpead a Pormtin, 7 lap ap lane congnam lap dn ceac 
no cCataispead oan cinn an cpfiom cacolice Romanaig oo sper 7 anaill ele 
cpa na bond Fp Zaovdealarb ap a ccoct cétup oo Zabarl Epeann ap mSpainn 
amail ap pollap i1yin leabap o1amd amm in leaban sabala. 

O po pspto pom an comainle pm bactan iacc vo paesa pom ma 
Caoimteact vo dol pon an fecpa yin, Remann a banc mac Slam, Capzimn 
aod mupp mac Robfno, 7 plaitpi mac prot uf maoilconaipe atann tcosxaide 


* Hugh Mus.—This is a mistake of the tran- The Irish were defeated at Kinsale on the 24th 
scriber for Hugh Mustian or Mostyn.—See the of December, 1601, according to the old style 
Pacata Hibernia, book ii. c. xxii. then observed by the English, but on the 3rd 

Y On the third day of the month of January.— of January, 1602, according to the Irish and 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2291 


Roe), Redmond, the son of John Burke, and Captain Hugh Mus*, the son of 
Robert, should go to Spain to complain of their distresses and difficulties to the 
King of Spain. , 

These chiefs left some-of their neighbouring confederates in Munster, to 
plunder it in their absence, namely : Captain Tyrrell, the other sons of John 
Burke, and other gentlemen besides them. These high Irishmen, namely, 
O’Neill and O’Donnell, ordered that the chief command and leadership of these 
should be given to O’Sullevan Beare, i.e. Donnell, the son of Donnell, son of 
Dermot; for he was, at this time, the best commander among their allies in 
Munster, for wisdom and valour. 

On the third day of the month of January’ [1602] this overthrow was given 
to the Irish. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1602. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred two. 


After this defeat of Kinsale had been given by the English (as has been 
already written), on the third day of the month of January, to the Irish and 
the few Spaniards of the King of Spain’s people who happened to be along with 
them at that time, O'Donnell (Hugh Roe) was seized with great fury, rage, and 
anxiety of mind; so that he did not sleep or rest soundly for the space of three 
days and three nights afterwards ; so that he despaired of getting succour in 
Ireland. At the expiration of that time, the resolution he came to (by the 
advice of O’Neill, who, however, gave him this advice with reluctance), was, to 
leave Ireland, and go to Spain to King Philip UI, to request more forces and 
succour from him; for he thought that the King of Spain was the person who 
could render him most relief, and who was the most willing to assist those who 
always fought in defence of the Roman Catholic religion ; and, moreover, on 
account of his [Philip’s] attachment to the Gaels, from their having first come 
out of Spain to invade Ireland, as is manifest from the Book of Invasions. 

Having come to this resolution, the persons he selected to accompany him 
on this journey were: Redmond Burke, the son of John; Captain Hugh Mus 
[Mustian], son of Robert; and Flaithri, the son of Fithil O’Mulconry’, a 


Spaniards. wasa Franciscan friar, and, at this time, the Pope’s 
* Flaithri, the son of Fithil O’Mulconry—He Archbishop of Tuam. He was a very learned 


Poem 2 


2292 GNNQZa RIODShachta ElREGNN. (1602. 


ound .S. pnonpep pob anméana ovdpom, 7 apanll ora pamnmumncin buofin cen 
mo tac. Jan ccloipceacc na comaiple pin la cac a@ ccoitcinne po bad lon 
do tThuaige 7 do neméle an lamcomainc anpporll, 7 an solmaipceneac 
ofpmaip, 7 an nuallguba anoaccaomteach vo ponad peacnom longpuipe ui 
vomnaill an can pin. Ro bad ofitbin ooibpiom innpm (o1a pRlpoaoip € an 
can pm) vaip. ni pacactap a ccoonac nac a ccomypis ctalmanoa an can pm 
imp Epeann ace pollamnuccad placipa uaipcib 6 pin alle. 

Oo deachaid imoppa ua vomnarll co na prallac 1 Lung hi ccuan an caiplem 
an 6. la vo mi Januapn, 7 pop 1omluaid cinpfo na céd Zaoite oup painice 
cap an ppaippcce pppaoc aasméil Fo po Zabpac cuan an 14. la oon mip 
ceona 1 ccompocpaib von cpuimne, barle oipveanc eipoe hi progacc na salipe 
ipm ppainn 7 ba hannpoe baot cop bneogsain ppp a porci bnigancia po cum- 
pact peacc pram la bneogan mac bnata,7 ba happaide cangaccap clann 
milid Cypainne mic bile mic bneogam vo céd sabarl Eneamn pon tuachaib ve 
danann. O vo puacc ua vomnaill 1 tcip ipin ccpuimne po Zab pon tarptel 
an baile, 7 00 CHD dO DEFaIn cup bneosain. Ga paoilis prom o1a poctain 
1 TTip an 04 pin an po bad vos Loup Fup bo celmaine mop manclp 06 a Tocan 
sup an maisin ap an sabpac a pinypp npc 7 cumacca pon Epimn peacc pram. 


theologian ; and, at his solicitation, Philip Til. 
of Spain, founded in 1616 the College of St. 
Anthony of Padua, at Louvain, for Irish Fran- 
ciscans.—See Harris’s edition of Ware’s Jrish 
Writers, p. 110, and O’Reilly’s Descriptive Ca- 
taloque of Irish Writers, p. 182. 

* Heroes.—* piallaeé .1, pranlao€é no puineann 
Laoé no gaipzeavac.”—_O’ Clery. 

> Cuan-an-chaislein : i.e. the Haven or Har- 
bour of the Castle, now Castlehaven harbour, 
near Castletownshend, in the south of the county 


of Cork. The editor of the Pacata Hibernia 


gives the following account of the reception of 


O’Donnell in Spain, from a letter found in the 
Castle of Dunboy, which was written on the 
4th of February, 1602, new style, by Patrick 
Sinnot, an Irish priest remaining at the Groyne 
with the Karl of Caracena, to Dominic Collins, 


a Jesuit. 


‘“¢ Sundry other things he related of Odonnel’s 
landing in the Asturias, who, with the Generall 
Pedro de Zubiare, embarqued at Castlehaven 
the « * Ianuary; the next day after he came 
to the Groyne, where he was nobly received by 
the Earl of Caracena, who invited Odonnell to 
lodge in his house; but hee, being Sea-sicke, in 
good manner refused his curtesie, wherefore, 
the Earle lodged him in a very faire house, not 
farre from his. But, when his sea-sicknesse was 
past, he lodged in the Earle’s house ; and upon 
the twenty-seventh of Ianuary Odonnell de- 
parted from the Groyne, accompanied by the 
Earle and many Captaines and Gentlemen of 
qualitie, who evermore gave Odonnell the right 
hand, which, within his government, he would 
not have done to the greatest Duke in Spaine ; 
And, at his departure, he presented Odonnell 
with one thousand duckets, and that night hee 


1602. | ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 92093 


chosen father of the Franciscan order, who was his confessor ; with others of 
his own faithful people besides them. When this resolution was heard by all 
in general, it was pitiful and mournful to hear the loud clapping of hands, the 
intense tearful moaning, and the loud-wailing lamentation, that prevailed 
throughout O’Donnell’s camp at that time. They had reason for this, if they 
knew it at the time, for never afterwards did they behold, as ruler over them, 
him who was then their leader and earthly prince in the island of Erin. 

On the sixth day of the month of January, O'Donnell, with his heroes", took 
shipping at Cuan-an-chaislein®; and, the breath of the first wind that rose waft- 
ing them over the boisterous ocean, they landed on the 14th of the same month 
in the harbour near Corunna‘, a celebrated city in the kingdom of Gallicia in 
Spain. And it was here stood the tower of Breogan’, usually called Braganza, 
which had been erected in ancient times by Breogan, the son of Bratha, ayd 
from which the sons of Milesius, of Spain, the son of Bile, son of Breogan, had 
set out in their first invasion of Ireland, against the Tuatha-De-Dananns. When 
O’Donnell landed at Corunna, he walked through the town, and went to view 
Breogan’s Tower. He was rejoiced to have landed at that place, for he deemed 
it to be an omen of good success that he had arrived at the place from whence 
his ancestor had formerly obtained power and sway over Ireland. After having 


lay at Santa Lucia, the Earle of Caracena be- 
ing returned; the next day hee went to Saint 
James of Compostella, where he was received 
with magnificence by the Prelates, Citizens, and 
religious persons, and his lodging was made 
ready for him at Saint Martins, but before hee 
saw it hee visited the Archbishop, who instantly 
prayed him to lodge in his house, but Odonnell 
excused it; the nine and twentieth, the Arch- 
bishop saying Masse with pontificall solemnity, 
did minister the Sacrament to Odonnell, which 
done, he feasted him at dinner in his house, and 
at his departure hee gave him one thousand 
duckets. 
nell’s arrival, wrote unto the Earle of Caracena 


The King, understanding of Odon- 


concerning the reception of him, and the affaires 
of Ireland, which was one of the most gracious 
Letters that ever King directed, for by it, it 


plainely appeared that hee would endanger his 
kingdome to succour the Catholikes of Ireland , 
to their content, and not faile therein, for the 
perfecting whereof great preparations were in 
hand. Odonnell carried with him to the Court, 
Redmond Burke, Father Florence, Captaine 
Mostian, and nine Gentlemen more, where they 
were nobly received.”—Book ii. c. Xxvi. 

© Corunna, a sea-port town of Gallicia, in Spain, 
at the mouth of the Groyne, about twenty miles 
south-west of Ferrol, and thirty-five north by 
east of Compostella, - 

4 Tower of Breogan.—The rock on which this 
tower stood is now occupied by a pharos or light- 
house, parts of the interior of which are, accord- 
ing to Dr. Wilde, very ancient. For the account 
of the migration of the Scotr or Milesians from 


Breogan’s Tower, or Braganza, in Gallicia, as 


2294 QNNaZa RIOShachTa E€IRECNN. (1602. 


lap mbGt achaid mbicc ace léccad a peceip 1pm ccpumne vo Co1d 50 haipm 
1mbao an pi pm Capcilla ucop ba hann vo.pala 06 bh an can pm (lap 
momcoicell o plaic(pa) ipin ccatparg diam} ainm Samona, 7 6 vo veachaid 
6 vomnaill hi ppiadnaipe im pig po léice pon a slumb € na fpfcnainc,7 vo 
pome umla, 7 a1d10e 06 amanl po ba 0G DIA Madumlacc 7 Ni po Paom einse 
co po tmpeall an pig a teona hicce noo. ba plo an céona oib;de, Apmarl 
vo cop Lay vionnpaigid Eneann co na ccongamb comadanp, 7 co na nadmb 
ceacta cecip tan poboapn enlama. Cin vana, san nfc vo paonclanoab ouaiple 
a pola do Cop in mont nac hi ccumacta vara na uap plon a 1onaic do spér 
via ngabad mopdacc an pig nyo 7 cumacca pon Epimn. An cplp icce Zan 
efnt a pimnyptp oo lagousad, na oupb(pnad pain pein no pon plop a 1oncMo 
tne bite mm Zac magni mbaot n(pc, 7 cumacca aga pmnpfpaib 1 n€pmn map 
an Tan pin. | 

Ro seallaicc mnpm ule lap an Rig oopom, 7 puaip capmiom mon uada 
nac DOIF FO Ppuaipn Faoiweal pram 1 noeipead aimpipe a common dondin 
6 nac ws nate. 

lan ndénam a topcea amlar pm ova vomnaill pip m pis, Ro cumns an 
pi pap poad Tap a ap oon Cnumne 7 aimiplom annplde .com b6é pinMte 06 
cToce Ina pMtins. Oo poime pom mn pin, 7 baof hi ppopp 50 léice 50 mf 
augupe an ccionn. 6a cnad cmde, 7 ba paot mfnman la hua noomnaill a poo 
po baccan Zaoiil san pupcace san poimidm uada 7 pob mecian lap baoi an 
. apmail po Zeallaod 06 Zan poccain 50 haon mangm, Ro cmall oomdipi do! 
dol vo lataip an fg dla plop cnéo an clppnaoad no an tTiompuineac baofs 
Pop an pocnaioe po seallad lap, 7 6 00 puacc pom von baile o1amd amm 
Simancap (oa léicce o uallavolfo vo cunt an 5) ba plo vo dveonms dia, 7 
vo clougs a hampén 7 a hécconac, a mpecait,7 a mallacc oimp épemom, 
5 vo Zaowelab slanbanba apctna 50 po sab salan a écca,7 eaplainte a 


believed in Hugh Roe O’Donnell’s time, the Caipalla, ap ba hann oo pdla oo a beizh an 
reader is referred to the Leabhar Gabhala of the can pin (ian czimceallad a plarziupa).” 
O’Clerys, and Keating’s History of Ireland, Ha- * Had power and sway.—The King of Spain 
liday’s edition, p. 261. could have hardly understood what Hugh Roe 
° Samora; i.e, Zamora, in the province of O’Donnell meant by this. Niall Garv O’Donnell 
Castile. In the Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell shortly afterwards explained it fully to Sir 
the reading is as follows : Henry Docwra, who has written the following 
“Oo coh co haipm a mbaoi an Rig ip account of Niall’s demands after he had got 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2295 


rested himself for a short time at Corunna, he proceeded to the place where 
the King was, in [the province of] Castile, for it was there he happened to be 
at this time (after making a visitation of his kingdom), in the city which is 
called Samora®. And as soon as O'Donnell arrived in the presence of the King, 
he knelt down before him ; and he made submission and obeisance unto him, 
as was due to his dignity, and did not consent to rise until the King promised 
[to grant] him his three requests. The first of these was, to send an army with 
him to Ireland, with suitable engines and necessary arms, whatever time they 
should be prepared. The second, that, should the King’s Majesty obtain power 
and sway over Ireland, he would never place any of the nobles of his blood m 
power or authority over him or his successors. The third request was, not to 
lessen or diminish on himself or his successors for ever the right of his ances- 
tors, in any place where his ancestors had power and sway‘ before that time in 


Ireland. 
All these were promised him [to be complied with] by the King ; and he 


received respect from him; and it is not probable that any Gael ever received 
in latter times so great an honour from any other king. : 
When O'Donnell had thus finished his business with the King, he was 
desired by the King to return back to Corunna, and remain there until every 
thing should be in readiness for his return [to Ireland}. This he did; and he 
remained there until the montli of August following. It was anguish of heart 
and sickness of mind to O’Donnell that the Irish should remain so long without 
being aided or relieved by him ; and, deeming it too long that the army which 
had been promised him had been without coming together to one place, he pre- 
pared to go again before the King, to know what it was that c@used the retard- 
ing or delay [in the raising] of the army which he had promised ; and when . 
he arrived at the town which is called Simancas, two leagues from Valladolid, 
the King’s Court, God permitted, and the misfortune, ill fate, wretchedness, and 
curse attending the Island of Heremon®, and the Irish of fair Banba in general, 


himself inaugurated at Kilmacrenan ° noe other kinde of right or interest in any man 
“Hee replied, that not onelie the Countrie of else, yea, the very persons of the people he chal- 

Tyrconnell, but Tyrone, Farmanagh, yea, and lenged to be his.” 

- Connaught, wheresoever any of the O’Donnells & The Island of Heremon.—This is one of the 

had, at that time, extended their power, hee many arbitrary bardic names for Ireland, and 

made accompte all was his; he acknowledged given it from Heremon, son of Milesius of Spain, 


2296 aNNawa RIOSshachTa ElREANN. (1602. 


od(oa Ua vomnanll, 7 baof pm pé pléc la nvécc ina lige co nénbarl po demi 
meacmains na pee pm an to. la 00 Sepcemben vo ponnpad ipm Tis baot as 
pis na Spcinne badém rpm mbaile pin (Simancap) 1ap ccaof a cionad, 7 a 
capsabal,.1ap naicpige 1ocpa ima peactorb 7 doanlcib, 1ap noenam a coibsion 
san ofoloct ppl a anmcaipoib ppropaclcaib rap ccant(m cuipp cpoyt, 7 a 
pola, 7 1ap na ongad amanl po bad tecca a lamaab a anmecanacc, 7 a ppuitlo 
feclapcacda budém an cataip plaitp ua maolconaine (conpfppoip, 7 com- 
aipleac ppipacalca ui domnaill, 7 pob aipofppuc tuama iapccam cid ap a 
lop) 7 an cata mump ullcac mac vonnchad bnatain boct ound 8. Fpon- 
perp a conuemt mammptpe oum na ngall, ba vo lonspontaib f oomnanll 
e1ploe. 

Ruccad ona a copp 50 Uallavoliv (50 ctipt an pig) bn ccfitipad cum- 
pacta 50 noponsaib oipime do Staca, vo Comaiple 7 00 Fapoa an pig ma 
uiptimceall 50 Locnannarb lapamnarb, 50 puopallanb polupcaib vo cei caoma- 
lainn an comlapad va Zac Lat de. Ro hadnacc 1apam 1 mamipoip S$. Fponpeip 
ipm ceapitcil Do ponnnad co maoac Mon onopac 1omnay ap aiprmomsge po 
hoonacc aom neach vo Zaoldelaab mam. Ro ceilebnad oipppinn 7 hymna 
iomda, claipefcail, 7 cancance ceoilbinne vo pat a anma, 7 po sabad a Ecc- 
noapc amonl po bad orp. : 

Monuap tna po bad liac vo pochaoib muicencpa an ci cfpca annpin an 
ba hepide cfnne coimnne 7 comaiple atcomaipc, 7 1omagallma enmomn Zaoioel 
eneann clo ppl pio cid pM coccad. Tigeanna cotaccac toinb(pcac 50 FRopy- 
malca plata, 7 co nolutuccad peacta, leo Bp n(t, 7] cumacca 50 ctTomarc(m 
| co Froppppaic 1 ngniom, hi mbpfitip, co na lamta a uptuapacc icp, an ba 
hGicefn cecib ni né fopconsyiad do denam Pain Po cédoIn amanl avbeinead a 
beol. Colum an cfnnpa, 7 an calsine pm nfimld, eccalpa, 7 ealadan, 7 pm 
Zac naon na pnt camplo pmipr 7 po bad mranac 06. Ep po ong a oman 4 
a im(ccla an cach a ccéin 7 a ppoccuyp, 7 Pop nap la nac aon imfccla iecip. 
Tigfpna oiocuipte vib(pecac, mudaiste meipleac, mopta mac mb(chao 7 


the first sole monarch of Ireland of the Scotic or construction. 

Milesian race. ' Requiem.—“ Gagnaine «1; imprde.”’—H. 3. 18, 
" Seventeen days.—The original is here re- p.539. ‘“‘€ccnainc 1. guide Oé.”—O’ Clery. The 

dundant and very clumsy, and the Editor has text is copied almost word for word from Cucogry 

been obliged to deviate a little from the original O’Clery’s Life of Hugh Roe O’Donnell. 


1602.} ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2297 


would have it, that O’Donnell should take the disease of his death and the 
sickness of his dissolution ; and, after lying seventeen days” on the bed, he died, 
on the 10th of September, in the house which the King of Spain himself had 
at that town (Simancas), after lamenting his crimes and’transgressions, after a 
rigid penance for his sins and iniquities, after making his confession without 
reserve to his confessors, and receiving the body and blood of Christ, and after 
being duly anointed by the hands*of his own confessors and ecclesiastical atten- 
dants: Father Flaithri O’Mulconry (then confessor and spiritual adviser to 
O'Donnell, and afterwards Archbishop of Tuam on that account), and Father 
Maurice Ultach [Donlevy], the son of Donough, a poor friar of the order of 
St. Francis, from the convent of the monastery of [the town of] Donegal, which 
was one of O’Donnell’s fortresses. 

His body was conveyed to the King’s palace at Valladolid in a four-wheeled 
hearse, surrounded by countless numbers of the King’s state officers, Council, 
and guards, with luminous torches and bright flambeaux of beautiful wax-light 
burning on each side of him. He was afterwards interred in the monastery of 
St. Francis, in the Chapter precisely, with veneration and honour, and in the 
most solemn manner that any of the Gaels had been ever interred in before. 
Masses, and many hymns, chaunts, and melodious canticles, were celebrated for 
the welfare of his soul; and his requiem’ was sung with becoming solemnity. 

Alas! the early eclipse* of him who died here was mournful to many; for 
he was the head of the conference and counsel, of advice and consultation, of 
the greater number of the Irish, as well in peace as in war. He was a mighty 
and bounteous lord, with the authority of a prince to enforce the law ; a lion 
in strength and force, with determination and force of character in deed and 
word', so that he durst not at all be disobeyed, for whatever he ordered to be 
done should be immediately executed, accordingly as he directed by his words; 
a dove in meekness and gentleness towards the Nemeds, the clergy, and the 
literati, and towards every one who had not incurred his displeasure, and who 
submitted to his authority ; aman who had impressed the dread and terror of 
himself upon all persons, far and near, and whom no man could terrify; a lord, 
the expeller of rebels, the destroyer of robbers, the exalter of the sons of life, 


: ; ati: a 
© Eclipse.—‘* Enena .1. eclipsis.’”—Cormac’s 1 In deed and word.—Cucogry O’Clery states 
Glossary. that Hugh Roe was ‘a Cesar in command.” 


13 N 


GNNdzZa RIOSshachta elREGHNH. (1602. 


jnasta mac mbaip, neac na po léice a painbnts, na a 1omancpaid a o1obaine 
na a DIMIAD Fan a aite 7 Fan a diogail Zan puineac. Imeaccpaid ainoimo 
arhmap, anddna na noin(n, Clinccteoin cogtac cneacac, comspl(cac na ccoice- 
oc, d1opZaoilceac, o1an, oAnmn(ccach oup vocoipec Fall, 7 sao1del baccap 
ina acchand, aon na po léice de Fan Vénam Fac ni po bad coipecwe vo Plait 
an ccfin po map. Suaball bionnglonac 50 mbuaid nmnyene 4 nuplabna, 
ceille,] comaiple, 50 ccaiobpl peince ina Ofierc accan la sac aen at ap ciov, 
cTaippnseancac cingeallcac po piontiopcanad la pardib pé cian mia na sein, 7 
co painpfoach lap an naoim énlam Colaim cille mac peilim via nébaine 


Cicpa pip an Enga apo, 
vo bena solmaincc in Zac Tip, 
bud € pin an donn oranda, 
ip biad .x. mbhadna na pis. 


ba tnog Ta po bap as Zaoidealaib eneanniap nécc wi oomnanll, ooi5 plo 
claoclaipiot a naippde 7 a nongfnca, op vo paccpac a milfccacc an miod- 
lacap, moipm(nma an moipcmse, 7 uallca an miple. Ro pgait a ngpam, a 
nZaipecead, a n5al, a n5Zépparteacc, a ccoppap, 7 a ccatbuaid 1ap na o1dead, 
Callpacc céill ora ccabarn sun 66 hfigtn o1a nupmop vol pop 1occ eccpat, 7 
canppine, 7} ancoll ele pon eipphdead 7 pon ppaoilead, ni nama an pud Eneann, 
act peacnom na ccfnnadac Zo coiscMho ina naiccpeabtacaib bocca oinnme 
veanoile, 7 oponga ele az cneic a nampame la hfccan cenelaib 50 po map- 
batt, ] 50 po muvhaigicc opecca Deapmana vo paonclanoaib porcenelcorbh 
p(n néneann 1 naile cmocanb cianib comaigzib,7 po bad adba aimeoil 4 fccalpa 
anoutcapa pobcan Roma adnaicte o6ib, an aba écca an aofn pip pin do 
énna uadaib. Acc cna po bad emmilc,7 po bad o1ocumaing piom no anpnéip 
vo na mon olcaib po pfolaidh, 7 po pionclanoaig 1 nmip Epeann a lor écca 
aoda puaid ui domnaill an can pin. 

lan Sccaoilead vo Zao1delarb ran mardm chinn cSaile amail pemebencman 
yo cup an lupcip an Pneproenp, lapla cuadmuman, 4 lapla clomne mocaipo 


™ Dispersed. —See Moryson’s History of Ire- 
land, book ii. ¢. ii., edition of 1735, pp. 62, 68. 
Don Juan vehemently exclaimed against the 
cowardice and barbarity of the Irish on this 
occasion; and in his first conference with Sir 


‘William Godolphin, he pronounced them to be 


‘not only weak and barbarous, but, as he feared, 


” But whoever will examine 


perfidious friends. 
the history of this General will find that he was 


totally unfit and insufficient for the enterprise 


1602. } ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2299 


the executioner of the sons of death ; a man who never suffered any injury or 
injustice, contempt or insult, offered His to remain unrevenged or unatoned 
for, but took vengeance without delay ; a determined, fierce, and bold invader 
of districts ; a warlike, predatory, and pugnacious plunderer of distant territo- 
ries ; the vehement, vigorous, stern, and irresistible destroyer of his English 
and Irish opposers ; one who never in his life neglected to do whatever was 
desirable for a prince ; a sweet-sounding trumpet; endowed with the gift of 
eloquence and address, of sense and counsel, and with the look of amiability in 
his countenance, which captivated every one who beheld him ; a promised and 
prophesied one, who had been truly predicted by prophets a long time before 
his birth, and particularly by the holy patron, Columbkille, the son of Felim, 
who said of him: 

A noble, pure, exalted man shall come, 

Who shall cause mournful weeping in every territory. 

He will be the pious Don, 

And will be ten years King. 


Pitiable, indeed, was the state of the Gaels of Ireland after the death of 
O'Donnell; for their characteristics and dispositions were changed ; for they 
exchanged their bravery for cowardice, their magnanimity for weakness, their 
pride for servility ; their success, valour, prowess, heroism, exultation, and mili- 
tary glory, vanished after his death. They despaired of relief, so that the most 
of them were obliged to seek aid and refuge from enemies and strangers, while 
others were scattered and dispersed, not only throughout Ireland, but through- 
out foreign countries, as poor, indigent, helpless paupers; and others were 
offering themselves for hire as soldiers to foreigners; so that countless numbers 
of the freeborn nobles of Ireland were slain in distant foreign countries, and 
were buried in strange places and unhereditary churches, in consequence of the 
death of this one man who departed from them. In a word, it would be tedious 
and impossible to enumerate or describe the great evils which sprang and took 
permanent root at that time in Ireland from the death of Hugh Roe O'Donnell. 

When the Irish had dispersed", after the defeat at Kinsale, as we have 
before mentioned, the Lord Justice, the President, the Earl of Thomond, and 


he had undertaken. He had previously com- and is charged, by the -historian Davila, with 
manded a Spanish force in Bretagne (A. D.1594), having allowed the French and English to cap- 
13 N 2 


2300 adnNava RIOshachta ElReEGNnn. (1602. 


50 maicthib an cploig gall anctna pfmpa, cfnncpaile oionnpargid 7 vol cpap 
na voinpib oosabala 7 cpap na beilgib bepnbpipce vo ponad lay an onoanap 
nallmupda naobal mop baot led ace cacti, 7 a5 comoiubnaccad an banle on 
céd Lo po pudispiot Campa pop a ioncaib sup an laite pm. Od cualais 
vonn John an mi pm, 7] 6 po Flop na Zaoroil Sup a pracc, 7 po bad 0615 lap 
via cabaip vo compgaoilead uad 7 a pasbarl ipin 1onad 1omcumans, 7 1pIN 
ccancain comoluca 1 mbaot, 7 na baot pop cumarp 06 poad pon cculaib go a 
caipoib, na dola an a aghad pop a (pecaintcib ap a nandble, J ap a molan- 
dact, 7 an peabup a mmo(sla,7] a momcoiméoa vo lo 7 vavhais, api com- 
ainle po cinn teacta vo con vada hi cefnn an lupcip, an Ppepoenp, lanla 
clomne mocaipo, 7 lapla cuadmuman s0 moichib an cplois 1a pada pra 50 
colocpad pon roncaib an lupcip 7 na coigeapnad pin, acc nama an baile vo 
léccad va Mumntin 50 pel Patponce ap ccionn, clo vola 7 teacta 1pteac 7 


ture Morlaix and Quimper, without making any 
able effort to relieve them; and the same writer 
states, that at Crodon, a fort which defended the 
mouth of Brest harbour, after exposing a brave 
garrison to destruction, through cowardice and 
incompetence, he yielded that most important 
position which he had ample means to defend. 
The late Mathew O’Conor, in his M itary Me- 
motrs of the Irish Nation, censures Don Juan for 
landing an army in the south to assist in a war 
whose principal seat was in the north; and this 
charge is well-founded, if we can rely on the 
documents published in the Pacata Hibernia, 
book i. c. xxv., for it appears from the exami- 
nation of Richard Owen, who had been servant 
to O'Neill, and who afterwards went out of Ire- 
land with Sir William Stanley, that ONeill and 
O'Donnell sent letters to King Philip III., the 
contents of which were “ to pray Aides to sub- 
sist the warre, according to the promise made 
by the old King; that if the Aides were sent 
for Vister, then Tyrone required but fower or 
five thousand men ; if the King did purpose to 
send an Army into Mounster, then he should 
send strongly, because neither Tyrone nor Odon- 
nell could come to help them.” 


Before Don Juan embarked for Spain, a kind 
of affectionate friendship appears to have grown 
up between him and Carew, President of Mun- 
ster, arising principally from the contempt 
which both entertained for the Irish. After 
Don Juan’s arrival in Spain he sent Carew a 
present in ‘wines of Ripadavia, Limmons, and 
Oranges,” accompanied by a most friendly letter, 
which the cautious President forwarded to the 
Lords of the Council in England, who autho- 
rized him-both to write to Don Juan, and to 
send him a present in return, if he were so dis- 
posed. Carew wrote him a polite letter, anda 
present of an “ambling hackney.” The con- 
cluding part of this letter runs as follows : 

‘** And whensoever your Lordship shall have 
occasion to send any of yours into these parts, 
hee shall bee vsed with the like courtesie. I 
haue received profit by the booke of fortifica- 
tion which your Lordship left me at your de- 
parture, and hold it as a Relique in memory of 
you; and, as a good Scholler, I haue put some 
things in practise, whereof your Lordship, at 
your returne hither againe (which I hope in 
God will be never), may be a witnesse whether 
I have committed any error in the art or no. 


1602. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2301 


the Earl of Clanrickard, with the chiefs of the English army in general, resolved 
to attack Kinsale, and to force their way through the fast gates, and through 
the shattered breaches which they had made by the great foreign ordnance 
which they had with them, firing and playing upon the town from the time they 
had pitched their camp before it to that day. As soon as Don Juan heard of 
this thing, and when he learned that the Irish, to whom he had come, and who, 
he thought, would have relieved him, were dispersed from him, and that he 
was left in the narrow place and blockaded prison in which he was, and that 
it was not in his power to return back to his friends or to go forth against his 
enemies, on account of their vastness and numerousness, and on account of 
the goodness of their defence and watching by day and night, the resolution 
he came to was, to send messengers to the Lord Justice, the President, and the 
Earl of Clanrickard, and the Earl of Thomond, and the [other] chiefs of the 
army, to state to them that he would surrender to the Lord Justice and these 
lords, if only they would allow his people to remain in the town until Patrick’s 
Day following, and to give liberty to his people and to the people of the Queen 


My greatest defect hath beene the want of the 
helpe of so great a Master as your Lordship is, 
of whom I am desirous to learne, not onely that 
art, but in all else concerning the military pro- 


fession, in which I doe give your Lordship the . 


preheminence. To conclude, I rest in all I may 
(my dutie reserved to the Queene, my mistress, ) 
affectionately ready at your Lordship’s service, 
and so, kissing your hands, I beseech God to 
preserve you many happy yeares.”’ 

This present and letter he sent, under a cau- 
tious disguise, in a small barque, laden with 
Irish commodities, by Walter Edney, lieutenant 
to Captain Harvey, and who had a son living 
in Spain. The following account of his adven- 
ture, and of the treatment of Don Juan shortly 
after his return to Spain, as printed in the Pa- 
cata Hibernia (ubi supra), shews that the King of 
Spain was not satisfied with the services he had 
performed in Ireland. 

“Although Queene Elrzabeth, of happy memo- 


ry, was dead before Licutenant Edney returned, 


yet I hold it not impertinent, in this place, to 
recount his successes. When he was landed at 
the Groyne, hee understood that Don Inan de 
Aguila, by the accusation of the Irish fugitives, 
was in disgrace, confined to his house, where (of 
grief) shortly after he dyed. His [Edney’s] Let- 
ters and Pasports were taken from him’ by the 
Earle of Carazena, and sent to the Court, and 
himselfe stayed untill the King’s pleasure was 
The Irish Traytors inveighed much 
that under pretext of Trade, 


knowen. 
against him, saying, 
and bringing of presents, hee came as a spie. 
Neverthelesse, he was well intreated, and had 
the libertie of the Towne, and to weare his 
sword, with allowance from the King of a Du- 
cat per diem, for his dyet. His goods were sold 
for the best advantage, and his Barque returned 
into Ireland; but the President’s present to Don 
Tuan the Earle of Carazena detayned to his owne 
use, and after nine moneths restraint, Edney was 
enlarged, and returned into England in Tuly, 
1603.”—Fdition of 1810, book iii. ¢, xi. p. 625. 


2302 annNaca RIoshachta €lREANN. [1602. 


amdaé asa muincip péin, 7 ay muincip na bammogna 1 ccumapce apaile, 7 
Oia 


cticcead puptacc no cabaip o pig na ppaime dia pargio in cane pm, opracharb 


ona clec malapta a noipsicc 7 a nppad, 7 Zac nhc pangaccap alfp. 


ap an luptip vonn lohn vo Vficcfn 1omlan 1 mfpce a@ muimncipe, 7 muna 
cTIccead, an lupzip 7] na cIZeannada pin dia 10dLacad cap a ap don Spainn, 
3 vonn John v0 10dlacad an loingip vo pacad lap ina niomlame go hEpinn 
do moi pe. 

Ro héiptlo mit(pee na cceaccad lap an Jupcip 7 lap na maimib anceana 
5 po haonzansfo vob amail po cummspioc. Jan naom 7 ian napecad a 
ccompseall ooib o1blumib canarce donn ton hi cefnn an Juptip,7] po plaoaseao 
50 honopac € lap an lupcip,7 lap na madib baccap ma pappad. Oo taov 
an lupcip an Ppepioenp, 7 conn lohn 50 copcarg, 7 00 pgaoilpiot cac via 
cuisib ap a haicle. 

Imtupa lapla cuadmuman canaic poe Dia TIN ian mbit ataio food ma 
hécemaup hi Saxoib, 7 hh ccampa cmncpaile, 7 nfop b6 cian po baoi mm prop 
lap, poctTam 06 dia DUThAIZ an Tan po ionnpals na oaoine uaiyple po baoi as 
com, 7 ac lot a cine, o po clop led vonn Jon do coc 1 nfipmn sup an 
ucap pin. Ro bad oiobpde Toippdealbac, mac matsamna, mic toinpdealbang, 
mic matzamna ui ban, 7 concopan mac vomnaill mic matsamna mic bprain 
ui bmcin. 6a heigm ooibpde na bailce bao ina noplaim sup a ccaippngeoip 
cwd aicttpeabtac,] aera anpramn an tine dia parsid (.1. Dope Eosain 4 
baile an caiplfin) oct con in oplaim daofne ccomtpom lap nan lainn loc cine 
mncib no eipcib. Oo paccad pocal,7 caipve conctioiy1 on 1apla oobpiom 
le ceileabnad va ccaipccib, 7 leip an tip opasbaal, 7 San poad tap a nap 
vomloip) san cfo an lupcip 7 na comaiple. 

Odla na noaome vapal papiu po cartpioc ofinl a ppocanl po cprallpac 


" Among his people.—This a mistake. The held by the Souldiers under his command in 
Lord Deputy Mountjoy consented to no such Castlehaven, Baltimore, and the Castle of Beere- 
condition, nor did Don Juan seek it. The Ar- haven, and other parts, to the said Lord Depu- 


ticles of Composition made on this occasion, be- 
tween the Lord Deputy and Council and Don 
Juan De Aguila, are printed in the Pacata Hi- 
bernia, book ii. ¢. xxiii. The first article was: 
“That the said Don Iuan de Aquila should quit 
the places which he holds in this Kingdome, as 


well of the Towne of Kinsale as those which are 


tie, or to whom he shall appoynt, giving him 
safe transportation (and sufficient) for the said 
people, of ships and victualls, with the which the 
said Don Tuan with them may go for Spaine, if 
he can at one time, if not, in two shippings.” 
The second article was: ‘“‘ That the Souldiers, 
at this present, being under the command of 


1602. ] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2303 


to pass in and out, and mingle with each other; and also liberty to exchange 
money and wares for anything they required ; that if relief‘or assistance should 
in the mean time come to him from the King of Spain, the Lord Justice should 
be bound to let Don Juan at large among his people"; that if no relief should 
arrive, that the Lord Justice and these lords should convey him and his 
people to Spain: Don Juan engaging to return back safe to Ireland the fleet 
that should be sent with him?) | 

The proposals of the envoys were hearkened to by the Lord Justice and 
chiefs in general, and their requests were acceded to; and when their condi- 
tions were ratified and confirmed by both [parties], Don Juan came to the 
Lord Justice, and was honourably received by him and the other chiefs who 
were along with him. The Lord Justice, the President, and Don Juan, went 
to Cork, and all afterwards dispersed for their respective homes. 

As for the Earl of Thomond, he returned to his territory after having been 
a long time away from it in England and in the camp at Kinsale; and he was 
not long at rest after arriving in his patrimony when he attacked the gentle- 
men who had been plundering and destroying his territory since they had heard 
of the arrival of Don Juan till that hour. Among these were Turlough, the son 
of Mahon, son of Turlough, son of Mahon O’Brien, and Conor, the son of Don- 
nell, son of Mahon, son of Brian O'Brien. These were compelled to deliver up 
the castles which they had in their possession, and into which they had carried 
to them the property.of the inhabitants and helpless people of the territory, 
namely, Derryowen and Baile-an-Chaislein’, into the custody of just men, who 
did not wish to plunder the country by means of them’. A fortnight’s parole 
and respite was given them by the Earl, that they might bid farewell to their 
friends [and prepare] to quit the country, to which they were not to return 
without the permission of the Lord Justice and the Council. 

As for the gentlemen, before the expiration of their parole, they prepared 


Don Iuan, in this Kingdome, shall not beare 
Armes against her Majestie, the Queene of Eng- 
land, wheresoever supplyes shall come from 
Spaine, till the said Souldiers be unshipped in 
some of the ports of Spaine, being dispatched 
(as soone as may be) by the Lord Deputy, as 
he promiseth upon his Faith and Honour,”— 


See also Moryson, book ii. ¢. 11. vol. il, p. 62. 

° Baile-an-Chaislein, now Castletown, in a 
townland of the same name, in the parish of 
Dury, not far from the town of Ennis, in the 
county of Clare. 

P By means of them, literally, “into them, or 


out of them.” 


2304 annaca RIoshachta ElRECGNN. [1602. 


an tip opasbarl,7 Lloccan tné clon cuiléin go pangavap cill oa lua, appaioe 
Tan plonamn 50 hana, 7 po cmallpac aimpiom na hoidce pin do venam 1 
noutars ana. Oc cualaccap clann toippdealbarg cappags mic compoeat- 
bong, mic muincefpcarsy mic oomnaill, mic caidce ul bmiam a. vonnchad 4 
vomnall baccap acc impo a hucc na bainmogna) 1avpom vo toct don Tin 
amail cangaccan, 1ap noeiliuccad pé focal an lapla,y san pocal an ppionnypa, 
no aoin nfic ele aca, Ro 1onnpaigpiott 1ate mn sac maigin 1 mbacctan 50 po 
hensabouce leo, cen mo ca comppdealbac mac mactZamna ui bniam vo cow 
lap ccocant(m a ppomne po colleib clutaip Drampa,7 PO Cnocarb c{nngZapnba 
dia mdio0(n pon a eapccaipoib. CAciad na monte po Zabad annpide, Conco- 
bap mac vomnanll, mic matgamna ui bmain, 6mian ballac mac maczamna 7 
cadcee ullcaé mac matsamna uf bmam guy an Lion vo pala ima ppocai, 7 
rap na n5abcal cuccad hn ccumpeac 1av cap a noop hi ccfnn an lapla go cll 
oa lua, 7 po cpochad race ma cctipladanb ip na cpannaib ba commnfpa ooib 
asad 1 nashaio. 

lan pecaolead 7 1a mbapuccad na noaoine uapal, 7 na ppoglad yin lap 
an lapla vo cw 50 Luimnedc, 7 apploe 50 concans hn ccfnn an lupcip. Ro 
ponconsaip an lupcip pop an lapla ool 50 béppe Fo comb milib pousoreip a 
maille pnip, oup an ccaompad ammup vo tabainc ap va Suilleban mbepne, 
7 an na vaomb uaaple baccap ma pappad 1. opong vo piol ccaptars, Capcom 
cipal, Mac mummip ciapparge O concobam,7 Riome-an slfnna. Ni capo an 
cianla 1 neipup an Popcongpa pin, acc wid pemme Fan anad Fan aipipiom Fo 
pamiee moumpeip blnocpaige 1 nouchang clone eogain uf pullebarn. baccan 
clann eocéam as consnam lap an lapla 1 nagad uf Sullebain 0615 00 bin 
6 Suillebam oun baof 7 beppe dia nataippiom vo bpht na comainle top 7 a 
bup,7 baot asa pada sup 66 06 plo bad oleacc ciop vpagbail 1 mbfmeparse. 


ba pé 1onad a paibe o Suilleban co na plog an can pm ag cfm an sabain 
9 Nearest trees, literally, “the nearest trees to upon the sight of an Army, having beene lately 
them.” wasted and spoyled by the Garrissons at Balti- 


. Three thousand soldiers. — This number is 





more, Castlehaven, and Bantry, upon the ninth 


exaggerated, and the Irish had it from common 
report only.—See the Pacata Hibernia, book iu. 
c. ., where the true number is given. 

“To make tryall whether the Rebels in the 


Countrey of Carbery would submit themselves 


of March (which was the day the Lord Deputy 
departed from Corke)-the President directed 
the Earle of Thomond, with two thousand and 
five hundred Foote in List (which were, by the 
Pole, but twelve hundred Foote and fittie Horse) 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2305 


to quit the country, and proceeded through Clann-Cuilein until they arrived 
at Killaloe; from thence across the Shannon into Ara; and they prepared to 
make a stay for that night in Duhara. When the sons of Turlough Carragh, 
son of Turlough, son of Murtough, son of Donnell, son of Teige O’Brien, 
namely, Donough and Donnell, who were acting in behalf of the Queen, heard 
that they had arrived in that manner in the territory, after the expiration of © 
the period of the word of the Earl, and not having the word of the Sovereign 
or any one else, they attacked them in every place where they were, and made 
prisoners of them [all], except Turlough, the son of Mahon O’Brien, who, 
‘after he had taken his dinner, had betaken himself to the shady, solitary woods, 
and the rough-headed hills, to shelter himself from his enemies. These were 
the chieftains who were there taken: Conor, the son of Donnell, son of Mahon 
O’Brien, Brian Ballagh, the son of Mahon, and Teige Ultazh, the son of Mahon 
O’Brien, with the number [of forces] that happened to be along with them. 
And when taken they were sent back in fetters to the Earl to Killaloe, and 
they were hanged in pairs, face to face, from the nearest trees’. 

After the dispersion and execution of these gentlemen and plunderers by 
the Earl, he went to Limerick, and from thence to Cork, to the Lord Justice. 
The Lord Justice ordered the Earl to proceed to Beare, with three thousand 
soldiers’, to see if he could [advantageously] make an attack upon O’Sullivan 
Beare and the gentlemen who were with him, namely, a party of the Mac 
Carthys, Captain Tyrrell, Mac Maurice of. Kerry, O’Conor [Kerry], and the 
Knight of Glin. The Earl did not neglect this order; and* he passed forward, 
without halting or delaying, until he arrived at the monastery of Bantry, in 
the territory of the sons of Owen O’Sullivan. ‘The sons of Owen were assist- 
ing the Earl against O'Sullivan, because the O'Sullivan had taken Dun-Baoi 
and Beare from their father by the decision of the Council beyond and here‘, 
-and was accustomed to say that he should by right receive the rents of 
Bantry. 

The place at which O’Sullivan and his forces were at this time [stationed] 


to march into Carbery, and from thence into * And: literally, ‘‘ but,” which is not correct 
Beare, there to view in what manner the Castle language. 
of Donboy was fortified, of the incredible strength t Beyond and here: i.e. the English and Irish 
whereof much was noysed.” councils. 


13 0 


2306 GQNNazZa RIOSshachta ElREGNN. 


(1602. 


etvip an anmail von caoib pin, 7 dol 1pceac 50 bénpe. lonad e1mde baot ma 
Conaip coiccinn do dol pin Tin, 7 baci amped 1omcumangs Lé Zabel cpite 
oapmenl moin na bampiogna, sion 50 mbfic slanta coillead,7 calman, oaoine, 
opoanay,.7 anmail puoigte fon a ccionn amail po baoi an can pin vo sabanl 
na conaine poppa. Gaol an tianla 1 ngan vo plecmam1 maimpein bhotpase, 
7 comne ecin € péin 7 o Suillebain, 7 6 nac pangaccan 1 ns5an via polle, 7 
nan bupupa von iapla na oon anmail m cplige 1omcumang pin oamar no 
DIonnypais1o, do Fasaib an Tiapla Zapapun pagoinme 1 noilén paoic pé hagh- 
ad uf Suillebain, 7 00 coo pln can a ap 50 copcoans bi ccfnn an luptip. 
Tadcc cave mac toppdealbars mic bniamn, mic vonnchad mec matsamna 
vo manbad 50 clecmanpeac oupcon perleip la a mac pln 1 mbénpe a mi man 
na bhadna po. 6a hamloand vo ponad an manbad pn. An Ppepioenc, 7 1apla 
cuaomuman, 7 an sobennoin cianpaiseac 1. Sin Seplup uelmenc 4 ciseap- 
naioe na muman ooneoc baot oiob ag consnam lar an bpmonnra do cabaipt 
a naigte uile an béppe, 7 ap ua Sullebain. Tapla vo tadcc caoc sup bin pé 
long cfhooige amac ap an praippse map an can pin. Ro ianp 6 Suillebain 
lapact na luinge pin an cadg 1a cup don Spain do cungid cabna an pig na 


“ Ceim-an-ghabhar : 1. e. the Goat’s Pass, now 
Keamagower, alias Cromwell’s Bridge, in the 
parish of Kilcaskin, over which was the common 
passage into the barony of Beare, in the west of 
the county of Cork. According to the tradi- 
tion in the country, O’Donovan was at strife 
with O’Sullevan Beare on this occasion, and had 
This 


tradition is confirmed by the following account 


some fighting with him at this place. 


of O’Sullevan’s movements after the defeat of 
the Irish at Kinsale, given by P. O'Sullevan 
Beare, in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, 
ib, °F) (657: 

“Post feedus Aquile Osulleuanus in Hispa- 
mam mittit Dermysium Odriscolem probate 
fidei, & prudentiz virum celerem opem roga- 
tum, & Danielem filium suum natu maximum 
paterne fidei pignus, & obsidem. Quibus cum 
vna ego, quoque puer, & alij iuuenes nobiles 
venientes a Carazenee Comite Galletie prefecto 
viro vetusta nobilitate claro, & in Ibernicam 


gentem maximé pio honorificentissimé sumus 
excepti. Vbi ego Patritio Sinoto populari meo 
Grammatico, & Rhetorico polito, & limato latine 
lingue, Rotherico V endanna Hispano ingenjj acu- 
tissimi_Philosophiz, sed alijs aliarum doctrina- 
rum preceptoribus sum vsus. Interim Osulleua- 
nus omni ratione, & studio conandum putauit, 
vt vsque ad Hispani auxilij aduentum se, & eos, 
quos ad Hispanorum partes sequendas mouerat, 
ab hostis impetu defenderet. Ei auxilium fe- 
runt Daniel Maccarrha Clancarrhe principis 
filius, Daniel Osulleuani Magni filius, Cornelius, 
& Dermysius Odriscolis Magni filij, Dermysius 
Osulleuanus pater meus, Dermysius, duo Dio- 
nysij, & Florentius Maccarrhe Fusci, equites 
Macsuinnij, Dionysius Odriscol cum suis fratri- 
bus. Ad eum confugiunt Oconchur Kierrius, 
Macmoris Lacsnae Baro, eques Auratus Kier- 
rius, eques Auratus vallis, lohannes Giraldinus 
Comitis frater, Iaimus Buttlerus Baronis Ca- 
thare frater superiore bello suis possessionibus 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2307 


was at Ceim-an-ghabhair", between the army on that side and the entrance 
into Beare. This place was the common pass into the territory, and it was in- 
tricate and narrow to be passed through by this large army of the Queen, even 
should there be no trees felled, or trenches sunk in the earth, or no men, ord- 
- nance, or army planted there against them, as indeed there was at that time to 
defend the pass against them. The Earl remained nearly a week in the 
monastery of Bantry, a conference being [expected] between him and O’Sulli- 
van; but as they did not come near each other, because it was not easy for the 
Earl, or the army, to attack or force this narrow pass, he left a garrison of 
soldiers in Oilen-Faoit", to oppose O’Sullivan, and went back himself to Cork 
to the Lord Justice. 

Teige Caech, the son of Turlough, son of Brian, son of Donough Mac 
Mahon, was accidentally killed with the shot of a ball by his own son, in Beare, 
in the month of May of this year. This death occurred in the following 
manner: the President, the Earl of Thomond, the Governor of Kerry, i.e. Sir 
Charles Wilmot, and such of the lords of Munster as were aiding the Sove- 
reign, turned their faces against Beare and O'Sullivan. Before this time Teige 
Caech happened to have captured a merchant’s ship at sea; [and] O’Sullivan 
asked him for a loan of that ship, to send it to Spain, to ask assistance from the 


eiecti. Osulleuanus Gulielmo Burko, Richardo west of the town of Bantry. It is a beautiful 


Tirello, & alijs conductis, oberatorum delectu 
conscripto & sociorum auxilijs millia militum 
circiter duo iuuentutis electee comparat. Quibus 
ea hyeme Torrentirupem arcem, quam solam in 
Beantria tenebat Eugenius O’Sulleuanus semper 
Regine partes secutus, partim aggere, turribus, 
vineis, musculis, pluteis oppugnatam, partim 
eneis tormentis quassatam in suam potestatem 
redegit. Odonnobhanum” [O’Oonnabam, nune 
anglice O’Donovan], ‘ad Anglos reuersum, & 
alios Anglorum auxiliares depredatur. Regias 
copias, que in Momonijs erant, terrore perculsas 
in oppida munita, & arces compellit.” 

“ Oilen-Faoit: called Fucdia insula by Philip 
O’Sullevan Beare—(Hist. Cathol. Iber., fol. 182). 
It is now called Whiddy Island, and is situated 
in the east side of Bantry Bay, about three miles 


island belonging to the parish of Kilmacommoge 
and barony of Bantry. The following notice of 
this event is given in the Pacata Hibernia: 

‘* Heerupon the Earle lefte with Captaine 
George Flower, besides his owne Company, the 
Companies of Sir John Dowdall, the Lord Barry, 
Captain Francis Kingsmill, Captain Bustock, 
and Captaine Bradbury, which were seven hun- 
dred men in List, in the Whiddy (an Iland lying 
within the Bay of Bantrie), very-convenient for 
the Service, and himself with the rest of his 
Forces returned to Corke, where, having made 
a relation of the particulars of his journey, it 
was found necessary that the President, without 
any protractions or delay, should draw all the 
Forces in the Province to a head against them,” 
&c., book iil. c. 2. 


ko: OZ 


2308 GNNdza RIOShachTa EIREGNN. (1602. 
Spainne mapa no cinspead anmail na bampiosna pain. Ro pmd cadz na 
ciubnad an long 06, ap ni baoi 00 Dains{n7 vO Copnam aicce ain fem, acc 
an long, ] 1ap na pad pin 00 no Culn a mac Péin 50 mbanoaib ele amaille 
FMP do copnam na lunge. Oo cod 6 Sullebdin 1 mbav vo buam na lunge 
amac -50 haimdeonac 4 vo pala cadcc amanlle pip 1pm mbav an tan pin. 
Ro puagsaip tadce Dia mac Toinpdealbac, 7 von banoa 6 Suillebam co na 
muimnzip do DIabpaccad. Oo pdnad ledpom imnpin, 7 can sae nowbpaccad 
vo canlaiclo (conpa po amanp coinpdealbac tadcc DuNcon vo perlép 1 nuac- 
can a cléib 50 ppuaip bap ipm occmad la ian pm. ba hé an cadce pin 
cigeanna conca baipemn iaptanaig: co po hatémpead 7 50 po hionnanbaoh 
ap a atanda la Mapla cuadmuman cm bliadna pap an can po 50 cconcan 
amanl a oubnamap. Ni baof aon cnioca céd vépinn na baoi a dionsmala 
do TIZEaTNa IP an Tadce pin, an lam, ap tiodlacavh ap cfnnac fiona, eac, 7 
ealadan,7] oa mbit outhans, n6é odpcc arcce ay é an ci pin lap a ccopcain 
fob ope orongmatla oia Apr. 

Iméurpa lapla cuadmuman ian nool vd6pide §0 concangs hi ccfnn an lupoiyp ap 
i comaiple po cimn an lupcip, an ciapla do Tionnchd do MdIp1 50 plogarb laip 
Sup an olen in po Faccaib pium sapapan mia pin .1. oilén paofc, 7 coblac co 
nopoanayp vo con timceall an muin 50 pangaccan hi ccompocnaib otin baot 
50 po gabrac caladpont,7 sabaicc oilén v1amd ainm baot benpe, 7 po manbao 
le6 a banda (1m a ccaiptin Ripofpo mac Ropa mic connla mes eocaccain). 


* Among the shots: literally, ‘‘ beyond every 
shooting.” 

y Aimed, po amcip.—This verb is incorrectly 
applied here, as it is stated in the beginning 
that the father’s death was accidental. Ro amaip 
denotes intention: on the part of Turlough, and 
the Four Masters should have added, ‘‘o’upchan 
n-impoill, by a mistaking, or random shot.” 

t West Corca-Bhaiscinn, now called the ba- 
rony of Moyarta, and comprising the south- 
western angle of the county of Clare. It is 
stated in the Pacata Hibernia, book iii. ce. 6, 
that, on the third of June, ‘‘ Teg Keugh Mac 
Maghon, a principall Rebell (in an Nand adjoyn- 
ing to the Dorseys) was casually shot through 


the body by his owne sonne, whereof he dyed 
the third day following.” 

* Which arrived; literally, ‘‘ until they ar- 
rived,” which is inelegant. 

> Dun-Baoi: i. e. the fort of Baoi. 
called Dunboy by English writers. 


This is 
There is a 
plan of it, as it was besieged on this occasion, 
given in the Pacata Hibernia.—See Dublin edi- 
tion of 1810, p. 526. 


remaining at present. 


There is no vestige of it 


° Conla Mageoghegan.—See note °, under the 
year 1580, p. 1726, supra, and also the Miscel- 
lany of the Irish Archeological Society, p. 182. 
There is a most circumstantial account of this 


stubborn siege of the castle of Dunboy [ ‘and so 


1602.} ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2309 


King of Spain before the Queen’s army should advance upon him. Teige said 
that he would not give him the ship, because he had no means of protecting 
or defending Inmself but the ship; and, upon saying this, he sent his own son, 
together with other guards, to defend the ship. O’Sullivan went into a boat, 
to wrest the ship by force; and Teige happened to be along with him in the 
same boat. 
O'Sullivan and his people. 
between them, Turlough aimed’ Teige with the shot of a ball in the upper 
part of his breast; so that he died on the eighth day after that. 


Teige called out to his son, Turlough, and the guards, to fire on 
They did so; and, among the shots* discharged 


This Teige 
had been Lord of West Corca-Bhaiscinn’, until he was expelled or banished 
from his patrimony by the Earl of Thomond three years before that time when 
he was as we have stated. There was no triocha-chead [barony] in Ireland 
of which this Teige was not worthy to have been Lord, for [dexterity of] hand, 
for bounteousness, for purchase of wine, horses, and literary works; and if he 
had a territory or inheritance the person by whom he fell would have been 
the rightful heir to succeed him. 

As for the Earl of Thomond, after he had gone to Cork to the Lord Jus- 
tice, the resolution to which the Lord Justice came was, that the Earl should 
again return with forces to the island on which he had previously left a garri- 
son, namely, Oilen-Faoit; and he sent a fleet with ordnance round by sea, 
which arrived* in the vicinity of Dun-Baoi’, and, having put to land, they took 
an island called Baoi-Bheirre, and slew its guards, together with their captain, 
Richard, the son of Ross, son of Conla Mageoghegan®. The [crews of the] 


obstinate and resolved a defence had not binseen the Mayne, for I know (sayd hee) you must 


in this kingdome” | printed in the Pacata Hiber- 
nia, book 111. chapters vi. vii. and viii. The 
Editor of the Pacata says that, on the 5th of 
June, Richard Mac Goghagan, the constable of 
Dunboy, parleyed with the Earl of Thomond, 
who requested him to render the castle unto 
the Queen; but that “all the Eloquence and 
artifice which the Earle could use avayled no- 
thing, for Mac Goghagan was resolved to per- 
severe in his wayes; and, in the great love which 
he pretended to beare unto the Earle, hee ad- 
vised him not to hazard his life in landing upon 


land at yonder Sandy Bay, where, before your 
comming, the place will be so trenched and 
gabioned, as you must runne upon assured 
death.” 

This castle, which O’Sullevan Beare had taken 
from the Spaniards, as appears from his letter to 
the Earl of Caracgena, and which he refused to 
surrender to the English in conformity with Don 
Juan’s articles of capitulation, was besieged aud 
stormed by Carew, Lord President of Munster, 
with the most unrelenting perseverance, and 
defended by Mageoghegan and the warders, con- 


2310 


aNNdca RIOSshachta EIREGNN. 


(1602. 


Tucpac an coblac, a napm,7 a nopoanap hi crip ag otn baoi Fo no sabyac, 
7 po coclad led ofoce daingln oitoglaig do Tpemnyi chen lardip ap dans an 


sisting of one hundred and forty-three select 
fighting men, with a stubborn bravery unpa- 
ralleled in modern history. At length, when the 
castle was nearly shattered to pieces, Mageoghe- 
gan retired into a vault, determined to blow up, 
with powder, what remained of the castle, unless 
the surviving part of the garrison should have 
promise of life. This was refused them by the 
Lord President, and the last fate of Mageoghe- 
gan is described by the Editor of the Pacata 
_ Hibernia, book iii. c. vili., as follows : 

‘“‘ His Lordship gaue direction for a new bat- 
tery upon the Vault, intending to bury them in the 
ruines thereof, and after a few times discharged, 
and the bullets entering amongst them into the 
Celler, the rest that were with Taylor” [an Eng- 
lishman’s son, appointed chief after the disabling 
of Mageoghegan] ‘partly by intercession, but 
chiefly by ‘compulsion (threatening to deliver 
him up if hee were obstinate), about ten of the 
Clock in the morning of the same day” [18th of 
June | “constrained him to render simply, who, 
with eight and fortie more, being ready to come 
forth ; and Sir George Thornton, the Sergeant 
Major, Captaine Roger Harvie, Captaine Power, 
and others, entering the Vault to receive them, 
Captaine Power found the said Richard Mac 
Goghegan lying there mortally wounded, and, 
perceiving Taylor and the rest ready to render 
themselues, raised himselfe from the ground, 
snatching a lighted Candle and staggering 
therewith to a barrell of powder (which for 
that purpose was unheaded), offering to cast it 
into the same, Captaine Power took him and 
held him in his armes, with intent to make him 
prisoner, untill he was, by our men (who per- 
ceived his intent) instantly killed, and then 
Taylor and the rest were brought prisoners to 
the Camp.” 


It is stated in the same work that, on the same 
/ 


day, fifty-eight of them were executed by the 
President, who deemed it prudent that Taylor, 
and one Tirlagh Roe Mac Swiny, and twelve 
others, should be reserved alive, ‘“‘ to trie 
whether he could draw them to doe some more 
acceptable service than their lives were worth.” 

P. O’Sullevan Beare gives a curious list of the 
Irish who opposed O’Sullevan Beare on this oc- 
casion, as will appear by the following extract 
from his Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 7 : 

‘His motibus Angli vehementer soliciti & 
auxli quam maximam possunt belli molem in 
Osullevanum constituunt vertere. Georgius 
Caruus Momoniarum prefectus Corcacham re- 
gias copias convocat. Auxilia Ibernorum ac- 
cersit. Illi presto fuerunt, aliquot Angloiberni, 
& hi Momonie magnates, sine quibus Angli pa- 
rum negocii possent Osullevano facessere, Dio- 
nysius O’Brien, Lomnache princeps quondam 
et Tomonize Comes, Macarrha Fuscus Carbriz 
princeps, Carolus Macarrha Muscrie princeps, 
Barrius Magnus Botevanti Vicecomes, Odonno- 
bhanus, eques Auratus Albus, Eugenius Osul- 
levanus Osullevani quidem patruelis, hostis ta- 
men infestissimus, Dermysius Osullevani Magni 
frater, Dionysius et Florentius Maccarrhe fra- 
tres qui Osullevanum deseruerunt. Urmonie 
comitatus delectus, & auxiliares ab aliis missi. 
Totus exercitus continebat plus quatuor milli- 
bus militum quorum vix quingenti erant Angli. 
Ceteri erant Iberni et Angloiberni, qui despe- 
ratis rebus a Regina descissere minime sibi tu- 
tum et integrum existimabant,” &. &e.—Cap. 11. 
fol. 182, b. 

The taking of this castle of Dunbaoi is thus 
described by the same writer (ubi supra, lib. 7, 
c. iii. fol. 183): 

‘“‘Iterum Caruus auctis copiis supra quinque 
millia hominum omnes Osullevani vires statuit 
contundere, in Beantriam perueniens in Agello 


1602] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2311 


fleet landed with arms and ordnance at Dun-baoi, where they formed a strong 
and impregnable ditch, and a stout and firm trench, from which to play upon 


Rubro, (Gurtin Rua), patente planicie castrame- 
tatur, inde in Bearram penetrare cogitans, Dum- 
beam castellum (anglice Birhauen) et ceteras 
Osulleuani arces oppugnatum. Osulleuanus iter 
occupans quingentos ab hoste passus tentoria 
figit militum numero longé inferior, sed virtute 
et loci commoditate fretus hostem incursionibus 
prohibet, et commeatu intercludit. Caruus se 
vallo, fossaque muniens menses duos castrorum 
finibus milites continet, donee proximé ad ma- 
ritimam oram applicent naues octodecim rostra- 
te, & tect & alie minores Manapia, Corcacha, 
& ex Anglia misse, in quas exercitum imposi- 
tum iuxta Dumbeam exponit arcem obsidens, 
Illam tenebant centum vigenti pedites ab Osul- 
leuano constituti duce Richardo Macgochegano 
viro nobili: qui munitiones egressi pro muro 
cum hoste fortiter dimicant, illum arcis oppug- 
natione diu prohibentes: & intra munimenta 
compulsi ex pinnis fenestris atque turribus sese 
firmiter tuentur. 
in arcem agere tentans cum a propugnatoribus 


Caruus aperta vi tormenta 


prohiberetur, & eruptionem facientibus & missi- 
lia ex munitionibus iaculantibus fossam homine 
cubitos duos altiorem in arcem dirigit, et rursus 
transuersum aggerem obducit magna propugna- 
torum contentione pro viribus opus interrum- 
pentium: et in fossam cum é castelli turribus 
non esset prospectus, per eam trahit tormenta 
quinque, quibus in transversa fossa dispositis 
arx continué quatitur. Interim propugnatores 
frequenter erumpunt hostem ex oppugnatione 
dimovere conantes, lévia: prelia cominus com- 


mittendo, & eminus ex munitionibus ignitos 


globos bombardis tormentisque iaciendo. Iam 
vero crebris tormentis laxata lapidum, meenium- 
que compage arx difliciebat. Magna pars con- 
Per 


ruinam regius exercitus in arcem impetum fa- 


cidit, pars alia consequens procumbebat. 


cit. Utrinque magna cede facta propugnatores 


impetum sustinent. Regii rursus pergunt emi- 
nus arcem tormentis, consumere, & bombardis 
propugnatores ex muro, turribusque dimouere. 
Ingente fragore frusta munimenti ruunt, tra- 
hentia milites secum, saxaque collisa armatos 
obruunt. 
propugnatores globulis & lapidibus consternunt, 


hastis transfigunt, gladiis iugulant, admotis 


Regii per ruinam irrumpunt, quos 


clypeis, saxisque revolutis deorsum per ruinam 
precipitant, totaque repellunt. Adhuc regu 
munimentum tormentis eminus oppugnant, & 
machinis tutd convellentibus, munitionibus af- 
fatim corruentibus, propugnatore passim ca- 
dente non datur libera facultas ruine defen- 
dende: per eam oppugnatores irruunt, & in 
aulam, ad quam usque Castellum erat collap- 
sum, cohortes tres signa inferentes dimidiam 
occupant. Ibi propugnatoribus occurrentibus 
manus cruenter conseritur: multis utrinque 
vulneribus inflictis, multis viris interemptis, 
regil terga vertere coguntur, aulam et ruinam 
totam deserentes. Qui sauciis receptis iterum, 
irruptionem faciunt recente, vegetoque milite 
cum defesso, & vulnerato, & magna multitudine 
cum paucis confligentes. Primum de ruina di- 
micatur: unde propugnatoribus expulsis cohor- 
tes septem in aulam aquilas conferunt e0 sibi 
iniquam, quod in ea se non poterant explicare. 
Ibi in longam moram pugna protrahitur: multi 
mutuis vulneribus succumbunt : magna corpo- 
rum atque armorum strages iacet. Aula tota 
sanguinis rivulis fluit. Propugnatorum pars 
longé maxima cadit, presertim Dux Richardus, 
cuius animi magnitudo cum generis claritate de 
principatu contendebat, maximé strenue pre- 
lians inter cadavera semianimis procumbit at- 
que lethalibus vulneribus affectus. Reliquorum 
etiam nemo non vulneribus affligitur. Super- 
stites aulam relinquentes in inferiora tabulata 


se recipere compelluntur. Vande acerrimé pug- 


2312 QNNQZG RIOSsHhachTd ElREGNN. (1602. 


boule vo cait(m la honvanar. baccan aga cautfm athaid pamlaio so po 
Uccad, 7 co po lambmpfo an banle leo 50 calmum 4 50 po manbad an banoa, 
| an dpons na po manbad diob po cnochad 1acc na. ccuplavhaib la hhapla 
cuaddmuman. ; 

O Sullebcin imonpo 1ap mbfin an baile pin de, 00 cuamd co na buan, 7 
co na botéancib, co na mumnceanaib, 7 co na mingib an caleab a cnoc cfnn- 
sanb 1 noiampaib, 7 1 nopoibélaib a cine. aot an tianla co na ploccanb, 7 
o Sullebain co na pocpamve ag catim, 7 ag compuabaint anole 50 harmyp 
na novlacc. Oo ponpacc an oa pluas pin fonbaip 7 porplonspont aghaio 
an asad 1pm ngl(mn sanb4 ba do oicfnn oaingin wi Suillebam an gl{no pin. 
bacctan a daoine ag foanpccapad 50 hinclfite san atcomape la hua puille- 
bon. Ro imag vad ceccup captin timal, 7 pob Accln vopom bade imelec 
Ran plop, Fan aipruccad von iapla an paoipe na noolacc. 
huide ap an ngl(nn sanb 50 boule Muipne, an vana hoidce 1 ccoiccpic owitce 
ui caoim 7 még amlaoib. Cn tpnlp owce 1 napd paccpaicc. On cltpamado 
oloce ay pulcord, an cticcead owdce, 7 an pfiplo owdce 1 mbel na coillead, an 


ba plo a cceona 


nantes tantum cum virtute, tum desperatione, 
qu ad honesté moriendum sepé magnum inci- 
tamentum est, valuerunt, ut hostem primum, 
aula deinde arce totaexuerint. Illicé nox diri- 
mit pugnam. Postero die regij rem per lega- 
tiones conficere ducunt. Propugnatores deiecta, 
labefactaque maiori arcis parte, amisso duce, 
vulneribus fatigati, multis' malis defessi pacti, 
ut incolumes dimitterentur, castellum dedunt 
mense Septembri decimo quinto die obsidionis. 
Postquam Regij sunt castellum ingressi, Richar- 
dus nondum exanimis cum Anglicum sonum 
audijsset linquentem animum reuocat, & sul- 
phureo pulueri, cujus non exigua facultas erat 
in castello ignem pergit applicare hostes procul- 
dubio combusturus, nisi antequam rem perfice- 
ret, spiritu destitueretur. Pactum, & fides An- 
glica religione dedititiis seruatur : nam virl & 
femine laqueo strangulantur. 

4 Attacking each other.—It is stated in the Pa- 
cata Hibernia, book iii. ¢. xvii., that the English 
‘attacked the fastness where the rebels, with 


their cattle, were lodged in Glengarrem [ Glengar- 
rew |, whereupon ensued a bitter fight, which was 
maintained, without intermission, for six hours, 
during which many were slain on both sides ; 
but the greatest losse fell upon the Traytors : 
there were taken from them, in that dayes ser- 
vice, 2000 Cowes, 4000 sheep, and 1000 Gar- 
rans.” 

On the next morning after O’Sullevan’s de- 
parture, being the 4th of January, 1602, Sir 
Charles Wilmot came to seek the enemy in their 
camp, where he found nothing but hurt and sick 
men, ‘‘ whose paines and lives, by the Souldiers, 
were both determined” !! Quare, whether was 
this murdering or slaying ? 

© Gleann-garbh, translated Vallis Aspera, by 
P. O’Sullevan Beare, now anglice Glengarriff, 
a singularly picturesque valley near Bantry 
Bay.—See a description of it in the Dublin 
Penny Journal, vol. i. pp. 117, 118, and in 
Windele’s Description of Cork and its Vicinity. 

f Baile-Muirne, now Ballyvourney, a small 


1692.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2313 


the castle with ordnance. They thus continued the firing until the castle was 
razed and levelled with the ground, and the warders were [for the most part] 
killed; and such of them as were not killed were hanged in pairs by the Earl 
of Thomond. 

O'Sullivan, after being deprived of this castle, went with his cows, herds, 
and people, and all his moveables, behind his rugged-topped hills, into the 
wilds and recesses of his country. The Earl [of Thomond] and his army, and 
O'Sullivan and his forces, continued shooting and attacking* each other until 
the Christmas times. The two armies were entrenched and encamped face 
to face in Gleann-garbh‘, which glen was one of O’Sullivan’s most impreg- 
nable retreats. His people now began to separate from O'Sullivan secretly 
without asking his leave. First of all Captain Tyrrell went away from him, 
and he was obliged himself to depart in the Christmas holidays, without the 
knowledge of, and unperceived by the Earl. In the first day’s march he went 
from Gleann-garbh to Baile-Muirne‘; on the second night he arrived on the 
borders of the territories of O’Keeffe® and Mac Auliffe; on the third night [he 


arrived] at Ardpatrick”; on the fourth night, at Sulchoid'; on the fifth and 


village in the barony of Muskerry, in the county 
of Cork, where there are some ruins of a church 
dedicated to St. Gobnait. P. O’Sullevan Beare 
says that O’Sullevan Beare, his kinsman, with his 
forces, encamped, the first night, at a place called 
Acharas, and that, on the next day, being the first 
of J anuary, 1603, they arrived at Ballyvourney, 
before noon, where they left gifts, and prayed to 
St.Gubeneta that they might have a prosperous 
journey. The same writer, and also the Editor 
of the Pacata Hibernia, state that, as they passed 
along the skirts of Muskerry, they were skir- 
mished with by the sons of Teige, the son of 
Owen Mac Carthy, where they lost some of their 
men and most of their carriage. 

® O'Keefe and Mac Auliffe—These families 
were seated in the present barony of Duhallow, 
in the north-west of the county of Cork. 

P. O’Sullevan states that the inhabitants of 
these territories were hostile to O’Sullivan: 
*Quos accole noctem totam eiaculando magis 


molestia, quam vulnere afficiunt.”—Fol. 189. 

h Ardpatrick, a village in the barony of Cosh- 
lea, and county of Limerick. It is stated in the 
Pacata Hibernia, that, in passing by Liscarroll, 
John Barry, brother to the Viscount, with eight 
horsemen and forty foot, charged their rear at 
the ford of Bellaghan, where he slew and hurt 
P. O’Sullevan Beare says that 
they fought for an hour at this ford, where 


many of them. 


O’Sullevan lost four men, and the Queen’s ad- 
herents lost more than four. The Editor of the 
Pacata, however, does not acknowledge the loss 
of more than one on Barry’s side. 

i Sulchoid : i.e. Salicetum, the Sallow Wood. 
—COor. Glos., in voce. This place retains its 
name to the present day, and is now anglicised 
Solloghod or Sallowhead. It is situated on the 
confines of the counties of Limerick and Tippe- 
rary, but in the barony of Clanwilliam, in the 
latter county, and four miles to the west of the 


town of Tipperary. 


13 P 


2314 ANNQCa RIOshachta elReann. [1602. 


plecmad oidce hn Ueanac, an toctmad oidce 1 mbaile achad caofn. Ni 
baof pom la, na aohaig m aipfec pin Zan _veaband, 7 Diancospaim o1iosaleac 
Fain, 7 po puilng(o, 7 po ppl(spad so Flppda pin bedda lap pom mnypm. Tan 
nool 06 in naomad o1oce Zur an ccoill o1anid ainm coll finne, vo pdénpac 
aamipiom ppl pé oa ordce an oo pin. Gao vonnchad mac caipppr mec aeda- 
5am ma ccompocnab, 7 bao pide acc Dénam oanacca veabta, 7 o1ubpaicte 
an ua Suillebain co na mumncip sup b6 héiccfh a mapbad po des1d ap ni 
faom corce pop comaiple uf Sulleboin. O n& puapaccap coitfoa, mace 
antpaise ele ineallma po manbaro leo a neacnaid an ogg a ppeola dite, 7 
vioméeap, 7 a ccadal cpoicfnn vo cop mm piocyplacanb plmpigne vo dénam 
cupac d10b via momeon Tap an Sionaind ppiobuaine (.1. ag at coillead puaid) 


Kk Baile-na-coille: i.e. the town of the wood, 
now Ballynakill, a village in the parish of Tome, 
barony of Kilnamanagh, and county of Tippe- 
rary. wit 

' Leatharach, now Latteragh, in the barony of 
Upper Ormond, and county of Tipperary, and 
about eight miles south of the town of Nenagh. 
In the Feilire Aenguis, at p. 27, the scholiast 
calls this place Letracha Odhrain, and places it 
in Muscraighe Thire.—See also Colgan’s Acta 
Sanctorum, pp- 151, 461. 

m Baile-achaid-caoin.—This place is still called 
Balloughkeen by the old natives, but it is usually 
shortened to Loughkeen in the anglicised form. 
It is the name of a townland and parish in the 
barony of Lower Ormond. . 

" Coul-fhine.-—This was the name of a wood 
adjoining Port-a-tulchain, now Portland, in the 
parish of Lorha, in the barony of Lower Ormond, 
P. O’Sullevan Beare calls this wood Brosnacha, 
from its situation near the river now called the 
Little Brosnach. 

° Donough, the son of Carbry Mac Egan.—lt 
is stated in the Pacata Hibernia, book iii. ¢. 17, 
that ‘‘the sherife of the county of Typperarie 
fell upon their reare and slew many of them.” 
But the author of this work did not think it 
necessary to add, that O’Sullivan’s people re- 


torted upon him, and slew and wounded many 
of his people. This, however, was the case, if 
we can believe P. O’Sullevan Beare, who gives 
a most minute and interesting account of the 
journey performed by his kinsman, Daniel, his 
father, Dermot, and their surviving followers 
and adherents, after their flight from Glengarriff 
through Munster and Connaught, until he ar- 
rived in O’Rourke’s country. The following is 
his account of the manner in which they crossed 
the Shannon at Port-a-tulchain.—Hist. Cathol. 
Iber., tom. 3, lib. 7, c. ix. fol. 190, 191. 

“ Hic in summum discrimen Osulleuanus 
videbatur deductus, quéd Sininnum amnem 
amplum, & nauigabilem non poterat transmit- 
tere, phasellis, atque nauigijs ab hoste remotis, 
& cauto penis acerbissimis, ne illum vllus por- 
titor transportaret. Propter inediam etiam -mi- 
Ob id animos om- 
nium iugens desperatio subit. 


lites viribus destituuntur. 
In hoe ancipiti 
statu rerum pater meus Dermysius Osulleuanus 
se nauim breui confecturum, & famem militum 
extincturum profitetur. 

‘* Postero die qui septimus erat Januarij 
mensis, Dermysij consilio in Brosnacham den- 
sissimam, atque tutissimam syluam sese ab- 
dentes, & coesis arboribus in valli speciem com- 
positis, fossaque leuiter facta circumuallantes, 


‘ 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. © 


2315 


sixth nights [he remained] at Baile-na-Coille*; on the seventh night at Leatha- 
rach'; and on the eighth at Baile-Achaidh-caoin”. He was not a day or night 
during this period without a battle, or being vehemently and vindictively pursued, 
all which he sustained and responded to with manliness and vigour. Having 
arrived on the ninth night at a wood called Coill-fhinne’, where they remained 
for two nights, Donough, the son of Carbry Mac Egan’, who lived in their vici- 
nity, began boldly to attack and fire upon O’Sullivan and his people, so that at 
length he was obliged to be slain, as he would not desist [from his attacks], by 
the advice of O'Sullivan. Not finding cots or boats in readiness, they killed their _ 
horses, in order to eat and carry with them their flesh, and to place their hides 
on [frame-works of] pliant and elastic osiers, to make curraghs? for conveying 
themselves across the green-streamed Shannon, [which they crossed] at Ath- 


biduum duas naues ex viminibus, & arboribus 
condunt, equis duodecim occisis, quorum corijs 
nauigia integuntur, & carnibus omnes vescuntur 
preter Osulleuanum, Dermysium,& Dermysium 
Ohuallachanum. Nauis, cuius Dermysius fuit 
architectus hune in modum conficitur. Vimina 
crassiore parte terre infixa, & ad medium inui- 
cem reflexa, restibusque reuincta corpus nauis 
constituebant: cui é solida tabula statumina, 
transtraque interius adduntur. Exterius corijs 
vndecim equorum cooperitur, remis, atque scal- 
mis coaptatis. Carina, & materiei necessitate, & 
saxa, cautesque vitandi causa erat plana: longi- 
tudo pedum viginti sex, latitudo sex, & altitudo 
quinque, preterquam quod ad fluctus propel- 
lendos prora magis aliquantum eminebat. Altera 
nauis, culus construende equites Omalle ma- 
gistri erant, viminibus sine iugis contexta ha- 
bens carinam circularis forme instar parme, & 
latera longe altiora, quam carina exigebat, con- 
tenta fuit vno equi corio, quo carina est obducta. 
He naues ad Sininni Oram nomine Portulacha- 
num militum humeris noctu portantur, quibus 
Osulleuanus suos clam traijcere cepit. Omalle 
Cete- 
rum nauis, cum parua, tum inepte structure 
pondere pressa in medio flumine cum hominibus 


milites decem suam nauim conscendunt. 


obruitur. Dermysij nauis, que triginta simul 
armatos capiebat, alios incolumes transtulit, 
equos nantes a puppi loris trahens. 

‘* Oriente die post milites transmissos Donatus 
Makeoganus, qui Syluas Rubras castellum prope 
tenebat, armata manu impedimenta circumue- 
niens, ccepit sarcinas diripere, calonum, cruore 
solum spargere, fweminas incusso pauore in flu- 
men inijcere. Thomas Burkus cum hastatis 
circiter viginti, totidemque fulminatoribus in 
excubijs, & insidijs ab Osulleuano dispositus, vt 
commodius ceteri flumen traducerentur, suos 
in pugnam cohortatus Donatum improuiso ador- 
tus cum comitibus quindecim interficit : reli- 
quos vulneribus feré affectos in fugam vertit. 
Catapultarum sonitu excitati accole ad vtram- 
que ripam fluminis confluunt. Quare Thomas 
cum excubitoribus, famine, calonesque trepi- 
datione tanta, & tumultu nauiculam imflendo 
submergunt, ita tamen proxime ad oram, vt 
nemo perierit, & nauis iterum aquis subducta 
excubitores traiecerit. Calones alij nando flu- 
men penetrant: alij non facta per accurrentes 
accolas transmittendi potestate in varias partes 
dissipati sese occultant. Nauim, ne sit hostibus 
vsui, Osulleuanus iubet dilacerari.” 


P Curraghs.—The Editor of the Pacata Hi- 


to P 2 


QNNQta RIOSshachTa elReaNN. 


2316 [1602. 


50 pangaccan Zan sabaid Fan Zuapacc tainp1 50 mbaccan oon caoib anaill 
1piol nanmcada. Coccap aippde 50 mbagcap an Taonmad o1dce DECC acc 
fcopuim 6 maine. Jan cconaccain o61b 1pmde po cnuinnigpiot na hata 7 
na haicmfdsa poptap comn(p oo1b plmpa 7 na nofohaid 50 po sainpiot oa 
Zac caoib ina cimceall. 6a 00 na huaplib pucc ponna oon cup pm mac 
lapla clomne piocannod tomar mac uillicc, me Riocaind paranais, 7 Mas 
- coclain Sfan 6cc, mac Slam mic aint, 7 6 madaccam 1. Oomnall mac Slain, 
mic bnlpail, 7 a mac anmchaid, 7 oponga ofglamda vo piol cceallang, 7 
pochaide ele nac aipimtean co na pocpaitce wile amanlle pu. 

Rob éiccfn oua puillebam, oua concobaip cianpaige, 7 oulliam bine mac 
Sfain na pf{man co na mbfcc buiom (uaip ni pabaccan pide ule, acc eapbarw 
an tpi céd) anmam acc fchopuim 6 mame le hiomsuin,7 pé Mombualas, 
cotugao lé catlataip,] pnomad.a pRfongaipccead pip na hilcéoaib baccan 


bernia calls the kind of boats they constructed 
Nevogs. 

4 Ath Coille-ruaidhe: i. e. the Ford of Red- 
wood. This ford was opposite Donough Mac 
Egan’s Castle of Kiltaroe, or Redwood, in the 
parish of Lorha, barony of Lower Ormond, and 
county of Tipperary. P. O’Sullevan Beare says 
that they crossed the Shannon at Port-a-tolchain 
(now Portland, in the same parish); but that 
author has committed some very glaring topo- 
graphical errors in his Description of the rout 
of O’Sullevan Beare through the County of Tip- 
perary, from which it is quite clear that he was 
writing from memory, or imperfect notes taken 
from the dictation of his father or cousin, and 
that he had no accurate map of Munster before 
him. 
* The many hundreds.—The editor of the Pa- 
cata Hibernia agrees with this,’ book iii. ¢. 17: 

‘* Being in Connaught, they passed safely 
through the county of Galway, until they came 
into the Kellies’ Countrey, where they were 
fought withall by Sir Thomas Burke, the Earle 
of Clanrickard’s brother, and Captaine Henry 
Malby, who were more in number then the 
Rebels. Neverthelesse, when they saw that 


either they must make their way by the sword 
or perish, they gave a brave charge upon our 
men, in the which Captaine Malby was slaine ; 
upon whose fall Sir Thomas and his Troopes 
fainting, with the losse of many men, studied 
their safeties by flight, and the rebels with little 
harme marched into Orwykes Countrey.” 
Philip O’Sullevan Beare gives a minute ac- 


_ count of the manner in which his cousin, the 


O’Sulievan Beare, defeated Thomas Burke and 
his adherents at Aughrim, and of the hard- 
ships and perils which he encountered till he 
arrived in O’Rourke’s country, in his Hist. 
Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 3, lib. 7, ¢. x. xi. 
After defeating his enemies at Aughrim, he 
proceeded over Shieve Mhuire (now Mount Mary, 
near Castle Kelly, but anciently Sliabh Fuirri), 
and marched through Mac David’s country, 
where the inhabitants pursued him all the day 
to prevent him from obtaining provisions. On 
the evening of the same day he betook him- 
self to Slieve-Ui-Flynn (near Ballinlough, in 
the extreme west of the county of Roscommon), 
and he concealed himself in the thick woods, 
where a friendly messenger arrived, stating that 
it was the determination of the natives to sur- 


1602. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2317 


Coille-ruaidhe’, without loss or danger, and landed on the other side in Sil- 
Anmchadha. From thence they passed on, and on the eleventh night they 
arrived at Aughrim-Hy-Many. Upon their arrival there the finhabitants of the | 
lands and the tribes in their vicinity collected behind and before them, and 
shouted in every direction around them. Among the gentlemen who came 
up with them on this occasion were the son of the Earl of Clanrickard (Thomas, 
the son of Ulick, son of Richard Saxonagh); Mac Coghlan (John Oge, the 
son of John, son of Art); O’Madden (Donnell, the son of John, son of Breasal), 
and his son, Anmchaidh; some active parties of the O’Kellys, and many others 
not enumerated, with all their forces along with them. 

O'Sullivan, O’Conor Kerry, and William Burke, son of John-na-Seamar, with 
their small party (for the entire did not fully amount to three hundred), were 
obliged to remain at Aughrim-Hy-Many to engage, fight, and sustain a battle- 
field, and test their true valour against the many hundreds’ who were oppress- 


round them early in the morning and extermi- 
nate them. They then marched on through the 
wood all night, and were pursued, early next 
morning, by Mac David, who, however, did not 
risk an engagement with men driven to such 
desperation, and they directed their course to a 
wood called Diamhrach, or the solitary. Here 
they lighted fires, and found the inhabitants not 
unfriendly. After having rested here for some 
time, they set out by night and marched over 
the Curlieu hills as far as Knockvicar, in the 
barony of Boyle, where they rested and took 
refreshment. When the day arose their guide 
shewed them O’Rourke’s castle of Leitrim at 
some distance, which they reached about eleven 
o'clock that day. By this time they were reduced 
to thirty-five in number, of whom eighteen 
were armed, sixteen calones, and one woman. 
All the rest, who were more than a thousand in 
number at their setting out from the camp at 
Glengariff, having either perished, forsaken their 
chief, or having been detained on the way by 
fatigue or wounds. O’Sullevan remained with 
O’Rourke for some days; and, after various ad- 
ventures in Ulster, he went to England after 


the coronation of James I., with O’Neill, Rury 
O’Donnell, Niall Garv O’Donnell, and others ; 
but O’Sullevan could by no means obtain a 
restitution of his territory, oreven pardon. He, 
therefore, set sail for Spain, where he was most 
graciously received by Philip III., who made 
him Knight of the Order of St. James, and 
Count of Bearhaven, with a pension of three 
hundred pieces of gold monthly. He was after- 
wards assassinated on the 16th of July, 1618, 
in the fifty-seventh year of his age, by John 
Bath, an Anglo-Irishman, whom he employed 
as a confidential servant. Of this assassination, 
his relative, P. O’Sullevan Beare, who was pre- 
sent, gives the following account in his Hist. 
Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 4, lib. 3, ¢. iv. 
“Sed vitimus aduerse fortune ictus est, quod 
decimo sexto die mensis eiusdem Osulleuanus 
Bearre princeps, in quo tune Iberni maximam 
spem habebant, miseré succubuerit, hoe modo. 
Iohannes Batheus Angloibernus, apud Osulle- 
uanum ade6 gratia pollebat, vt etiam ab eo pa- 
trocinio, & authoritate adiutus beneficijs affice- 
retur; & inter familiarissimos habitus sit etiam 
domum receptus, & in mensam admissus: Quo- 


2318 GQNNata RIOShachta €iRECNN. (1602. 


apa PRonac, 7 acca priplmmain. Ro ionnpars 6 Suillebamn go plccac 
polpniaca, 50 Pnaocoa plpconca Fup an maigin1 mbaccap na sulla, ap ap 
pu ba hulle a aimcmide 7 & aininne, 7 ni po camp Sup an 1onad ma praca 
a tcoipec Fo po vicfhoms 50 v1an ofstapaid an paop sall pin lap 71. Mac 
Capztin malber. Ro ppaoinead 1anam an an cleclamad plois pn go po map- 
bad lion vipime oiob. Op mg ma vo ponpac an upnoal vo buidm cuinte 
cjampiublaig, 7 a ccfsmonl 1 nerccipmoon a namacc, paral an ofinstinple 
oaclp ay copnam a nanma 7 a nomveancap an la pin. Ciagoenc appioe ian 
mon Zarbeb 1ap ccmiall a mbpact,7 a maipnce Popp na conaimb Fo pangaccap 


50 hullcorb. 


Mac conmapa fionn, Sfan mac taidcc, mic conmeada décc, 24. do mi 
febpu 7 vomnall a mac vo Zab a 1onad. 


rum beneficiorum Johannes immemor, e6 impu- 
dentiz processit, vt leui primum controuersia 
orta ob pecunias ab Osulleuano mutuo datas, 
inde sit ausus tanti viri clarissime nobilitati 
genus suum apud Ibernos, & Anglos, a quibus 
oritur, minimé sublime conferre. Quod egre 
ferens Philippus Osulleuani patruelis, qui hance 
historiam scribit, cum Iohanne ea de re expos- 
tulat. Wnde Madriti iuxta regium monasterium 
diui Dominici vterque alterum stricto gladio 
agereditur. Incepto certamine Johannes in- 
gente pauore perculsus, & vocem elferens loco 
semper cedebat: & illum in facie Philippus cesa 
vulnerauit : & interfecturus, videbatur, nisi 
eum Edmundus Omorra, & Giraldus Macmoris 
ab Osulleuano missi, & duo equites Hispani pro- 
texissent, Philippumque apparitor deprehendis- 
set. Cum multi vndique confluxissent, inter 
ceteros Osulleuanus aduenit leva manu rosa- 
rium, & dextera chirotecas gerens. ‘Quem lo- 
hannes conspicatus incautum, nihil timentem, 
& alid aspicientem subitd accedens gladio inter 
turbam intento per leuam lacertam confodiendo, 
& rursus guttur feriendo occidit. Philippus 
lictore frustra reluctante in domum Marchionis 
Seneceiz Galliarum legati sese abdidit. Iohan- 


nes In carcerem conijcitur vna cum consanguineo 


suo Francisco Batheo, qui rixe interfuit, sicut, 
& Daniel Odriscol Philippi consanguineus. Osul- 
leuano in eo cenobio postero die exequiarum ius 
magna frequentia Hispanorum nobilium, & stu- 
dio domini Didaci Brocheri splendidi equitis, 
Obiens annum 57 
Erat vir plané pius & largus, maximé 


regij consiliarii soluitur. 
agebat. 
in pauperes, & egenos. Duobus, vel tribus Mis- 
sarum sacris quotidié interesse solebat, longas 
ad Deum, & superos quotidianas preces effun- 
dens: crébré peccatis expiatus sacrosanctum 
Domini corpus suscipiebat. Ita mors eius su- 
bita, & infausta vite minimeé consentanea fuit, 
etsi eo etiam duobus sacris peragendis interfue- 


, 


rit, & acceptis vulneribus sit 4 sacerdotibus 


peccatis absolutus. Erat procerus, & elegans 
statura, vultu pulcher, etate canescente vene- 
rabilis.”” 

S Captain Malby.—P. O’Sullevan Beare says 
that Malby was killed by Dermot O’Huallachan 
and Cornelius O’Murchu. 

' Tt is scarcely credible that: literally, ‘‘it is 
scarce if.” 

“ John, the son of Teige-—His descendants ap- 
Ac- 
cording to a genealogical manuscript, preserved 


in the Library of the Royal Irish Academy, John 


pear to have become extinct soon after. 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 9319 


ing and pursuing them. O'Sullivan, with rage, heroism, fury, and ferocity, 
rushed to the place where he saw the English, for it was against them that he 
cherished most animosity and hatred, and made no delay until he reached the 
spot where he saw their chief; so that he quickly and dexterously beheaded 
that noble Englishman, the son of Captain Malby*. The forces there collected 
were then routed, and a countless number of them slain. It is scarcely credible 
that‘ the like number of forces, fatigued from long marching, and coming into 
the very centre of their enemies, [ever before] achieved such a victory, in 
defence of life and renown, as they achieved on that day. They afterwards 
proceeded, in the midst of spies and betrayers, along the roads until they arrived 


in Ulster. 


Mac Namara Fin (John, the son of Teige”, son of Cu-Meadha) died on the 
24th of February ; and his son, Donnell, took his place. 


Mae Namara Fin, head of his sept, who was 
living in 1714, was descended from Donough, the 
brother of this John, who died in 1602. Henry 
Pantaleon Mac Namara, Captain, Royal Navy, 
Knight of St. Louis, living in 1782, was de- 
scended of this branch of the Mac Namaras. He 
was the son of Captain Claud Matthew Mac Na- 
mara, who died in 1766, whose brother, John, 
who was born in Ireland, accompanied his parents 
to France in his infancy, and was page to his 
Serene Highness the Duke, brother of the Great 
Condé ; entered the navy, passed through the 
various grades with distinction, obtained letters 
of recognition of his nobility of extraction from 
Louis XV. in 1736, and died, in 1757, Vice- 
Admiral of France, Commander and Grand Cross 
of St. Louis, and Commandant of the Port of 
Rochfort. 

This vice-admiral was the son of John Mac 
Namara, who followed the fortunes of James II. 
According to a pedigree of this French family 
of the Mac Namaras, made out by the late Che- 
valier O’Gorman, and now preserved in the 
Library of the Royal Irish Academy, this John, 
who went to France in 1697, was the son of 
Mahon, who was the son of Donough, who was 


son of Mahon (brother of John, who was the 
father of Sir John Mac Namara of Madhmtal- 
mhan, or Mountallon), who was son of Sida, son 
of Maccon, son of Sida, son of Maccon, son of 
Teige, who was the son of Maccon, who, accord- 
ing to Ware, built the abbey of Quin in 1433. 
Major Daniel Mac Namara Bourchier repre- 
sents, in the female line, the head of the Mac 
Namaras of Rossroe. He is the son of General 
John Bourchier of Elm Hill, in the county of 
Clare, by Mary Mac Namara, daughter of Thomas 
Mac Namara, Esq. (by Lucy, eldest daughter of 
Stanislaus Mac Mahon, Esq. of Clena, head of 
the Mac Mahons of East Corca-Vaskin), who was 
son of Daniel Mac Namara of Ardeloney, son of 
Florence Mac Namara, M.P. for Clare, Custos 
Rotulorum, and a Judge; son of Daniel Mac Na- 
mara of Doon and Ardcloney, Colonel of the 
Brigade of Thomond, who went to Spain with 
a Regiment of 1200 men after the capitulation 
of Limerick, who was the son of Teige Mac Na- 
mara, son of Couvea Reagh Mac Namara of 
Clonmoynagh and Ardcloney, who died in 1625, 
son of Florence Mac Namara of Rossroe, com- 
monly called Fineen Meirgeach (vide bill filed by 


Florence Mac Namara in 1711), son of Loughlin, 


2320 ° 


AQNNaZa RIOshachtd ElREaNnN. 


(1602. 


Coinpoealbac mac matgZamna, mic an (ppuic ui bia vo manbao hi 


mameacaib le San a bane mac mocaino, mic Slain 6 doipe mec Lactna. 
Mac bnucofoa, Maoilin occ, mac maoilin, mic concobaipn décc an la 

Déld(naé vo mi decembep. Ni baof 1 nepinn 1 nén peanpain Schad, pile, 7 

EMH oana vo befpp inap. CApé vo cum na vuanta pMcapa pot noan vipeac. 


Cuinpfcc cumaoin an clomn cant. 
Tuce vam Taipe a mp an Laois. 
Qhéim mfyi a més coclan. 


Cabnam an cucipt pi an clomn carp. 


Oconad punna plocc cataoip. 7 
O cltpan sluaipio Zaoioil. 7c. 


Slucacchead la mall nganb va noomnarll 50 ngallanb 7 50 nZaoiealarb 
amaille pup ap an Fnaccmas 1 crip eosam ap ponal(m an lupcip bao hi 


son of Fineen, son of Sida Cam, son of Maccon, 
son of Sida, son of Maccon, son of Couvea, 
son of Maccon, son of Loughlin, son of Couvea 
More, son of Niall, son of Cumara, son of Don- 
nell, son of Cumara, a quo the surname of Mac 
Conmera, now anglice Mac Namara. 

* Doire-mic-Lachtna, now Derrymaclaughny, 
near Knockdoe, in the barony of Clare, and 
county of Galway.—See note ', under the year 
1598, p. 2048, supra. 

* Mac Brody.—See note *, under the year 
1563, p. 1597, supra. 

1 Dan-Direach : i.e. metrum rectum, a species 
of Irish metre very. diflicult of composition.— 
See O’Molloy’s Grammatica Latino-Hibernica, 
p- 144, where he calls it the most difficult under 
the sun: ‘*Maximé autem de Metro” [recto] 
‘omnium que unquam vidi, vel audiui, ausim 
dicere, que sub sole reperiuntur, difficillimo.” 
For some account of these poems the reader is 
referred to O’Reilly’s Descriptive Catalogue of 
Trish Writers, pp. 164, 165, A. D. 1602. 

* raechinhagh.—This is called the Fort of 
Augher by Fynes Moryson, Hist. Irel., book iii. 
c. 1, Dublin edition of 1735, vol. ii. pp- 193, 197, 
198. 


Sir Henry Doewra gives the following account 
of his own movements in Ulster at this period : 
‘*In May I receiued diuers lettres from my 
lord Deputie, all in discourse about kis intent 
of coming that sommer to Blacke water againe, 
where hee willed I should prepare myselfe to 
meete him; And the lords from England had now 
sent vs annother supplie of 800 men, that landed 
att Derrey about the latter ende of this Moneth. 
** And soe, on the 16th day of June, from 
Liffer I sett forth to meete him; but when we 
had Marched two dayes, and lay in Campe att 
Termin Mac Guirck, I understoode hee would 
not be readie till-6 dayes after; therevpon I 
returned backe, & hauing discouered by myne 
Eye, as I past by it the day before, that Omy 
was a place easie to be fortefied, & stood conve- 
nient for many vses, to leaue a Garrison in, I 
made it Defensible with fower days labour, & 
left Captaine Edmond Leigh solye in it; on the 
26th I sett forward againe, & encamped 4 Myles 
shorte from Dongannon, & going forth with some 
horse to discouer, I mett with my lord’s skowts 
that Conducted mee that night to his Campe. 
“The next day St Arthur Chichester came 
ouer at Lough Sidney, & landed 1000 Men at 


1602.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2321 


Turlough, the son of Mahon, son of the Bishop O’Brien, was slain in Hy- 
Many, by John Burke (son of Richard, son of John), of Doire-mic-Lachtna”. 
Mac Brody* (Maoilin Oge, the son of Maoilin, son of Conor) died on the 


last day of the month of December. 


of one individual, a better historian, poet, and rhymer, than he. 


There was not in Ireland, in the person 


Tt was he who 


composed these historical poems in Dan-Direacht’: 
“JT will lay an obligation on the descendants of Tal.” 
“Give thy attention to me, O Inis-an-laoigh” [Ennis]. 


“Know me, O Mac Coghlan !” 


“Let us make this visitation among the descendants of Cas.” 

“The descendants of Cathaoir are exiles here.” 

“From four the Gadelians have sprung.” 

A hosting was made by Niall Garv O’Donnell, and the English and Irish 
along with him, from Fraechmhagh’ in Tyrone, by order of the Lord Justice, who 


that place, where he presentlie erected a fforte, 
which had afterwards the name given it of 
Mountioy, & my lord, hauing gayned his pas- 
sage before, and erected annother at Black- 
water, which he called by the name of Charle- 
mounte, the axe was now at the roote of the 
tree, &, I may well say, the Necke of the Re- 
bellion as good as vtterlie broken, for all that 
Tyrone was afterwardes able to doe, was but to 
saue himselfe in places of difficult access vnto. 
““Ten dayes (as I remember) I stayed with 
his lordship in these partes, assisting him to 
spoyle & wast the Countrey, which he inde- 
uored, by all the meanes hee could possible, to 
doe; & then my prouision of victuell spent, hee 
gaue mee leaue to retourne, with order to be in 
a readines againe to meete him about a Moneth 
after. : 
_ “JT was noe sooner come home to the Defrey, 
But O Caine sent Mee an offer of his submission ; 
I acquainted ny lord withall; hee bad mee dis- 
patch & make shorte with him, that we might 
be the readier for a Mayne Prosecution vpon 
Tyrone; soe, on the 27th of July, wee came to a 
full agreement, the substaunce whercof was this 


(Countersigned with ech of our handes), that soe 
much of his Countrey as ley betweene the Rivers 
of Foghan, Bangibbon, & Loughtoyle, should be 
to her Maiestie to dispose of to whome shee 
pleased, a peece of Ground should be allotted 
for maintenance of a Garrison at the Band, the 
rest he should haue her Maiesties lettres Pat- 
tents for, to hould to him & his heires. 
Conditions my lord acknowledged to be better 
then hee looked for, approued them vnder his 


These 


hand, promised mee the inheritaunce of the re- 
serued lands, & gave me the present vse & Cus- 
todium of it vnder the Exchequer Seale, and him 
the like of the rest; then wrote vp to mee, to 
drawe vp to the Omy, to wast all the Countrie 
I could thereabouts, & there to attend him 
against hee sent vnto Mee againe. 

**On the 10th of August I came thither, & 
Hugh Boy, coming after mee the next day, was 
sett vpon and slaine by a party of loose fellowes 
that fell upon him by chaunce ; a man whom 
I found faithfull & honest, let Envie and Igno- 
raunce say what they will to the Contrarye. 
Hee left three brothers behinde him, Phelime 
Reaugh, Edmond Groome, & Shaine Cron ; they 


15 Q 


2322 aNNaza RIOshachta elReEaNn. (1602. 


Fropbaiy: pop olén an pnaocmaige an can pm go po cplcaoh lap conbmac 
mac an bantm ofpbpatain 7 néll, 7 an bupoinac, 7 plan sup an macanpe 
St(panac $0 ccantec aipccte,] cpeaca 1omda lair 5up an pppaocmars oionn- 


pansio an lupcip. 


Sloiccead ele la mall ua vomnaill vo Sallaib, 7 00 Zaowelaib ina panpad 
50 bneipne i Ruaipe 50 ccucc buan ofpme lap. 

ms Semup vo piogad1 monad na bampfogna Elizabeth an cltpamad 
la pice 00 manta, 1602, do péip aipme na Saccran, 7 00 pip pime na 
poman ap 1603. 7 ap Opie an perpead Sémup vo progaib alban. 


were all men of very good parts, & deserued a 
better Countenance, at least from the state, then 
my Creditt was able to procure them, which, if 
they had had, & those Courses forborne that 
Phelime Reaugh was vext with all, by particu- 
ler Persons, vpon no sufficient ground of reason 
that I ame wittnes to, theire liues had perhap- 
pes beene preserued to this day, & a better op- 
pinion conceiued of vs in gennerall then is by 
the rest of that Nation. Let noe man Censure 
mee a misse for this kinde of saying, for I hould 
it a sinne to Conceale a truth where I am inter- 
ressed & haue occasion to speake it. 

“Being heere & knowing my lord was not 
yet readie to take the field, I was tould by Irish 
Guides of a prey- that in theire opinion was 
easilie to be sett out of Cormocke mac Baron’s 
Countrey, & I liked theire reasons soe well, that 
I resolued to giue an attempte for it. Soe I 
tooke out 400 foote & 50 horse, & sett forth in 
the eveninge, & marcht all Night; by breake of 
the day wee found it was gone further then they 
made accompte of, &, loath to retourne Emptie, 
wee followed it till wee were at least 3 myle 
from home. Captaine Edmond Leigh, that Com- 
maunded the vaunt Guard, with a fewe light 
horse & foote, in the ende ouertooke it, guarded 
by Cormocke himselfe, whome he presentlie 
charged & beate away; then went in & gathered 
about 400 Cowes togeather, & brought them to 
vs where wee made a stande with the Mayne 


forces. Wee were then all exceeding wearie, & 
therefore, finding howses at hand, satt downe 
& rested our selues a while. After wee risse 
& had marched about three Myle, wee might 
discerne troupes of Men gathered togeather in 
Armes drawing towards a wood which wee 
must pass thorowgh, to possess themselues of it 
before vs. I then allighted, sent away my horse, 
& put myselfe in the Rere, badd the rest of the 
horse, with a fewe foote, & the Prey, make haste 
& gett thorowgh as fast as they Could; & soe 
they did before there came downe any greate 
Numbers vpon them. Vpon vs that ‘came after 
with the foote, they fell with a Crye, & all the 
terrour they were able to make; skirmisht with 
shott, till all our Powder on both sides were 
spente; then came to the sword & Push of Pike; 
& still as wee beate them off, they would retyre, 
These kindes 
of assaults, I thinke I may safelie say, they gaue 
vs at least a dozen of; yet in the end wee car- 


& by & by come vpon vs againe. 


ryed our selues cleere out ; came to place where 
our horse made a stand vpon a faire, large, & 
hard peece of ground. There wee put ourselues 
into order of Battaile, drewe forth againe &, 
marched away. They stoode in the edge of the 
woode, & gaue vs the lookeing on ; but offered 
to follow vs noe further. Soe wee lodged quiet- 
lie that Night, & the next day came home to 
Omy, where wee diuided our Prey, with in 20 
of the full Number of 400 Cowes, & found 


 1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2393 


was at the same time laying siege to the island of Fraechmhagh. He plundered 
Cormac, the son of the Baron, who was brother of O’Neill ; and also Boston, 
and the country westwards as far as Machaire-Stefanach*, and carried many 


preys and spoils to Fraechmhagh, to the Lord Justice. 

Another hosting of the English and Irish was made by Niall O’Donnell to 
Breifny O'Rourke ; and he carried off a countless number of kine. 

King James” was proclained King in the place of the Queen, Elizabeth, on 
the 24th of March, 1602, according to the English computation‘; or in 1603, 


according to the Roman computation. 


of Scotland. 


wanting of our Men about 25. 
went through was a good Myle longe ; the wood 


The pase wee 


high oaken Timber, with some Coppice amongst 
it; & most of the wayes nothing but dirte & 
myre. O Doghertie was with vs, alighted when 
I did, kept mee companie in the greatest heate 
of the feight, beheaued himselfe brauelie, & 
with a great deale of loue & affection, all that 
day, which at my next meeting with my lord 
IT recommended him for, & he gaue him the 
honnor of knighthoode in recompence of; and 


so of the Captaines & officers, there was not one ’ 


but was well putt to it, & had none other meanes 
to quitt himselfe by, but his owne Valour. And 
these I can nowe call to Remembrance were 
Captaine Leigh, Captaine Badby, Captaine Ralph 
Bingley, Captaine John Sidneye, Capt. William 
Sidney, Captaine Harte, & Ensigne Davyes, that 
was shott in the theigh, & not without Difficulty 
brought of, & afterwards safelie cured. 
‘“Shortely after my lord wrote vnto mee; he 
was almost readie for the feilde againe, & had a 
“purpose to plante a Garrison at Clogher, or 
Aghar, both standing on this Cormockes landes, 
willed mee if I could to bringe a peece of Artil- 
lery with mee, & as much victuell as I was able, 
& soe be in a readines against the next time I 
should heare from him. Artillery I was not 
able to bring ; but about 10 dayes after I came 
to him, about 8 myles wide from Dungannon, 


He was the sixth James of the Kings 


| 

&, as I remember, founde S‘ Arthur Chichester 
with him; but sure I ame, wee mett all three 
about that time, & marched togeather about 6 
or 7 dayes, in which time the Castle of Aghar, 
standing in a lough, 12 myles wide from Omy, 
was yealded to him, & he placed Captaine Richard 
Hansard in Garrison in it, with 20 dayes vic- 
tuell, & lefte mee in charge to supplie him when 
that time came out, which I did to the very 
day Tyrone was taken in, & order giuen for 
restitution of it into his handes, & afterwardes, 
when we parted, hee sent S" Hen. Follyatt with 
Mee to Comaund att Ballyshannon, first with 
directions to be vnder Mee, but not long after 
to be absolute Gouernor of himselfe.” 

* Machaire-Stefanach, now Magherastephanagh, 
a barony in the east of the county of Fermanagh, 
adjoining Tyrone. 

> King James.—Sir Harris Nicolas says, that 
‘“‘for nearly twelve months after James’s acces- 
sion, the Statutes then in force vested the legal 
right to the throne in Lord Seymour, eldest son- 
of the Earl of Hertford, by Lady Katherine 
Grey (sister of Lady Jane Grey), as heir of 
Mary, Duchess of Suffolk, the youngest sister 
of Henry VIII. James’s hereditary pretensions 
were not acknowledged and ratified by Parlia- 
ment until March; 1604.” 

© The English computation.—The Julian, or old 
style, and the practice of commencing the le- 


13 Q2 


2324 GNNadta RIOshachta eElReEaNN. 


[1602. 


Imtupa f nell 7 na n5aowdeal po anpac 1 nepinn ian maim cmn cpaile, 
ba plo po tioncoipcc, 7 po atm ua vomnaill aod puad ofob pla nimteact 00 
von ppainn calma do Dénam acc copnam a natapoa FN sallaib 50 TTiopaD 
pom pocnaicce laip dia PROIPITIN, 7 GIMProm 1pm 1lompulde 1 Mbactap ap po 
bad bfce a cclpbad 5é po meabad poppa. Aobfpc piu ona nan bo hupapa 
vob 1ompud meallma via Tcip v1Ia madeaoh no bad lain Leo, ap no bertcip 
a namvde 7 a mbioobada aga tcopalgeact, | ‘acca tToccpaim, 7 an opong 
pobcap spaovac captanac impa ace Toct do1b Don Mumann, Somoip mipcenec 
miopinaé 1a0plde OoIb ay cTlonnTHo o1a TTimb, 7 Ho mbeiccip aga pruabarpc, 
j acc vénam a néovala, 7 acc cluice 7 acc panamacec impaib. 

Ni po sabpacc cha mate Zaoideal an comaiple pin, 7 ni Deapnpac Pain 
an po cums cuca 6 na baot pin (coppa. Acc apo po cimnpiot tionnctd dict 
ccipb. Coccap ianam ma mbnéoib plas san cfnnap uadaib oaomn tiZeapna 
act Fac TIZeapna, 7 Zac coipeac po Lat co na tamypib, 7 co na muincin ofp 
ina Lmam. =Monuap am nion 66 honann mfnma, 7 mfyneac, bnigh 7 bonp- 
pao, bens, banann vo na saowealab ag pill(o ma ppmting an can pin, 7 
amoul po baccan 6 cap ace dol pon an eactpa yin. Ro pfopad poncantca na 
plata uf domnaill, 7 Zac ni po taippnsin 0616, ap nf nama po coméinslecan 
a mbiodbada bund ma nazao plmpa, 7 ma noid do Catuccad pniu, acc 
po éinsCccan an caop capaccpaid, 7 commctngal, 7 a ccompannca coccaid 
50 mbaccap ag oeabhad 7 acc o1ubnaccad ponna in Fac conaip 1omcumains 
cTpép an cinspioc. Nip bo hupupa oa naipeacanb 7 oa nuaiphb o1a noccarb 


gal year on the 25th March, subsisted in Eng- 
Jand until the 24 Geo. II., 1751, in which year 


introduced into his picture of the Election Din- 
ner a placard inscribed, ‘“‘Give us our eleven 


an Act of Parliament passed for making the year 
commence with the first of January. Sir Harris 
Nicolas observes, in his Chronology of History, 
2nd edit. p. 37, that though some enlightened 
minds in England endeavoured to introduce the 
reformed calendar, soon after it was passed [in 
October, 1582], and cited the example of other 
countries, it was rejected by the Legislature, 
‘apparently for no other reason than that the 
plan had emanated from Rome.” He also re- 
marks that this Bill for Reforming the Calen- 


dar was so generally unpopular, that Hogarth 
8 ] 5 


days !” 

4 Scoff at—An English writer would say, 
‘““and treat them with contumely, contempt, 
and mockery.” i 

© How different : literally, ‘‘ Alas! not equal, 
indeed, were the spirit, courage,” &c. The sen- 
tence would be much more effective if reversed 
thus: ‘Alas! how different were the feelings 
of the Irish on their return home on this occa- 
sion, from the courage, vigour, self-reliance, 
spirit of defiance, and magnanimity, by which 
they were exalted, animated, elated, sublimated, 


1602.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2325 


As for O'Neill and the Irish [adherents] who remained in Ireland after the 
defeat at Kinsale, what O’ Donnell (Hugh Roe) had instructed and commanded 
them to do, before his departure for Spain, was, to exert their bravery in 
defending their patrimony against the English, until he should return with 
forces to their relief, and to remain in the camp in which they [then] were, 
because their loss was small, although they had been routed. He had observed 
to them also that it would not be easy for them to return safe to their country, 
if that were their wish, because their enemies and adversaries would pursue 
and attack them ; and those who had been affectionate and kind towards thems 
on their coming into Munster, would be spiteful and malicious towards them 
on their return to their territories, and that they would attack and plunder 
them, and scoff at and mock them’. 

The chiefs of the Irish did not, however, take his advice, and did not attend 
to his request, because he himself was not among them ; but they resolved on 
returning to their territories. ‘They afterwards set out in separate hosts, with- 
out ceding the leadership to any one lord ; but each lord and chieftain apart, 
with his own friends and faithful people following him. Alas! how different* 
were the spirit, courage, energy, hauteur, threatening, and defiance of the Irish, 
on their return back at this time, from those they had when they first set out 
on this expedition. The surmises of the Prince O'Donnell, and every thing 
which he predicted, were verified ; for, not only did their constant enemies rise 
up before and after them to give them battle, but their [former] friends, conte- 
derates, and allies, rose up, and were attacking and shooting them on every 


narrow road through which they passed. 


on their way into Munster, when O’Donnell 
performed, on a Winter’s day, the greatest 
march of which there exists any record, and 
O’Neill overawed his enemies from the Boyne 
to the Bandon.” 

The Spanish General was so disgusted at this 
sudden-retreat of the Irish, that, in his very 
first conference with Sir William Godolphin, 
he pronounced the Irish to be *‘ not only weake 
and barbarous, but, as he feared, perfidious 
friends ;”” and, among the sarcasms he after- 
wards gave vent to, in treating with the Eng- 


It was not easy for the chiefs and 


lish, he is reported to have said: ‘‘ Presuming 
on their promise, that I should have joyned with 
them within a few dayes of the arrival of their 
forces, I expected long, in vaine sustained the 
brunt of the Viceroy’s Armes. I then saw these 
two Counts take their stand, within two miles 
of Kinsale, reinforced with some Companies of 
Spaniards, and every hour repeating their pro- 
After 
all this we saw them at last broken with a hand- 


mise to join us in forcing your camps. 


ful of men, blown asunder into divers parts of 
the world, O Donnell into Spaine, O Neale to 


2326) GNNdzwa RIOSshachtd ElREGNn. (1602. 


7 na miblfoaib anacal 7 mofsal a mumcine an foo na plicced baoi nfmpa 
7 la homat a nfpcecanac, la voinmnn 7 la deancan na saipbrme simpeacca 
an ba veipead seimpid do ponpad baoi ann an canypm. Ap a aoi cfna 
pangaccan iap mon. sonbeib via crib Zan Ecc omdeine opagbaul, 7 po sab 
yac TIZeanna Tine aca ay mdio(n a atapda amail ap pfpp po peo. 

Rudpase ona 6 vomnaill mac aoda mic magnapa ba harccepoe po 
paccaib 6 vomnaill (an adag pe mimteacc 00) clnnap a muinzipe, a tine, 7 
ce talman, 7 Zac nfite po bad toic 06 Fo tTciopad pom ina pmcting do mop), 7 
fo atin oua nell, 7 00 Rodpaige Fomoip capaccpac pm a pole amail po 
baccan pom fin ina noir. » Ro tingeallpac oopom imnpin. 

Ro 1adpatc cenel cconaill raptcain im oamna a pplata sé bd pocanad 
cuinp pm hanmain la a nupmon foanpecanad pip amci po bad cumsid 7 po 
bad poplamad ponpa 50 pin. Ro sab tna mac 1 vomnall Ruopaige acc 
pémmpéouccad a muintine co peitpeac pioncalma in Zac conan dodaing do- 
imteacta, m Zac Zabaio, 7] m Zac Zuapacc vo pala odib 6 00 pagaibpioz 
e{nntpale 50 pangaccan 1 nuptopac eanpais 50 hioccap connact ainm 1 
pabaccan buap, 7 bnugada, cpod, 7 cltpa ceneoil cconaill peacnom na cipe 
1pm cconann hi luigmb,7 hi ccip Pracnac muaide. 6a mart an buacail 7 an 
cTHOZaINE DO pact cucarom annpin, ap Fén b6 Momova cpod corccpice po 
paccaib 6 vomnaill aga mumein acc pecanad pit, ni po léicc Rudnarge a 
nactcumaoin udoaA OIA GIMDEOIN DO PaIs1d nac Tipe ap A TTUCCAD 1aTT, DOF 
po p(n, 7 po pplenang a ampa,7 a occbaid pon b(pnadanb baogant, 4 pon 
Monsib erpinnile na cpice co na lamta toct tainpib oposail no omnsperm 
neich o1a MuInzippiom. 

baof ona 6 sallcubain Eosan mac Slain acc 1oméoiméce baile an mécang 
6 ua noomnanill o po cmalliyin mumain gup an can pin, 6 do macc Ruopaise 
cuca co. bfpt an banle noo co mbaot pon a cumay. 


the furthest part of the north, so that now I 
See the 
Pacata Hibernia, book ii. c. xxiii., and Moryson’s 
History of Ireland, edit. of 1735, vol. ii. pp. 61, 
52 


da. 


find no such Counts in rerum natura.” 


' The length of the way: i.e. the long journey 
they had to pass. 


& Remarkable loss: i.e. without losing any 


man of note. 

» Return back again.—This phraseology is re- 
dundant, but it is perfectly literal. 

i Commanded, po cizin.—This is not the pro- 
per verb ; po cuingid, i. e. he requested or im- 
plored, would be far more correct. 

K Themselves both : i.e. Hugh Roe and O’Neill. 

' This thing.—It should be: ‘ They accord- 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2327 


gentlemen, for the soldiers and warriors, to protect and defend their people, on 
aceount of the length of the way‘ that lay before them, the number of their 
enemies, and the severity and inclemency of the boisterous winter season, for 
it was then the end of winter precisely. Howbeit, they reached their territoryes 
after great dangers, without any remarkable loss*; and each lord of a territory 
began to defend his patrimony as well as he was able. 

Rury O'Donnell, the son of Hugh, son of Manus, was he to whom O’Donnell 
had, on the night before his departure, left the government of his people and 
lands, and everything which was hereditary to him, until he should return 
back again’; and he had commanded’ O’Neill and Rury to be friendly to each 
other, as themselves both* had been. They promised him this thing". 

The Kinel-Connell then thronged around the representative of their prince”, 
though most of them deemed the separation from their former hero and leader 
as the separation of soul from body. O’Donnell’s son, Rury, proceeded to lead 
his people with resoluteness and constant bravery through every difficult and 
intricate passage, and through every danger and peril which they had to en- 
counter since they left Kinsale until they arrived, in the very beginning of 
spring, in Lower Connaught, where the cows, farmers", property, and cattle of 
the Kinel-Connell were [dispersed] throughout the country, in Corran, in 
Leyny, and in Tireragh of the Moy. God was the herdsman and shepherd 
who had come to them thither; for although O'Donnell, at his departure, had 
left his people much of the cattle of the neighbouring territories, Rury did not 
suffer them to be forcibly recovered from him by any territory from which 
they had been taken; for he distributed and stationed his soldiers and warriors 
upon the gaps of danger and the undefended passes of the country, so that 
none would attempt to come through them to plunder or persecute any of his 
people. ; 

O’Gallagher (Owen, the son of John), had been keeping the castle of Bally- 
mote for O’Donnell, since he set out for Munster, until this time ; but as soon as 
Rury returned he gave the castle up to him, so that if was under his command. 


ingly promised so to continue.” merely for the sake of alliteration. The sen- 
™ Representative of their prince: literally, “ma- tence should be: ‘‘ Where the farmers of the 

teries principis sui.” Kinel-Connell were staying, with, their cows 
2 Cows, farmers.—These words are grouped and other cattle and property.” 


GQNNata RIOSshachtd ElReEaNN. 


\ 


Caipciall beoil ata plas 1 mbactan 1omcomméva 6 ua noomnaill vo 
sabail la mall n5anb ua noomnaill, 7 la salleabiap na bmpead, 7 1ap.na 
blandpébad la sonna mon vo beantpac cuicce, 7 an banda vo teapndo ap an 
elud 6 na bao cobcup na compuptact 1 ccompoccuy 0616 7 ba 1pm eanpac 


2328 (1602. 


vO Ponnpad vo Zabad an caupoiall hipin. 
Imp parmép 7 mp meic conall vo Zabel la haod mbuioe mac cumn 
uf domnaull, 7 conbmac mac donnchaid dice MéZwIOIP do sabcal loanyp beop. 
Niall sanb cona veanbpaitmb, 7 50 n5allaib do dol 1 napcpaisib pon loch 


eine 50 plo 5sabad, 7 50 po bnipead leo mp ceiclfnn. 


Ro sabad leo vin 


vaiminip, 7 lor sabail, 7 po paccaibsioc banoa imoib. 
Mac puibne basgameac, Oonnchad mac maolmuipe vo toct dIonnpaigio 


nell f oomnanll 7 na ngall. 


Niall, 7 mac puibne vo tocan pé opung oo rol 


wldip, 7 oo clon caba dia po manbad pochaie 7 bmian mac oubsaill més 


caba vo Zabanl leo. 


Oilén cille wisZeannaig bn ppeanaib manac vo sabanl la oomnall mac 
cumn 1 vomnanill, 7 éoala 1omoa do tabaint ap. 
Cpneac la haod mbuide mac cuinn1 domnaill pop cuatal mac peilim ouib 


i nell 1 noucharg pleacca ain 1 nell. 


Sin ohuen lambent vo teacc pluas mop vo sZallanb 7 vo Zaoiwealanb 
iym Tpampad vo fonnad 50 plicceac, 7 baccap hipwoe hi ppopbarm fon 


° By Niall Garv.—The castle of Ballyshan- 
non, ‘*that long desired place,’ was taken by 
Captain Digges, one of Docwra/s officers, on the 
25th of March. Doewra himself has written the 
following account of it in his Narration : 

‘And now, being earnestlie called vpon for a 
supplie of victuells by them at Dunnagall (the 
second shipping I had sent about for that pur- 
pose being kept backe with foule weather), I 
tooke vp Garrons in O Doghertie’s Countrey, 
loaded them with salte & Biskitt, & with 100 
Beeues went over the mountaines, most parte 
on foote, the wayes were soe rotten, & on the 
12th day of December broughte them reliefe ; 
& because I sawe that litle pile, reserued from 
the rage of the fire, to small, a greate deale, to 


containe a large & important Garrison, I re- 
moued parte of them, & added two Companys 
moore, to ly at Ashrowe, an Abbay 10 myles 
further, & not aboue a quarter of a Myle dis- 
tant from Ballyshannon ; left.Captaine.-Edward 
Digges, the Sergiant Maior, to Commaund there; 
tooke a viewe of the Castle; promised, as soone 
as I came home, to send him the Demy cannon, 
which, before, [had taken Ainogh withall; gaue 
my oppinion howe he should proceede in the vse 
of it ; tooke cath & pledges of the chiefe of the 
Inhabitants thereabouts ; and soe returned. By 
the way I was a litle stopped by the passage of 
the waters, & before I came home the Newes 
ouertooke Mee of the Lord Deputie’s happie 
victorie att Kinsaile, of Tyrone’s flight and re- 


1602.) ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2329 


The castle of Ballyshannon, in which guards. had been placed by O’Don- 
nell, was taken by Niall Garv’ O’Donnell and the English, after they had 
broken and greatly battered it by a great gun which they had carried to it; 
and the warders, seeing that there was no assistance or relief at hand, escaped 
from it by flight. This castle was taken in spring. 

Inis-Saimer [at Ballyshannon] and Inis-mic-Conaill? were taken by Hugh 
Boy, the son of Con O'Donnell ; and Cormac, the son of Donough Oge Maguire, 


was also taken prisoner by him. 


Niall Garv, with his brothers, and the English, went in boats on Lough 


Erne, and took and destroyed Enniskillen. 


They also took [the monasteries 


of] Devenish and Lisgoole, and left warders in them. 

Mac Sweeny Banagh (Donough, the son of Mulmurry) came over to Niall 
O'Donnell and the English. Niall and Mac Sweeny fought a battle with a 
party of the Maguires and Mac Cabes, in which many were slain; and Brian, 
the son of Dowell Mac Cabe, was taken prisoner by them. 


The island of Cill-T 


Tighearnaigh’, in Fermanagh, was taken by Donnell, the 


son of Con O’Donnell ; and he carried off many spoils from it. 

Hugh Boy, the son of Con O'Donnell, took a prey from Tuathal, son of 
Felim Duff O'Neill, in the country of the Slhiocht-Airt’ O'Neill. 

Sir Oliver Lambert came in the summer to Sligo with a numerous army of 
English and Irish, and there encamped against Rury O’Donnell, who was to 


turning homewards, & of O Donnell’s departure 


to Sea to goe into Spaine. I sent away the Can- _ 


non assoone as I came home, & on the 20th of 
March it arrived there, & on the 25th (being 
the first day of the yeare 1602) was that long 
desired place taken by the said Captaine Digges, 
with lesse then a tenth parte of that charge which 
would haue beene willinglie bestowed vpon it, 
& the Consequence thereof brought many fur- 
therances to the gennerall seruice.” 

P Inis-mic-Conaill : i. e. the Island of the Son 
of Conall. This name does not now exist in the’ 
county of Donegal. It was probably the name 
of the Island in Lough Esk, near Donegal. 

4 Cill-Tighearnaigh: i.e. the Church of St. 


Tighearnach, now. Kiltierney, in the barony of 
Lurg, and county of Fermanagh. 

' Sliocht-Atrt, a sept of the O’ Neills descended 
from Art mac Con, the grandfather of Turlough 
Luineach. They were seated in the barony of 
Strabane, and possessed Castle Derg and the 
Crannog of Loch Laeghaire. Docwra describes 
the situation of this sept as follows: 

“In the beginning of Aprill” [1600] “‘ I made 
another iourney upon them of Sleught-Art, a 
People that inhabited a Countrey in Tyrone of 
16 myles longe, most parte Bogge & wood, & 
bordering not farr off from the Liffer, where 
onelie I had, by Neale Garvie’s means, Castle 
Derg deliuered into my hands.” 


13 R 


9330 anNNdzwa RIOshachtd elReaNn. [1602. 


Ruodpaige ua noomnanll baoi alla tuap oiob, 7 pop 1occtap connact ap cfha | 
our an ccaipplofp ni oa néovalanb. Oo deachaid umoppo cachbapp mac aoda 
oub 1 Domnall 50 plo cfngeul a Cupay a mumnc(pup la Sip oluep. 6a hann 
baoi campiom 7 ofnapup catbaipp an can pm 1 noun alle von Lit a map do 
flicceac. Oppo po cmall Sin olibep, 7 catbapn co na plog vol o1appard 
cneac 7 eoala 50 peanaib manac. O po clop la Rudpase ua noomnaill an 
cepcmiall pin ba vols lap a aop covalg 7 canadpad vo 1onpad san Toct 
DIM PHUNTACT DIG TTIOPad DE 7} DO Cold DO Parshid us Ruane (bpan occ) 
va Iappald Pop Toct ma focnaiTce ap co ccocnad FIP na sZallonb 1pm 
cconain m no bad og lap a ppagbanl 1 nfoanbaogal, 7 po cumms pain beop 
congnam lap 1pm ccoccad 50 tcfopad o vorinall vo cobain gZaoweal, 4 
oinad vamp dvitoglong: ora bonleib no biad na 1onad cumpanta aga aor 
sonta ] atsZaoite, eimpci, 7 eaplamte, 7 ona pmp pm fo no léiccead a 
muinzip co na ccnod, 7 cféparb cucca ina tip. Ro ob 6 Ruaine mac uf dom- 
naill im sac ni po pip pap. 6a méla, 7 ba hataip lappium a é:msfo 1071p, 
conad €ad do pdme 6 na baoi comlion plore pip na salle’ aipipiom az 
mmofsonl a mumcme badéin. 

Oala Sip oluep vo cod pride 7 catbapp co na ctiondl 50 po cneachad 
leo ma mbaof ina ccompoccup vo peapaib manac,7 00 beantpac éccala 
iomoa led, J Impuroyiote DIA Tos Ib. 

Ro harpneidead do Sip olen an cencpiall vo pone Rudpaigse 6 vomnanll, 
7 amail po cums pon ua Ruaine cocc lap o1a commmfpcee pom don tupup 
pémebencman. Ro méovaig a aincpide ni bad uille pp ap a lor gonad ape 
rin po cocurn purllead plorg a hatluam ma ovocum vo diogail a mipecne fon 
Ruodpaise. Ov cualaig Ruopaise 50 mbaccan soill ata luain ag tcoct oon 
Lat anuap ora iomnpaicchid, 7 5o0ill pliccis von Lit ele, Ro ciomainclo a 
cnod 7 a cltpa, a imnile, 7 a capnéip lap can comppplab na plspa hn mag 
luinec, apmde cap pronainn hh muincin eolarp, 7 co pliab an rapaimn In ccon- 
maicne péin co na cantaic(p soill ni ofob, 7 50 po 1ompaioproc Zorll ata 
luam oa ctigib Zan nac -copecap von cup pm. Oo taoopact mumntip merc 


> Dun-Aille: i.e. the Dun or Fort of the this is called the castle of Downally, and de- 
Cliff or Precipice, now Donally, in the parish of scribed as situated “in Collary, in the barony 
Calry, barony of Carbury, and county of Sligo. of Carbery and county of Sligo.” 
In the deed of partition of the Sligo estate, * But seeing : literally, ‘so that what he did, 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2331 


the south of them, and against [the inhabitants of] Lower Connaught in general, 
to try whether they could seize on any of their property. Caffar, the son of 
Hugh Duv O'Donnell, went and ratified his peace and friendship with Sir Oliver. 
The place at which Caffar had his residence and fortress at this time was Dun- 
Aille’, to the west of Sligo; [and] Sir Oliver and Caffar prepared to go with 
their forces into Fermanagh, in search of preys and spoils. 

As soon as Rury O’Donnell heard of this expedition, it grieved him “that his 
allies and friends should be plundered, without coming to their relief, if he 
could; and he repaired to O’Rourke (Brian Oge), to request of him to join his 
forces, that they might engage the English at a pass where he expected to get 
an advantage of them. He also requested him to assist him in the war until 
O'Donnell should return to relieve the Irish, and to give him one of his strong, 
impregnable castles, as a resting-place for his wounded, disabled, feeble, and 
sick people ; and, moreover, that he would allow his people [to remove] with 
their property and cattle into his territory. O'Rourke refused the son of 
O'Donnell everything he requested of him, and the other was grieved and 
insulted at his refusal; but, seeing’ that he was not strong enough to cope with 
the English, he remained to protect his own people. 

As for Sir Oliver, he and Caffar went, with their muster, and plundered the 
neighbouring parts of Fermanagh ; and, after carrying off many spoils, they 
returned to their houses. 

Sir Oliver was informed of the proceedings of Rury O’Donnell, and how he 
had requested of O’Rourke to join him, to obstruct him [Sir Oliver] in the 
expedition which we have before mentioned, and his animosity against him 
grew greater on account of it; and he, therefore, sent for additional forces to 
Athlone, to wreak his vengeance upon Rury. As soon as Rury heard that the 
English of Athlone were approaching him from the south side, and the English 
of Sligo from the other side, he collected his property, his cattle, flocks, and 
herds, [and moved] with them across Coirrshliabh-na-Seaghsa into Moylurg, 
from thence across the Shannon into Muintir-Eolais, and to Shabh-an-Iarainn, 
in Conmaicne-Rein ; so that the English seized no portion of them; and the 
English of Athlone returned to their homes without gaining any victory on that 


as he was not of equal force with the English, this idiom looks so inelegant in English that 
was, to remain protecting his own people.” But the Editor has taken the liberty to alter it. 


Tok 2 


2339 QNNAZa RIOSshachTA ElREGNN. [1602. 


U1 domnaull co na ccpooh pon cetlaib vo mdi Fup na hancib ap po posluarp- 
plot .1. 5up an cconann go luigne, 7 co tip placnac. 

Oo coid umonpo Ruopaige budém so lion a cionoil 50 pcunice 50 hoilén 
loca Mapcecans alla toip vo dGn na ngall aipm a mbaccap bapoada 1 dom- 
naall, 7 m po paccbad ua concobaip Sliccig In lam o po gabad eipde la 
hua noomnaill 0 oeipead an tpampaid hipm. O vo acc pom von baile 
baccap paoils a mumcip pram. Ro cingeall 6 concobain a sap vo mac 
ui domnaill, 7 14 naiom a ccon 7 a cconnapta pM a poile po léicc ua con- 
cobain a sfimeal, 7 00 dDeacaccap 1apam cap anaip hi cconnaccaib. 

] neacmaing na pee pin .1. Ipin ppogmap do ponnad po tionolpioc Foil 
Roppa coma, ] uactain connacc pluagy mon do tocc pon Rudpaise. ua noom- 
naill domdiy1, 7 ni po hanad leo Fo pangaccan 50 mammpoip na biille. Ro 
clcclamaod plog nale la Rudpage, 7 la hua cconcobain ma ccomddil 50 
accaccan tan compplab g0 po sabpace lonspopt po encomaip an baile 
von caoib anall. Oo b(pcpac a muincteana co na cod, 7 co na ceftpaib ap 
na ccul 6 mag 1 Zaopa bi cctil 6 ppINn, Sup an ccfnd top vo coipppliab, ap 
ba homan leo na soll baccan hi pliccle o1a ccpeachad oa néip dia mbeiccip 
1 neiscincém uadaib. baccap achad amlaid pin aghaid 1 naghaid m pporcill 
anole. Ro Zonad 7 po loictead vaoine 1omda (coppa in aipn(ce baccap 1pm 
mampomp. 6a cian lap na sallaib baccan an cucc pin Zonad (od po cimnp te 
iomnpaisz1o an bealais buide pon Rudpaige, 7 pon ua cconcubaip, 7 ool 
cTappa dia normdedin. Ro pn(plaid 7 po pmotahec lap na saoidealaib uain 
po picchead pecamnean cpdda fcoppa so po mapbad ile vo na sallanb, 7 sun 
b6 hficcfn ob PO DeHId Pillead na PRINS ian na mélaccnuccad Fo mon. 
Paccbaict an maimptip 1apam, 7] vo dbeacaccap Tan anaip 50 por comauin. 

Our pice Rudpaige 7 ua concobain tan coipppliab,7 po sabpacc pop- 
lonspopc ag Cpoana i ppopbaiys pop na sallaib baccap hi plicceac. Peace 
am oup nantoaicih poinfno vo na-sallaib pémpdice az béin anba, 7 slapgone 


“ Loch-Iasgach, now Lough Esk. is situated is Cuil-Obh-Finn. It is now made 
¥ Cuil-O-bh-Fhinn.—This was first written anglice Coolavin, which is a well-known barony 
hi ccuil 6 pplom, but the letters lo would ap- verging on Lough Gara, in the south of the 
pear to have been cancelled, evidently by the county of Sligo. . 
original scribe. There is a district called Cuil- Ww Bealach-Buidhe: i. e. the Yellow Road or 
O’bhFloinn, in the county of Leitrim, but the Pass, now anglice Ballaghboy, the name of a 
true name of the territory in which Moy-O’Gara pass or ancient road over the Curlieu hills, on 


1602.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2333 


occasion. The people of the son of O'Donnell [then] returned back again with 
their cattle to the places from which they had set out, namely, to Corran, Leyny, 
and Tireragh. 

Rury himself then set out with all his forces, and arrived at the island of 
Loch-Iasgach", to the east side of Donegal, where O’Donnell’s warders were, and 
where O’Conor Sligo was left in custody, since he had been taken by O'Donnell 
until the end of that summer. When he came to this castle, his people there 
were much rejoiced at his arrival. O’Conor promised to be entirely submissive 
to O’Donnell’s son; and after they had entered into a treaty of friendship with 
each other, he released O’Conor from captivity ; and they afterwards returned 
back to Connaught. 

At this time, that is, in autumn, the English of Roscommon and Upper 
Connaught mustered a numerous army, to march against Rury O’Donnell again; 
and they did not delay until they arrived at the monastery of Boyle. Rury 
and O’Conor mustered another army to meet them ; and they marched across 
Coirrshliabh, and pitched their camp before the town at the other side. They 
took their people, with their property and cattle, along with them, from Moy- 
O’Gara in Cuil-O-bh-Fhinn” to the eastern extremity of the Coirrshhabh; for 
they were afraid that the English of Sligo would plunder them in their absence, 
were they far distant from them. Thus they remained for some time, face to 
face, in readiness for each other ; and many persons were disabled and wounded 
between them, while in the monastery. The English deemed it too long they 
had been in that situation ; and they resolved to face Bealach-Buidhe”, and pass 
it in despite of Rury and O’Conor. They were met and responded to by the 
Irish ; and a fierce battle was fought between them, in which many of the 
English* were slain ; so that they [the survivors] were compelled to return 
back, after being much disheartened. They afterwards left the monastery, and 
returned to Roscommon. 

Rury and O’Conor proceeded across Coirrshliabh, and pitched their camp 
at Ballysadare, to wage war with the English of Sligo. One day they overtook a 
party of the English aforementioned, who were cutting down the corn and green 


the borders of the counties of Roscommon and * Many of the English.—This should be, ‘“ In 
Sligo.—See note *, under the year 1497, p.1232, which the English lost so many men that they 
supra. were compelled to return back,” &e. 


2334 ANNAZA RIOShMachTA ElREANN. [1603. 


an tine an nion 66 padbin Lom iavpide, 7 po mudangic led po céddIp. » Oo 
ponpac opad miopa pm apoile 1apccan. 

Ro tocaitpiot pamlaid 50 huptopac seimpio go po cup Condo Ceute- 
nant Zenenal coccaid na heneann (.1. chaplep blunc .. lopo mounciop), 
ceacta 7 pecpibenn vo paiccid Ruopaige f oomnaill oa aplac pain teact 
£6 pit, 7 caoncompac. ba hfo a trotact via pad pip sup 66 hhomaipcciwde 
D6 FE nd oiccpld PO pid 7 CaupdIne, 7 po bad mtpeac lap muna Tforad 
ITTIP, UI! DO Puacc pccéla curcceplom go po écc ua oomnanll ofpbpacaip — 
Radpaisze pin Spainn, 7 50 noeachand an coccad vo lithe via orohead, 7 
po bad tosaoip, 7 po bad meallad mon 06 muna deannad pid pmiupuM a 
TTPAITTE. 

O no haipléugaicc na litpe po saipmic a comaiphs 50 Rudpaise our 
c10d DO DEnad 7 po Zab ag cpvo acomaiple pmo. bGaccap porp(n ofob asa 
pada nan bo pip Ecc 1 Domnall, 7 sup ab via bpéccad 7 dia togaochad 
pom, 7 dia accomal py oligead po volbad an pecél pin curcce. Oo baccan 
opons ele aga pad sup bo pion, 7 5un bo ofscomaiple an crit vo Zabanl an 
can po bap aga haplac poppa conad pap po hanad leo po demH1d e1ppium 4 
ua concobain Sliccig 00 dol 50 hat Luan vo naiom a ploda pp an ngenenal. 
Tiagaicc iapccam, 7 po pradengicc lapm ngenepal, 7 v0 pace ondip 7 
capmiccin m6n do mac f domnall, 7 vo pome pio FMP a hucc an ms,7 po 
naiom a caipolp pmippum pampit. Comaipléiceip 06 1apam vol oa atapoa 
oiamad lainn Lap. 


QO1S CRIOST, 16038. 
Coip Cmort, mile, pe cézz, a tpi. 


O Nerll Goo mac an fpipdoncae, 7 unmop saoideal leite cute do toct 
po pid cenmoca ua Ruaine ap po heppuaccnad pit coitefnn, 7 aiplcc a pola, 


¥ Requested of them.—The English writers re- 
verse this account, and state that Rory O’Don- 
nell made humble suit to the Lord Deputy for 
Her Majesty’s mercy.—See Moryson, book iii. 
c. 1. edit. of 1735, vol. i. p. 226. 

2 0’ Neill.—If Queen Elizabeth had lived afew 
months longer, O’Neill would never have been 
taken into mercy, as appears from her letter to 


Mountjoy, dated 9th October, 1602, in which 
she writes as follows : 

‘Lastly, for Tyrone, we do so much mislike 
to give him any Grace, that hath been the only 
Author of so much Effusion of blood, and the 
most ungrateful Viper to us that raised him, 
and one that hath so often deceived us, both 
when he hath craved his Pardon, and when he 


1603.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2335 


crops of the country, because they were not rich in provisions, and they were 
annihilated by them at once. They [1.e. the English of Sligo, and Rury O’Don- 
nell and his party] afterwards made a month’s truce with each other. 

Thus they passed the time until the beginning of winter, when the Lord 
Lieutenant and General of the war of Ireland (namely, Charles Blount, Lord 
Mountjoy) sent messengers and letters to Rury O’Donnell, requesting him to 
come upon terms of peace and tranquillity. The import of these [letters] was, 
that it was meet for him to come upon terms of peace and friendship, and that, 
if he would not, he should be sorry for it, for that news had reached him that 
O'Donnell, Rury’s brother, had died in Spain, and that the war was at an end 
by his death, and that it would be a great want of wisdom, and [self] delusion, 
in him, if he did not make peace with him [Mountjoy] immediately. 

As soon as he had read the letters, Rury called his advisers to him, to con- 
sider what he should do; and he began to deliberate with them in council. 
Some of them said that the [report of ] O’Donnell’s death was not true, but that 
the story had been fabricated, [and sent him] to allure and deceive him [Rury], 
and to bind him by law. Another party asserted that the rumour was true, 
that it was good advice to accept of the peace, when it was requested of them’; 
so that what they finally agreed upon was, that he and O’Conor Sligo should 
go to Athlone, to ratify their peace with the General. They afterwards went, 
and were welcomed by the General ; and he shewed great honour and respect 
to the son of O'Donnell, and made peace with him on behalf of the King, and 
confirmed his friendship with him in particular. He then recommended him 
to return, if he thought proper, to his patrimony. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1608. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred three. 


__. O'Neill? (Hugh, the son of Ferdorcha) and most of the Irish of Leath-Chuinn, 
except O’Rourke, came in under peace; for a proclamation for a general peace, 


hath received it of us, as when we consider how _ still remain determined not to give him Grace 
much the World will impute to us of Weakness of any kind.”—Moryson’s History of Ireland, 
to shew favour to him now, as if, without that, book iii. c. 1. vol. 11. p. 226 

we could not give an end to this Rebellion, we After this Her Majesty’s officers in Ireland 


2336 


AQnNNaza RIOshUuchta ElREGNN. 


[1603. 


| a duitce 0a Zac aon la bad cal o mépdacc an pig Bing Sémarp rap na — 
omIponead 1 Monad na bammpfosna 6p paraib Ppainc,7 uap Eipimn. 


had recourse to every stratagem that cunning 
and subtlety could suggest, to take him priso- 
ner, or assassinate him; but he had been edu- 
cated in their own school, and had learned to 
The 
Lord Deputy Mountjoy complains of O’Neill’s 
skill in keeping on his head, and of the inviola- 
ble honour of his followers, who could not be 
induced, by any bribe, to lay violent hands upon 
his sacred person, in a letter written to the Lords 
in England on the 25th of February, 1602, as 
follows : 


avoid them with equal skill and caution. 


‘“* And it is most sure that never Traitor knew 
better how to keep his own Head than this, nor 
any Subjects have a more dreadful Awe to lay 
violent Hands on their sacred Prince, than these 
people have to touch the persons of their O’Neals; 
and he, that hath as pestilent a Judgment as ever 
any had, to nourish and to spread his own In- 
fection, hath the ancient Swelling and Desire 
of Liberty in a conquered Nation to work upon, 
their Fear to be rooted out, or to have their old 
Faults punished upon all particular Discontents, 
and generally, over all the Kingdome, the Fear 
of Persecution for Religion, the debasing of the 
Coin (which is grevious unto all sorts), and a 
Dearth and Famine, which is already begun, and 
must, of Necessity, grow shortly to Extremity, 
the least of which alone have been many Times 
sufficient Motives to drive the best and most 
quiet Estates into sudden Confusion. These 
will keep all spirits from settling, breed new 
Combinations, and, I fear, even stir the Towns 
themselves to sollicit foreign Aid,” &e. 

It appears from another letter, given by Mo- 
ryson, book iii. ¢. ii. vol. ii, p. 275, 25th March, 
1603, addressed, by the Lord Deputy, to Master 
Secretary, that the designs towards O’Neill wére 
still baser. The following extract from this 
letter will explain their dark intentions ; 


‘I have received, by Capt. Hays, her Majes- 
ties Letters of the 6th of February, wherein I 
am directed to send for Tyrone, with Promise of 
Security for his Life only, and upon his Arrival, 
without further Assurance, to make Stay of him 
till her Pleasure should be further known; and, 
at the same Time, I received another from her 
Majesty, of the 17th of February, wherein it 
pleased her to enlarge the Authority given unto 
me, to assure him of his Life, Liberty, and Par- » 
don, upon some Conditions remembered therein ; 
And withal I received a letter from yourself, of 
the 18th of February, recommending to me your 
own Advice, to fulfil (as far as I possibly could) 
the Meaning of her Majesty’s first Letter, and 
signifying her Pleasure that I should seek, by 
all the best Means I can, to promise him his 
Pardon by some other Name than Earl of Ty- 
rone, and rather by the Name of Baron of Dun- 
gannon, or, if it needs must be, by the Name of 
some other Earl. Secondly, to deliver him his 
Country in less Quantity, and with less Power, 
than before he had it. And lastly, to force him 
to cleare his Paces and Passages, made difficult 
by him against any Entry into his Country. 


‘And now, since it hath pleased her Majesty, by 


so great a Trust, to give me so comfortable Ar- 
guments of her favour, I am incouraged the 
more freely to presume fo declare myself in 
this great Matter, which I call great, because 
the Consequence is great and dangerous to be 
dealt in without the Warrant of her gracious 
Interpretation. And though my Opinion herein 
should proceed from a long and, advised Consi- 
deration, described with large and many Cir- 
cumstances, and confirmed with strong and ju- 
dicial Reasons, yet, because I think it fit to 
hasten away this Messenger, I will write of 
these Things somewhat, ‘though on the sudden, 
and commit the rest to the sufficient Judgment 


1603.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2337 


and a restoration of his blood and territory to every one that wished for it, had 
been issued by His Majesty King James, after he had been appointed in the 
place of the Queen [as King] over England, France, and Ireland. 


and Relation of the Lord President, now in his 
Journy towards you ; and the rather, because I 
find him to concur with me in the Apprehen- 
sion of this Cause, and of the State of all other 
Things of this Kingdom. And first, for her 
Majesty’s first Letter, I pray you, Sir, believe 
me, that Ihave omitted nothing, both by Power 
and Policy, to ruin him, and utterly to cut him 
off ; and if, by either, I may procure his Head, 
before I have engaged her royal Word for his 
Safety, I do protest I will do it; and much 
more be ready to possess myself of his Person, 
if, by only Promise of Life, or by any other 
Means whereby I shall not directly scandal the 
Majesty of publick Faith, I can procure him to 
put himself into my Power. But to speak my 
Opinion freely, I think that he, or any Man in 
his Case, would hardly adventure his Liberty 
to preserve only his Life, which he knoweth 
how so well to secure by many other Ways; 
for if he fly into Spain, that is the least whereof 
he can be assured, and most Men (but especially 
he) do make little Difference between the value 
of their Life and Liberty ; and to deceive him I 
think it will be hard, for though Wiser Men 
than he may be over-reached, yet he hath so 
many Eyes of Jealousy awake.” 

In the mean time Queen Elizabeth died (on the 
24th of March, 1603), and Moryson boasts that 
he, himself, contrived that O’ Neill should make 
his submission to her, though he (Moryson) 
knew that she was dead. He made his sub- 
mission on his knees, in most beautiful lan- 

cuage, at Mellifont, on the 30th of March fol- 
lowing, but when he heard the news of the 
Queen’s death, he could not refrain from tears, 
being now a sexagenarian, and seeing the help- 
less state to which he was reduced by the arti- 


fice of his enemies ; for the pardon and _protec- 
tion he received rested on the dead body of 
Elizabeth, which had no longer the power to 
He had 
also lost the opportunity, either of continuing 


protect him, or to bind her successor. 


the war against a weak prince, or making a me- 
ritorious submission to the new king, who was 
believed to have descended from the Irish. 

The Lord Deputy’s honour was, however, 
pledged, and accordingly, on the 6th day of 
April, he did not only renew his Protection, in 
King James’s name, but soon after gave him 
liberty to return to Ulster to settle his affairs ; 
but first O’ Neill, now once more Earl of Tyrone, 
delivered up hostages, and also renewed his sub- 
mission in a set form of words, wherein he “ ab- 
jured all foreign power and jurisdiction in gene- 
ral, and the King of Spain’s in particular,” and 
renounced all power and authority over the 
Urrighs of Ulster (but which he claimed soon 
after, by the Lord Deputy’s consent), and the 
name of O'Neill, and all his lands, except such 
as should be granted to him by the King; and 
he promised future obedience, and to discover 
his correspondence with the Spaniards. And, at 
the same time, he wrote a beautiful letter to the 
King of Spain, requesting him to send home his 


* eldest son, Henry, who, however, never returned 


to him, for he was afterwards found strangled 
at Brussels, nobody knows why or how.—See 
Cox’s Hibernia Anglicana, vol. ii. pp. 2, 3. 

But he was still great, mighty, and formida- 
ble, and on his return into Ulster challenged 
regal authority over O’Kane, hanged Doewra’s 
guides without trial by jury, and had the fish- 
eries of Lough Foyle ceded to him, although 
they had been given to Sir Henry Docwra. 

On his return to Ulster the Earl of Tyrone 


15°s 


2338 


ANNata RIOSshachTa ElReEaNnN. 


(1603. 


Mac pubne panacc oomnall vo tocc po dliccead oilonnpaiccrd nerlt 


{ domnaill. 


sent some of his men to be cessed upon O’Kane, 
which intimated that he was made lord of his 
country. This was directly against the Lord 
Deputy’s promise, and Sir Henry Docwra re- 
paired to Dublin to complain of this and other 
concessions made to the Earl of Tyrone and 
others. The following extract from Docwra’s 
Narration will shew the exact nature of the au- 
thority assumed by the Earl of Tyrone, on his 
return to Ulster, and of the unwillingness of 
the Lord Deputy to interfere with him, even 
though he knew that he had acted contrary to 
the laws, and even to the words of his submis- 
sion, The ultimate object of this policy is ex- 
plainable only by the project which the Go- 
vernment had at this time in contemplation, 
though not fully developed till some years af- 
terwards. Docwra, who was very fond of fair 
play, gives the following account of his inter- 
view with Mountjoy, concerning the fulfilment 
of certain promises which he had made to O’ Kane 
and, others. 

‘“« Then, touching O Caine, I tould him” [Lord 
Mountjoy | ‘how the Earle of Tyrone had sent 
men to be cessed vpon him, & how hee refused 
them. S'‘ Henry Docwra sayeth he, my lord of 
Tyrone is taken in with promise to be restored, 
aswell to all his lands as his honnor of Dig- 
nitie, & O Caines Countrey is his, & must be 
obedient to his Comaund. My lord, said I, this 
is strange, & beyond all expectation ; for I ame 
sure your lordship cannot be vnmindfull, first, 
of the agreement I made with him, wherein he 
was promised to be free & to hould his lands 
from the Crowne, & then your lordship ratified 
& approued the same vnto him vnder your hand, 
haue iterated it againe diuers & diuers times, 
both by word of mouth & writing ; how shall I 
looke this man in the face, when I shall knowe 
myselfe guilty directlie to haue satisfied my 


word with him. Hee is but a drunken ffellowe, 
saith hee, & soe base, that I doe not thinke but 
in the secreete of his hearte, it will better Con- 
tent him to be soe then otherwise ; besides, hee 
is able neither to doe good nor hurte, & wee 
must haue a Care to the Publique good, & giue 
Contentment to my lord of Tyrone, vpon which 
depends the Peace & securitie of the whole 
kingdome. My Lord, said I, for his drunken- 
ness & disabillitie to doe good or hurte, they 
are not heere to come into Consideration ; & for 
his inward affections, what they are I know not ; 
but sure I ame hee makes outward shewe, that 
this will be very displeasing vnto him ; and the 
manifest & manifould benifitts hee shall receiue 
more by the one then the other, are, to my vn- 
derstanding, sufficient arguments to make mee 
thinke hee doth seriouslie inclyne to his owne 
good; &, with your fauour, what good can en- 
sue to the Publique by a direct breach of Pro- 
mise, whereof there is soe plaine and vndeniable 
Evidence extante vnder our hand§, it passeth 
Well, sayeth 
hee againe, that I haue done was not without 
the aduise of the Councell of this kingdome. It 
was liked of & approued by the lords in Eng- 
land, by the Queene that is deade, & by the 
king’s Maiestie that is now living; & I ame 
perswaded, not without good «& sufficient Reason, 
it may not be infringed ; but if yow can thinke 
vpon any course to Compase it in some good 
fashon, that I be troubled noe more with it, I 
shall take it as an acceptable kindnes. But, 
howsoeuer, By God, sayeth hee, O Cane must & 
shall be vnder my lord Tyrone. I then tould 
him I had noe more to say, though I were not 
soe fullie satisfied as I could wish. Yet hee 
should see my will was, & should be, obedient & 
Conformeable to his: let it be soe sayeth hee, & 
yow shall doe mee a pleasure. 


my vnderstanding to Conceiue. 


1603.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2339 


Mac Sweeny Fanad (Donnell) came under the law, to join Niall O’Don- 


nell. 


‘Then, touching O Doughertie, I tould him 
hee had hard his lordship had a purpose to giue 
away the Ile of Inche from him, which hee had 
shewed Mee was expreslie contayned in his fa- 
ther’s Graunte, &, therefore, would importe a 
breach of Promise both of myne & his owne. 
Hee acknowledged he had been moued in such 
a matter, but thanked mee for telling him thus 
much, & bad mee be assured it should not be 
Wherewith I rested fullie satisfied, & 
tould O Doughertie as much, whoe was at that 
time in towne in my Compaine. 

‘Then I came to younge Tirlough & tould 
him I had receiued a generall Warraunt from 
his lordship, to restore all the Castles & hould- 
ers that I had in Tyrone, into my lord’s hands. 
That there were two, videlicet: the Castle of 
Newtowne & Dongevin, that were delivered to 
Mee vpon Condition that, the Kinge hauing noe 


done. 


longer vse of them, they should haue them again 
from whome I receiued them; «& besids that of 
Newtowne was parte of the peculier lands be- 
longing .to S' Arthur O Neale, whose sonnes, 
there were very many reasons for, should be 
fauoured & respected by the state. Hee tould 


Mee it was with him as it was with O Caine ; 


all that Countrey was my lord of Tyrones, & 
what hee might be intreated to giue him, he 
might haue, But otherwise he could challeng 
noe right nor interest in anythinge ; &, there- 
fore, for the Castles, badd mee -againe deliuer 
them, & for younge Tirlough, hee would speake 
to my lord to deale well with him. 

“ Ffor my Guids & Spyes I then saw my aun- 
swere before hand, & that it was booteless to 
Motion for any landes for them ; yet I'tould him 
what seruices many of them had done, what pro- 
mises I had made them, how vtterlie destitute 
of meanes they were to liue vpon, & how much 
I thought the state was ingaged, both in honnor 


and Pollicie, to prouide for & protect them. Hee 
said he would speake to my lord of Tyrone in 
their behalfe, & badd mee giue them what I 
thought good in victuells out of the King’s 
stoore, & it should be allowed of. I was some- 
what importunate for a Certaintie & Conty- 
nuance of meanes for them to liue vpon, & that 
by aucthoritie of the state they might be al- 
lowed to retourne to theire owne landes, But 
he would not indure to heare of it; yet hee 
spake to my lord of Tyrone in my presence, 
and he promised freelie to forgiue all that was 
past, & to deale with them as kindlie as with 
the rest of his Tenants ; how beit, afterwardes 
(I could giue particular instances wherein) he 
changed his Note and Sunge annother tune. 
**T then tould him of my Guide that my 
lord of Tyrone had hanged ; he aunswered, he 
thought it was not without some iust cause ; I 
desired that cause might be knowne, & the mat- 
ter come to open tryall. Hee seemed to be ex- 
treamelie offended to be troubled with Com- 
plaints of that kinde, & my lord of Tyrone, said 
for his excuse, my lord had giuen him aucthori- 
tie to execute Martiall lawe, & this was a knaue 
taken robbinge a Priest, & therefore worthyly 
put to Death. 
trary, & offerred to doe it vpon perill of my life, 
by the Confessions of those Men I had, at that 
time, Prisoners in my hand, But seeing the 


I was able to proue the Con- 


Bussines soe displeasing to my lord, I gaue it 
ouer, & afterwards one of them, that was cheife 
in the action, breaking Prison, I sett the rest at 
liberty. 

“ Then came I lastlie to my selfe, & tould him 
I receiued order from him to suffer the Earle of 
Tyrone’s men to fish the Riuer of Loughfoyle. 
I hoped his lordship had not forgott, that hi- 
therto hee had giuen Mee the proffitts of it, & 
promised mee the inheritaunce, & that it was 


L3is 2 


2340 aNNAZza RIOgshachta €iREGNN. [1603. 


Mac pubne na ccuat Maolmuipe mac mupchaid, 7 catbapp occ mac 
catbaipp, mic magnapa1 oomnaill vo gol hi ccip concnll co na mumceanarb, 
J co na ccpod do coccad pr mall Zanb 7 pm sallaib, 7 ni po hanad leo so 
fangaccap vo na popaib,7 ovona hailénab. Nip b6 cian vob pamlaro an 
can po cneachad 1acc la mall co na bnantpib, 7 po*hensabad catbapp dce 
50 mbaof hi lam leo. 

Muincip Rudpage t oomnaill co na ule cpod 7 cleponb, 7 1olmaoinb vo 
dol hn crip conanll 1pm cce1o mi veanpnac, 7 Rudpaige badéin co na ciondl, 7 
co na coic(pcal gaoideal 7 gall im captin guert oo vol (a tceact aman 
dla MuIntip|) do Dioganl,] oalte a Dimiada ] a eapanona an ua Ruanc, 
6bpian 6ce amonl po bao na mfmain achaid map an can pin, 50 po aanecpror, 
J co po mmppioc an bneipne ecip1t 4 anbap, 7] sac a coaitaic(p dia ccpod 
ap plo teicplot a nupmop fo diampaib 7 oporbelanb na cpice. Ro mapbaicc 
uathad oaoine eacoppa im eosan mac an Fipdoince f gallcubaip, 7 1m Toipp- 


dealbac mac mec loclaimn toncnaccan comtuitim pé poile oon cup pin. 


Ro 


paccbad onong vo sallanb 1 ngapapun 1 nopum va Acian ap oaig momillce 


not his meaning to take it from Mee againe. 
He said, S* Henry Docwra, yow haue deserued 
well of the kinge, & your seruice there is greate 
Reason should be Recompenced, but it must 
be by some other meanes then this: yow see 
what promise I haue made to my lord of ‘Tyrone; 
& it is not my Priuate affection to any man liv- 
ing that shall make mee breake it, because I 
knowe it is for the Publique good. Yow must, 
therefore, let him haue both that & the lands 
which were reserued from O Caine, and, on my 
honnor, yow shall be otherwise worthylie re- 
warded. I expected nothing less then such an 
answere, yet I made noe further wordes, but wil- 
linglie yealded to giue vp my intrust in both, 
& departed at that time, aswell contented with- 
out them, as I should haue beene glad to haue 
had them. Then I desired to haue gone with 
him into England; but he would not suffer 
Mee; but with exceeding fauorable Counte- 
nance assured mee to do me all right vnto the 
kinge ; & soe was I satisfied with hopes, though 


any man may see I had hitherto nothing bettered 
my selfe by this Journey. ; 

‘As he was readie to take shipping, O Dogher- 
tie came & tould Mee, that notwithstanding all 
the assurance I had giuen him of the Contrary, 
the Ile of Inch was past away. I could not pos- 
siblie beleeue it at first, but hee showed mee 
manifest proofes that a lease was graunted for 
xxi. yeares. I then badd him goe speake for 
himselfe, for I had done as much as I was able: 
wherevpon hee followed him into England, and 
had such reamidie as shall presently be declared. 

‘*In the meane time being gone, my lord 
Hugh (the Earle of Tyrone’s eldest sonne) & I 
went home togeather, & when wee came to the 
Derrey, I sent for O Caine, & tould him what 
my lord’s pleasure was touchinge him. Hee be- 
ganne presentlie to be moued, & both by Speach 
& gesture, declared as earnestlie as was possible 
to be highlie offended at it; argued the matter © 
with Mee vpon many pointes; protested his 
fidelitie to the state since hee had made profes- 


1603.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


23-41 


Mac Sweeny-na-dTuath (Mulmurry’, the son of Murrough), and Caffar Oge, 
the son of Caffar, son of Manus O'Donnell, went to Tirconnell, with their people 
and cattle, to wage war with Niall Garv and the English. They made no delay 
until they arrived at the Rosses° and the Islands*. They had not been long 
here when they were plundered by Niall and his kinsmen; and Caffar Oge was 
taken prisoner, and detained in custody. 

The people of Rury O’Donnell repaired ‘to Tirconnell with all their property, 
cattle, and various effects, in the first month of spring. But Rury himself, with 
his gathering and muster of Irish and English, with Captain Guest, went (before 
his people had removed from the west) to revenge and get satisfaction of 
O’Rourke (Brian Oge), for thg insult and dishonour he had some time before 
offered him (as he had in contemplation some time before); so that they plun- 
dered and ravaged Breifny, both its crops and corn, and all the cattle they could 
seize upon, for the greater part of them had been driven into the wilds and 
recesses of the territory. A few persons were slain between them, among whom 
were Owen, the son of Ferdorcha O’Gallagher, and Turlough, the son of Mac 
Loughlin, who fell by each other on that occasion. A party of the English 
were left in garrison at Dromahuire, for the purpose of plundering the country 


sion of it; asked noe fauour if any man could 
charge him with the Contrarie; said he had 
alwayes buylt vpon my promise & my lord De- 
puties ; that he was nowe vndone, & in worse 
ease then before hee knewe vs; shewed many 
reasons for it; & asked, if wee would blaime 
him hereafter, if hee followed my lord of Ty- 
rone’s Councell, though it were against the 
kinge, seeing hee was in this manner forced to 
be vnder him. In the end, seeing noe remidie, 
hee shaked handes with my lord Hugh; bad 
the Devill take all English Men,’ & as many as 
put their trust in them ; & soe in the shewe of 
a good reconciled frenshipp they went away 
togeather.” 

* Mulmurry.—His territory comprised the 
parishes of Mevagh, Clondahorky, Raymunter- 
doney, and Tullaghobegly, in the barony of Kil- 


macrenan, and county of Donegal. The lineal, 


legitimate descendant of this chieftain was a 
tinker by profession, and living in 1835, when 
the Editor examined the county of Donegal. He 
and many others of the O’Donnells and Mace 
Sweenys, confidently asserted that his descent 
from Sir Mulmurry, who was knighted by 
Queen Elizabeth, who allowed him a handsome 
pension, was as follows : 

I. Sir Mulmurry Mac Sweeny Doe. 

Il. Donough More Mac Sweeny Doe. 

III. Murrough Mac Sweeny Doe. 

IV. Donough Oge Mac Sweeny Doe. 

V. Turlough Mac Sweeny Doe. 

VI. Edmond Mac Sweeny Doe, aged 61 in 
1835. 

> The Rosses:; a district in the barony of Boy- 
lagh, still well known. 

© The Islands : i. e. the northern Aran Islands, 
lying opposite the district of the Rosses. 


i 


2342 


na cpice Ina nuipntimceall. 


GANNdZa RIOShachta ElREANN. 


[1603. 


Rob éiccfn oua Ruaince bit 1 nuachad pochonde 


hi pelo 7 hi ppcungl(nncoib, 7 pon olénonb wipcecide a tine o pin amac. 
Oala neill sainb 1 Domnall vo place psmb(nn o até chat via pargsio oa 
cungd pap ceacc do lataip an lupcip 7 na comaiple vo glacad paiceinc 


ap cin conall a log a peipbipe, 7 a Posanca von condi. 


4 For Tirconnedl.—This is not correct; for the 
Lord Deputy had by this time received frequent 
complaints of Niall Garv’s insolence and imprac- 
ticable ambition; and Rury O’Donnell offered 

to prove that Niall Gary had agreed with his 


brother, Hugh Roe, to join with him against | 


the English forces as soon as the Spaniards 
should arrive in Ireland.—See Moryson, book 
iii. c. i. Sir Henry Doewra, in his Narration, 
gives the following circumstantial account of 
Rury O’Donnell’s submission and reconcilia- 
tion to the State, and of Niall Garv’s rash pro- 
ceedings upon the hearing of it : 

‘* Now it fell out that my lord wrote for Ro- 
Hee 


being in Connaught, desires first to putt ouer 


rie O Donnell to come to him to Dublin. 


his Catle into Tirconnell, which would other- 
wise be in danger, in his absence, to be preyd 
by those of that prouince that yett stood out in 
Rebellion. 
to Neale Garvie that he shall not molest nor 


My lord giues him leaue, & writes 


trouble them, & soe Roory takes his Journey.’ 


Hee was noe sooner gone, & the Catell put ouer, 
But Neale Garvie, notwithstanding my lord’s 
Comaund, Ceizes them as his owne, vnder pre- 
tents they were the goods of the Countrey be- 
longing vnto him. Complainte made, my lord 
writs to Mee to see them restored. I send vnto 
him, & hee refuseth. My lord, vpon that, bidds 
Mee discharge him of his Entertainements, & 
writes vnto hin, without delay, to come to him 
to Dublin. 
deferres his going. Thus it runnes on, for at 
least 3 Monethes togeather, & neither would he 
come at Mee nor my lord, nor by any meanes 
be perswaded to make Restitution. In the ende, 


Hee growes more discontented, & 


Ro léice prom hi 


he assembles, of his owne aucthoritie, all the 
Countrey att Kilmackoran, a place where the 
O Donnells vse to be chosen. There hee takes 
vpon him the title, & with the Ceremonyes ac- 
customed proclaymes himselfe O Donell, & then 
presentlie comes to Mee to the Derrey, with a 
greater troupe of attendances then at any time 
before, & they styling him, at euery word, my 
Lord. Assoone as I sawe him, J asked him howe 
he was thus suddenlie stept into the Name of a 
lord ; hee tould Mee they called him so because 
he was O Donnell. I asked him by what auc- 
thoritie he was soe; & hee said, by my lord De- 
puties, I badd him make that appeare vnto mee 
& all was well; he pluckt out a lettre written 
vnto him from my lord, about two yeares before, 
Superscription whereof was this, ‘To my very 
lovinge freinde O Donnell.’ Asked him if this 
were all the Warrante hee had; & hee said yes. 
I asked him why he went not to my lord all this 
while, nor came vnto Mee sooner, nor restored 
Rorie O’Donell’s Catle; His aunswere was 
this: ‘You knowe the whole Countrey of Tir- 
connell was long since promised Mee, & many 
seruices I haue done that, I thinke, haue de- 
served it; but I sawe I was neclected, & there- 
fore I haue righted myselfe by takeing the Catle 
& People that were my owne, &, to preuent others, 
haue made myselfe O’Donnell. Now, by this 
meanes, the Countrey is sure vnto Mee, & if I 
haue done any thing a misse, lett all be par- 
doned that is past, & from this day forward, by 
Jesus hand, I will be true to the Queene, & noe 
Man’s Councell will I fellow hereafter but yours. 
Yow take a wronge Course, said I, it may not go 
thus; the first act you must doe to procure for- 


1603.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2343 


around them. O’Rourke was thenceforward obliged to remain with a few 
troops in the woods or precipitous valleys, or on the islands in the lakes of his 


territory. 


‘As for Niall Garv O’Donnell, a letter arrived from Dublin to him, requesting 
of him to come before the Lord Justice and the Council, to receive a patent for 


Tirconnell’, as a reward for his services and his assistance to the Crown. 


giuness for your faults (if it may be) is to make 
restitution of the Catle; if yow do it not of your 
owne accord, I knowe yow will be forced vnto it 
vpon harder Conditions ; yet, at that time, no- 
thing I could say would prevaile with him, & 
soe hee departed downe into the towne. And 
of all these manner of Proceedings I writt vnto 
my lord. But it is true the next day hee came 
& made offer to restore them, & I was glad of 
it, & sent for Rory O Donnell (who was then at 
the Liffer) to come and receiue them, & my 
thoughts were fullie bent to make the best Re- 
consiliation of the Bussines that I could. Roory 
came, but with open Clamour, that Neale Garvie 
had laide a Plott to murther him by the way, & 
it is true, if the Confession of 3 of his owne men 
may be beleeued, he was, the Night before, in 
Consultation to haue it done, but did not (as 
they say) Resolue vpon it; but this put all the 
Bussines out of fraime, for then could wee. gett 
Roory to no kinde of Patient Conferrence; &, in 
the meane time, came lettres from my lord to this 
effect, that hee had now taken in Tyrone, & was 
fullie resolued to beare noe longer with Neale 
Garuie, and therefore, if I were sure he had 
made himselfe O Donnell, it was treason by the 
lawe, I should lay hould on him & keepe him 
safe. My lord, I was sure, was mistaken in the 
qualitie of his offence, for I looked vpon the 
statute Booke, & sawe that Rigeréus lawe was 
onelie for such as made themselues O Neales ; 
for those that looke vpon them to be heads of 
other families, the Punishment was onelie a 
Penaltie of 100 marks, I pawsed, therefore, & 
was doubtefull with myselfe, whither, by this 


He 


Misgrounded warraunt, I should doe well to 
restrayne him or noe. But while I stood ad- 
uising vpon it, Came others lettres of aduertis- 
ment, of the Queene’s death, & order to Pro- 
clame the kinge. Then I entred into a further 
Consideration; should this man take the advan- 
tage of the time, & knowinge he hath offended 
the state, stepp aside & take Armes, thinkeing, 
by that meanes, to make his owne peace ; how 
should I aunswere it, that haue him now in my 
handes, and my lord’s warraunt to make him 
sure? Againe: what a Blemish would it be to 
all my actions, if the kinge, at his first Coming 
in, should finde all the kindome quiet but one- 
lie this litle parte vnder my Charge. This 
moued Mee (to send for him) Presentlie, & 
when hee came I tould him the Newes of the 
Queene’s death : hee seemed to be sorrie for it. 
I tould him of the Succession of the kinge; then 
ame I vndone, sayeth hee, for Roory hath better 
freindes about him then I. That speach en- 
creased my iealousie, & therevpon I tould him 
further I had order from my lord to restraine 
him of his libertie; then ame I a dead man, 
saith hee. I tould him noe, hee needed not 
feare any such matter, neither his life nor 
landes were yet in danger; his offence was a 
Comtempte onelie, & hee must be brought te 
acknowledge a higher Power then his owne. 
The Marshall offerred to put Boults on him; 
hee sent vnto Mee, & desired hee might not be 
handled with that indignitie, protesting, with 
many oathes, he would not offerr to flie away. 
I bad the Marshall forbeare; & hee desired 
then I would allowe him a guard of a dosen of 


2344 ANNaza RIOshachtd EIREGNN. [1603 


ppoill an ni pin conad fo vo poine vol co cill meic nena, 7 vo pact 6 FiIpsil 
comanbaé colaim cille via poigid, 50 po Zoinead 6 vomnaill ve san comaip- 
leccad Dplop 1onaice an pig nd von comainle. Jap na cloiptm pin von wpeiy 
7 von comaiple pa mopcaip leo an ci mall, 7 ona nip bo pampfpcac lap an 
ngenenal Sin henp: vocuna € beop sen bo caipips,7 Zep bo mon a posnam oo 
yuay an can pin. 

Oo pala tna Ruopaige ua vomnanll 1 nat chat 1 monband pin, 7 po sarp- 
mfo é vo latain an Jupcip, 7] na comaple. Ro paoolo lcpe 7 pecmbfnna 
laip 50 Sip henpy docuna oia pupal paip mall Zsanb vo enszabanl,7 po cupead 
anall vo captimb ina ,caoimtedce, oup fice monpo Rudpaise 50 doipe, 7 
po cuin an sobepnoin opong vo Tofpeacaib, 7 do Caiptimb voipe  * * * 
Habtap ona tuatal mac an ofccanarg 1 Zallcuban, aod bude mac Seaam 
acc, 7 peilim mac Slain oicc Fo nopuing ele sen mo tac don cup pin. Ro 
ela mall sap bcc 1ap pin, 7 00 Cod Fem co na bnantpib, 7 co na muinceanaib 


po coilleib cin magaip. 


Souldiers to looke to him, & soeI did. Then 
did hee seriouslie (as I thought) acknowledge 
his follye; promised faithfullie to doe nothing 
I tould him if 
he did soe, let him not feare, his Cryme was not 


hereafter but by my Councell. 


Capitall, & that hee might well see by his vsage, 
for hee had libertie to walke vp & downe in the 
towne with his guard onelie. Hee seamed woun- 
derfull thankfull for it, & my intentions were 
now wholie bent to doe him all thee good offices 
might lye in my Power; but the third day af- 
ter hee had beene thus Restrayned, hee secreetlie 
caused a horse to be brought to the towne gate, 
&, noe man suspecting anythinge, hee sudainelie 
slipt aside & gott vp vpon him, & soe made an 
Word being brought vnto Mee of it, I 
was then, I confess, extreamlie irritated against 


escape. 


him, &, castinge about what to doe, presentlie 
coniectured he would goe to his Creaghtes, that 
lay about 8 Myle from the Liffer, & with them 
gett downe to the Bottome of Tyrconnell, to- 
ward the Hands, where I knewe was the great- 
est strength he could goe to, & furthest (of any 


other) out of my reach; Therefore I sent first 
to Captaine Ralph Bingley, that lay at Ramul- 
lan, fitt in the way to Cross his passage, that 
hee should speedilie make out to stoppe him 
till I came, which should be so soone as I could, 
& then to the Garrison att Liffer, that they 
should follow him, to whome Roory O Donnell 
(being there at that time) readily wyned him- 
selfe, as glad of soe fair an opportunitie to ad- 
vaunce his owne endes by. I was not deceiued 
in my Coniecture, & soe, by that time, I had 
writt these lettres, made ready the Souldiers 
to goe with Mee, was past ouer lough Swilley 
by Boate, and had marched some 7 or 8 mile, I 
mett with the Newes that our Men had ouer- 
taken & beate him, gott possession of the Cowes, 
which he fought for, & defended with force of 
Armes as longe as hee was able (and were esti- 
mated to be about 7000), & that hee himselfe was 
fledd into Mac Swyndoe’s Countrey, with a pur- 
pose to gett into Owen Oge’s Castle, which was 
reputed to be the strongest in all the North. I 
had then Owen Oge in my Compaine, & to pre- 


1603.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2345 


neglected this thing; and what he did was, to go to Kilmacrenan, and send for 
O’Firghil’, the Coarb of Columbkille ; and he was styled O'Donnell, without 
consulting the King’s representative or the Council. After the Lord Justice 
and the Council had heard of this, they became incensed against Niall, and 
even the General, Sir Henry Docwra, did not well like him, although he had 
been faithful to him, and had rendered him much service before that time. 
Rury O'Donnell happened to be in Dublin at this time ; and he was cited 
to appear before the Lord Justice and the Council. Letters and writings were 
sent with him to Sir Henry Docwra, ordering him to take Niall Garv prisoner. 
Some captains were sent in company with him; and when Rury arrived at 
Derry, the Governor sent a party of the officers and captains of Derry * * * 
Tuathal, the son of the Dean O’Gallagher ; Hugh Boy, the son of John Oge ; 
and Felim, the son of John Oge, ‘with others besides them, were taken prisoners 
on that occasion. Niall Garv made his escape shortly afterwards, and proceeded 


himself, with his kinsmen and people, into the woods of Ceann-Maghair®. 


uent him, Required he would deliuer it to Mee, 
& soe hee did, onelie requesting hee might haue 
it againe, when the Garrison I should put in it 
should be withdrawne, which I gaue my word 
vnto hee should; and then, seeing himselfe pre- 
uented of a place to retire vnto, spoyled of all 
his goods, & nothing in the world left him to 
liue vpon, hee sent vnto Mee for a Protection 


to goe safe vnto my lord Deputie, & takeing his. 


Brother for his Pledge, & his oath besids, that 
he would goe & submitt himselfe wholie to his 
Judgment, I was contented, and gaue it him ; 
putt the Pray wee had taken from him vpon 
Roory ODonnell’s hand, because hee should 
not haue that pretense to say I had driuen him 
out of purpose to make Prey of his goods, & 
soe promised to be there ere longe & meete 
him; for nowe I had receiued diuers lettres 
againe, one, that my lord was purposed shorte- 
lie to goe for England; that his Maiestie (by 
his recomendation), was pleased to call Mee to 
be one of the Councell of Ireland; & that hee 
would have Mee to come speake with him be- 


fore his departure. Annother to Comaund Mee 
to suffer the Earle of Tyrones Men to retourne 
to theire landes, & especially to the Salmon fish- 
ing of Lough foyle, which, till this time, I had 
enioyed, & was promised the inheritaunce of, as 
a parte of the reward for my seruice; And an- 
nother for restitution of Castles, Tennements, 
Catle, & many other thinges vnto him, which, 
altogeather, gaue Mee occasion, presentlie, to 
prepaire my selfe to that iournef.” 

®° O’Firghil, now O’Freel, or Freel simply, 
without the prefix OQ’. 

f Of Derry.—Two lines and a half are left 
blank here in the autograph. It appears from 
the subsequent context, that this blank was left 
till the compilers should learn the exact man- 
ner in which Niall Garv was taken prisoner. 
This blank is now more than supplied from 
Doewra’s Narration: ‘‘ The Marshall offered 
to put Boults on him ; hee sent vnto mee, and 
desired hee might not be handled with that 
indignitie,” &e. 

8 Ceann-Maghair, tow Kinnaweer, a’ well- 


13 T G 


2346 anNaza RIoshachta elReEqNN. 


[1603. 


Oo manbad Masgnup 6ce o ppwitéin an can pin la oomnall mac cumn 
f vomnanll a noisoal a oveanbpazan po manbad laippium peact pam .1. an 
calbac mac cumn. Oa ppp vo na oingenad an Zniom pin ap oup pangaccap 
ule 1omda odibpiom f6 a bitin. O615 po ponconsnad pon Rudpaige ua noom- 
naill co na mbaoi lap vo Zaoweloanb,7 pon na caapcinib cangaccap lary oon 
Tii,] Pop Caipcin nguerc bat ma caoimteacc hi cconnaccaib Lfnmain netll, 
a veanbpotpeae, ] a mumcipe via ccneachad, 7 o1a monnpad. Co pdnao 
lappiom amail po hepfuaccnad noo co na po paccbad mil mnnile ag muincip 
néill,7 50 ccapcpac ilmile vo cnod leo Fo noeacaccap opécta veanmapa oan 
cneachad ann vécc opuacc 7 vo sopca. Ro pann Ruopaige na cpeaca, 7 
DO pad a TcéCcta 00 na huaaplub vo maccacap ma pocnaroe. Oo cpectnan- 
ccead Clod bude mac cumn ina musoopn 4 po cuipead ora LAS Cp bi cepannoice 
na noun ip na cuachab por suill vo ponnad é. Ra sabad an taod céona 
la sallaib, 7 puccad é lam 50 vone. Ro seall an sobennoin na loicpead 
amac € 50 ctIccead an Ti vo pome an manbad (ovomnall mac cumn) a 
ppuapeclad ap. Oo chuaid mall 4 oormnall ap pocal oo lataip an Zobepnona. 
Oo léiccead aod bude 7 vo Zabad vomnall. 

Caio 1anccain mall 6 vomnall 50 Sarai’ o1appard maitéme ina comb 7 
opagail logaideacca a peinbipe, ] a posanca oo Conon tparan 6n Rig Semurp. 
Oo deachaid Rudpage 6 vomnaill 50 Saraib on mod ccéona sion Fup bo 
hionann a pposnam a noir von condin, 7 baci sac aon aca acc fporllpruccad 
a é(ipc an tip Conall, conad ann po opoaig an pi 7 an comainle Ruonaise 
6 vomnaill maiapla 6p cip conall, 7 a@ duchais pém do mall 1. o leacta 
plubame pian, sup an pfpecann labanac call, 7 abup ap sac caoib von fino 


known district in the north of the parish and 
barony of Kilmacrenan, in the north of the 
county of Donegal. 

" Crannog-na-nDuini: 1.e. the wooden house 
of Duini, now Downies or Downings, in the 
parish of Mevagh, barony of Kilmacrenan, and 
county of Donegal, Ros-Guill is still the name 
of the northern angle of the parish of Mevagh, 
extending into the sea between Redhaven and 
Sheephaven, “ 

| Different, literally, ‘although not equal” 
| was] ‘‘ the service of both to the Crown.” 


k Karl over.—This should be Earl of Tircon- 
Sir Henry Docwra did not think it fair, 
on the part of the Government, to make Rury 


nell. 


O’ Donnell Earl of Tirconnell, in preference to 
Niall Garv, who had rendered such services to 


the Crown. He has the following remark upon 


_this preference in his Narration : 


‘“¢ Within a while after came Roory O’ Donnell 
to Dublin, with his Majesties Letters, to be made 
Earle of Tyrconnell, & have all the countrey to 
him and his heires (except Ballyshannon with 
1000 acres of ground, and the fishing that hes 


1603. ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2347 


At this time Manus Oge O’Sruthein was killed by Donnell, the son of Con 
O’Donnell, in revenge of his brother, Calvagh, son of Con, whom he {Manus | 
had slain some time before. It would have been better for him that he had 
not done this deed, for many evils redounded to them [his family] on account 
of it; for orders were given to Rury O'Donnell and all the Irish that were 
with him, to the captains who had come with him into the territory, and to 
Captain Guest, who had been in his company in Connaught, to pursue Niall, 
his brothers and people, and to plunder and prey them. He [Rury] did as he 
was ordered, so that not a single head of cattle was left with Niall’s people, the 
others having carried off with them several thousand heads of cattle; so that 
vast numbers of those who were plundered died of cold and famine. Rury 
divided the preys, and gave their due proportions of them to the gentlemen 
who came in his army. Hugh Boy, the son of Con, was wounded in the ankle; 
and he was sent to Crannog-na-nDuini" in Ros-Guill, in the Tuathas, to be healed. 
The same Hugh was taken prisoner by the English, and conveyed to Derry, to 
be confined ; and the Governor declared that he would not liberate him until . 
the person who committed the slaying (Donnell, son of Con) should come in 
his ransom. | Niall and Donnell afterwards repaired to the Governor on parole 
[of honour]; and Hugh Boy was set at liberty, and Donnell detained. 

Niall O'Donnell afterwards went to England, to solicit pardon for his offences, 
and to obtain the reward for his service and aid to the Crown of England from 
King James. Rury O'Donnell also went to England from the same motives, 
although the services of both to the Crown were very different’ indeed. Each 
of them exhibited his right to Tirconnell. The King and Council then ordered 
that Rury ©’Donnell should be Earl over* Tirconnell, and that Niall should 
possess his own patrimonial inheritance, namely, that tract of country extending 
from Leachta-Siubhaine', westwards, to Seascann-Lubanach™, lying on both 


~ 


under it), and such landes as Neale Garvie had 
held, living in amitie with the former O’ Donell; 
the said Neale Garvie judicially convicted of no 
For the 
entries and abstracts of the grants to Rury or 
Rory O’Donnel, the reader is referred to Erck’s 
Repertory of Chancery Enrolments, pp. 47, 59. 

' Leachta-Siubhaine: i.e. Johanna’s monument, 


crime, which I thought was strange.” 


now Laght, a townland in the parish of Do- 
naghmore, barony of Raphoe, and county of 
Donegal. 

m Seisceann-lubanach : i.e. the swamp of the 
loops, now anglice Sheskinloobanagh, a swamp 
in the townland of Croaghonagh in the same 
parish adjoining the boundary of the county of 
Tyrone. 


Tare 


2348 


Find 7 Tiasaitc anaon 1 nepinn P6 plo 7 copa tan ne 


lao pin. 


QNNQZa RIOShachTa EIREANN. 


[1604. 


oluccad (conpa am- 


Niall sanb mac Ruopaige, mic eiccnecain, mic eiccn(éan, mic neaccamn 
mic toippdeatbargs an fiona 1 domnanll oécc. 
Concobapn mac oonnchand, mic mupchaid, mic coinpdealbarg f bmam vécc 


a mi vecemben. 


Hopta oiopulaing peacnom Epeann. 


QOS CRIOST, 1604. 


Cloip Cpiorc, While, Se céctz, a cltamp. 


Ua Ruane bman occ mac bam na munca, mic bniain ballars mic eoccan 


vo écc 1 ngcollim an 28. lanuapn, 7 a adnacal 1 mampoip Rup mala as 
bnaémb $. Rponperp. Ro ba vam écc an ci cfpoa annpm, an ba heipide 
Porc congmala,7 sabal pulams cata aoda fino, cup cata an calmacap, 
Rinn aga 7 iomsona ua mbmuin, pp cnoda, copantac na po léicc an bpeipne 


2 Famine—P. O’Sullevan Beare, who con- 
versed with people that witnessed this famine, 
has written the following notice of it in his 
Hist. Cathol. Iber. tom. 3, lib. 8, ¢. vi.: 

‘Ita bellum hoc confectum est. Ibernia pene 
tota deuastata, & euersa, ingenteque inedia, & 
fame omnes inuadente, qua multi compulsi sunt 
canes atque catos edere: multi ne his quidem 
suppetentibus pereunt. Neque homines tantum 
sed etiam bruta fames occupat. Lupi syluis, & 
montibus egressi homines media debiles inua- 
dentes laniant. Canes foctida cadauera, partem- 
que in cinerem versa sepulchris extrahunt. Ita- 
que nihil erat nisi squaloris & vera Trojzx direptx 
imago a Virg. lib. i. Auneid. descripta.” 

Mountjoy boasts, in a letter to the Lords in 
England, dated 12th September, 1602, that he 
had brought the country of Tyrone to such a 
state of famine, by destroying the corn, ‘‘ that 
O’Hagan protested, that betweene Tullogh Oge 
and Toome, there lay unburied a 1000 dead, and 


that since our first drawing this year to Black- 
water, there were above three thousand starved 
in Tyrone.”—Book iii. e. i. 

Moryson gives a horrible account of the famine 
which the English caused in Ireland, “‘ by de- 
stroying the Rebels corn, and using all means 
to famish them ;” but the examples he adduces 
to shew the miserable state to which the poor 
people were brought, are too horrible and dis- 
custing to be quoted here. He remarks gene- 
rally: ‘‘No spectacle was more frequent in 
the Ditches of Towns, and especially in wasted 
countries, than to see Multitudes- of these poor 
people ‘dead, with their Mouths all coloured 
green by eating Nettles, Docks, and all things 
they could rend up above ground. These, and 
very many like lamentable Effects, followed 
their Rebellion, and, no doubt, the Rebels had 
been utterly destroyed by famine, had not a 
general Peace shortly followed Tyrone’s sub- 
mission (besides Mercy formerly extended to 


- 


1604.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2349 


sides of the River Finn, Both then returned to Ireland in peace and amity, 
matters having been thus settled between them. 

Niall Garv, the son of Rury, son of Egneghan, son of Egneghan, son of 
Naghtan, son of Turlough-an-Fhiona O’Donnell, died. 

Conor, the son of Donough, son of Murrough, son of Turlough O’Brien, 


died in the month of December. 


An intolerable famine" prevailed all over Ireland. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1604. 


The Age of Christ, one thousand sia hundred four. 


O’Rourke (Brian Oge, the son of Brian-na-Murtha, son of Brian Ballagh, son 
of Owen) died at Galway on the 28th of January, and was buried in the monas- 


tery of Ross-Iriala’, with the Franciscan Friars. 


The death of the person who 


departed here was a great loss, for he was the supporting pillar and the battle- 
prop of the race of Aedh-Finn, the tower of battle for prowess, the star of the 
valour and chivalry of the Hy-Briuin ; a brave and protecting man, who had 


many others), by which the Rebels had liberty 
to seek Relief among the Subjects of Ireland, 
and to be transported into England and France, 
where great Multitudes of them lived for some 
years after the Peace made.”—Vol. ii. pp. 283, 
284. P. O’Sullevan Beare (ubi supra) gives the 
following short notice of the persons from whom 
they obtained relief on the Continent: 

‘Ob hoc Iberniz uniuersum pene excidium 
multi Iberni per exteras gentes sese diffuderunt. 
Ingens turba in Galliam, longé maxima in His- 
paniam confluxit. Exules causa fidei benigné, 
comiterque a Catholicis excipiuntur. In eos 
Rex Hispania fuit tanto amore, ea pietate, & 
munificentia, vt vix vllus possit, aut oratione 
complecti, aut animo assequi, quantum illi de- 
beant: omnes principio quam honorificentissimé 
suscepit donis ornans: nobilioribus menstruos 
nummos uestigales, pro sua cuique conditione, 
assignans, alijs militare stipendium constituens. 


Ex illis in Gallia Belgica legionem conscribi 
missit, que prius sub Henrico, & post Henrici 
interitum sub Johanne Onelli principis filiis 
contra Batauos fideliter, & strenué pugnauit. 
In regia quoque classe maris oceani cohortes 
aliquot stipendium fecerunt magna virtute pre- 
stantes. Post Catholicum Regem inter Iberno- 
rum exulum patronos clarissimus Brigantiz 
Dux Lusitanus, Cardinalis Surdis, Burdigale 
Archiepiscopus Gallus, Carazene Marchio His- 
panus, & Fabius Onellus Vallisoleti vrbis Giues 
ciuis non infimum locum obtinent.”—Fol. 202. 

° Ros-Iriala, now Rosserilly, a monastery of 
which the ruins are still in very good preserva- 
tion, situated about a mile north from the town 
of Headford, in the barony of Clare, and county 
of Galway. In an Inquisition taken apud St. 
Francis. Abb. 22° April, 1636, this monastery 
is called Rossryully, and placed in Mointermo- 


-roghow, in the territory of Clanrickard. 


2350 aNNazZa RIOSshachca EiREGNN. (1605. 


vo baogluccad ma pé, pip popwd popmaca, cfnnaip pm caipoib, maca pm 
naimoib, pln po bad veappeargceé 10cv 7 emmeac, uaple 7 ompbfpc, anad 4 
omipiom né hachad oon cenél via mbaci. 


QOIS CRIOST, 1605. 
Cloip Cmorc, Mile, Se ced, a ciice. 


Sin Qpcup chiceptep wupcip na hepenn, 7 1apla cipe heoccaim Coo mac 
an pipdoipce do Toct an an ppat mban, 7 po baof ua nell ag aspa blade 
don vacharg pucip mall 6 oomnaill on pig a. an moencacc. Tucc Niall oo 
latonp an lupcip na veanbea baoi aicce ap lonce a pimnpeap ap an moentacc, J 
ona FMIppM na cantaca vo bf Magnup 6 vomnaill oua neil vo conn bacac 
a ppuapeclad enm mic Sfain buf 1 lam ag ua noomnanll (Magnup) 50 ppuain 
na capcaca pmn app, 1ap ccuicpin a pecéil an gac caoib von lupeip Sip 
Qincup Rucc vo bnee an Moencacc vo mall,7 acbenc na po cumains 
Ua neill an peanann vagna 6 c{pt, ap do coid1 phopacup Foda 6 do CoIdD Tayi 
pfpsac mbliadan. Rob éiccfn vob ofblimb aampiom pop an mbit pm. 

O Ruane cadg mac bmiain mic bia mic eoghain cisfpna na bpeipne, 
pf puaip mop mmmodh, 7 néccualeang acc 1omcopnam a acthapda pm a 
ofibpataip ua Ruane bmian occ, pip na po paoilead a ecc pm havhanc, act 
a@ ol0ead do PMN no oPaobap, pp pucip veabca ourlse, 7 scabhche suaip 
lomda ace paicchioh orohpeachta a achapda, 7] 1onmo a achap sup po 
léice Dia Ticcfpnap Cuicce FO DEOID, ] Hup-po ecc, 7 a adnacal 1 mameytipi 
S. Pponpeip 1 ccappaice pactpaice 50 nonaip amail po bad ofop. 


P Voentacht, a district situated to the south 


of Lifford, on the borders of the counties of 


Tyrone and Donegal. 

8 Both—This should be O’Neill (or rather 
the Earl of Tyrone), because of course Niall 
O’Donnell was glad of it, and, therefore, wil- 
lingly submitted to it. Defects of this nature, 
frequently occurring in the style of the Four 
Masters, shew that they paid ttle or no atten- 
tion to the philosophy of language. 

* Teige.—Charles O’Conor interpolates so as 


to make the text cadg an fiona, i.e. Teige, or 
Timothy, of the Wine. He wasa knight, and is 
He left 
two sons, Brian and Hugh. Brian na Murtha 
had a brother, Turlough Fin (Terentius Albus), 
who had a son Owen More, who had a son Owen 


commonly called Sir Teige O’Rourke. 


Oge, who hada son Brian O’Rourke, a youth of 
‘* oreat expectation,’ who died of the small-pox 
at Leytrim, on the 13th of June, 1671, in the 
eighteenth year of his age. The following epi- 
taph was composed for him by Thady Roddy, of 


1605.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2351 


not suffered Breifny to be molested in his time; a sedate and heroic man, kind 
to friends, fierce to foes ; and the most illustrious that had come for some time 
of his family for clemency, hospitality, nobleness, firmness, and steadiness. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1605. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred five. 


Sir Arthur Chichester, Lord Justice of Ireland, and the Earl of Tyrone 
(Hugh, the son of Ferdorcha), went to-Strabane. O’Neill claimed a portion of 
the territory which Niall O’Donnell had obtained from the King, namely, Moen- 
tacht. Niall produced before the Lord Justice the proofs that he had of his 
right to Moentacht?, in succession from his ancestors; and, among the rest, he 
produced the charters which Manus O’Donnell had obtained from O’Neil! (Con 
Bacagh) for setting at liberty Henry, the son of John, whom O'Donnell (Manus ) 
had had in his custody. The Lord Justice, Sir Arthur, having understood their 
stories on both sides, he adjudged Moentacht to Niall, and said that, O’Neill 
could not by right claim the lands, inasmuch as his title, having been more than 
sixty years in abeyance, had become obsolete. Both* were obliged to abide by 
this decision. 

O’Rourke (Teige’, son of Brian*, son of Brian‘,.son of Owen), Lord of 
- Breifny, a man who had experienced many hardships and difficulties while 
defending his patrimony against his brother, Brian Oge ; a man who was not 
expected to die on his bed, but by the spear or sword ; a man who had fought 
many difficult battles, and encountered many dangers, while struggling for his 
patrimony and the dignity of his father, until God at length permitted him to 
obtain the lordship, died, and was interred with due honour in the Franciscan 
Monastery at Carrickpatrick”. 


Achadh na Croise, or Crossfield, in the county Flos juvenum splendor proavum Iunii Idibus, 
of Leitrim : eheu ! e 
‘‘Conditur exigua Rourk hac Bernardus in Interiit, rutilos vectus ad usque polos.” 
urna, s Brian.—Charles O’Conor interpolates na 
Stirpe perillustri, mente, lyraque Linus, munca. ; i 
Hic pudor Hippoliti, Paridis gena, pectus t Brian.—Charles O’Conor interpolates bal- * 
Ulyssis _ lag. 


nee pietas, Hectoris ira jacet “ Carrickpatrick : i. e. Dromahare, “in the 


2352. 


ANNata RIOSNaAchTaA ElREGNN. 


(1607. 


CQO1S CRIOST, 1606. 


Cop Cporz, Mle, Se ceo, a SE. 


QO1S CRIOST, 1607. 


Cloip Cmorz, mile, Se cev, a Seact. 


O baoigill tadcc é6cc, Mac ToNdcC, Mic ToInpodealbalg Ecc 1 NopuIM apc 
la caob bale f baoigill an 3. Man, 7 a adnacal 1 notin na ngalt. 
Maswodip cucomact, 7 oonncad mac Mactsamna, mic an eppuice uf bniain 


vo tabaine lunge le6 go hépinn sup po sabrat 1 ccuan na pinlise. 


Cn 


ciapla o neil Cod mac an pipooince, 7 an Tiapla o vomnaill Ruopaase mac 


county of Leitrim: Charles O’Conor interpo- 
lates: ‘*Mainé ve bupg ingfn iapla cloinne 
Riocaind mazaipn an cars pin; i.e, Mary De 
Burgo, daughter of the Earl of Clanrickard, was 
the mothér of that Teige.” 

Y 1606.—This annal is left blank by the Four 
Masters. 

~ Druim-arc, now Drumark, a townland in 
the parish of Killymard, not far from the town 
of Donegal. 

*  Baile- Ui-Bhaoighill : i. e. the town of 
O’Boyle, now Ballyweel, near the town of Do- 
negal. 

Y Harbour of Swilly.—The cause of this pre- 
cipitate flight of the two Earls has since re- 
mained involved in mystery. There is a curious 
account of O’Neill’s flight and subsequent his- 
tory preserved in a paper manuscript, consist- 
ing of 150 pages, in the College of St. Isidore at 
Rome ; but although it gives a detailed account 
of his movements, it is entirely silent as to the 
immediate cause of his sudden flight. The late 
Dr. Lyons, P. P. of Kilmore-Erris, sent the 
Editor a fac-simile of the first page of this ma- 
nuscript, which runs as follows : 

“(namm O€. Az po pane vo peelorb 7 
oimzeczoib ui neill on uaip fon Fagoip pe 


Eine. Cp cup bu o neill a ppochaip wipaip 
na hEmeann ancuip Sizpepcan am-baili plame. 
Oo glac pe Leizip 6 plon baz dia dapoaoi in 
reachemas la Sepzembnip, 7 aoip in ciZeanna 
in can pin Mile j pe chezz 7 peache mbliaona, 
bu ap mn lizip pempaize go ccainic maguioip 
cuconaée maguioip, Oonnchavh O: bmamn 
mata og o mailcuile, Seon Ruz go loms 
FRMangcaig a scomaipciyy ui nell, 7 vepla tim 
conaill g0 cuan Suiligi moipe ap upchomaip | 
pata maolam a franaic. Gapuip o nell acheo 
asym iupap, nm Sachapn na deghmo pin zeid a 
noice pin sup m Mamipap Mop Giz a mbur 
rp sepoio Moodup. Cp na mapach 06 Fo 
pnpaobaili ouna vealgan, 

«Sluaippip oa Lua appin Spaobaili tia 
bealac mon in Ffoa, 50 bél aéa in angie, can 
Shap puaiz, 50 h-ano Macha, cup abainn 
moip 30 Oun sfnamn sup mm scpaoip «1. baile 
oilfin via baila’. Oo gni pe comnaiwe 4 
Oluaipro 


a nainm Oe o1a cfoaom on Chpaoib cap pap 


ommipfm ap in Chnaoib oa maine. 


porp. Sur an o1dée pm a Mumeip Cums ap 
comgan locha bfigpine. Cp na mapach vo 
50 bun oifnnoiwe. Sui na chomnaive 6 aim- 
rin mfooin lao: Zo comzuieim na hordce. Tan 


rin UWigip can Feppaiz moip ap leé péabal 4 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2353 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1606". 
The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred six. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1607. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred seven. 


O’Boyle (Teige Oge, the son of Teige, son of Turlough) died at Druim-arc”, 
near Baile-Ui-Bhaoighill®, on the 3rd day of May, and was interred at Donegal. 
Maguire (Cuconnaught) and Donough, the son of Mahon, son of the Bishop 
O’Brien, brought a ship with them to Ireland, and put in at the harbour of 
Swilly’. They took with them from Ireland the Earl O’Neill (Hugh, the son 
of Ferdorcha), and the Earl O’Donnell (Rury, the son of Hugh, son of Manus), 


gach noineach 50 onoic(z adamnain. Oui mac 
ui Oomnaill cachbapp mac aoda mfic mag- 
nupa ap a sclormn annpin. Sappac so paiczh 
meallzeain, an la ag poillpugad onpa in can- 
pin. Gipgic so Raith Maolain aiz a mbui in 
long a ouppamap. Cp an gcuimp puanacap 
pudpaig: 6 Oomnall Ifpla cipe conaill sup 
na oaoinib uaiple pempaize maille pe monan 
doipeaczt j 00 Luchze Lenamna in I{plae ag con 
rconuipp bid 7 oIghe apzeach pan loins.” 
‘In the name of God. This is a part of the 
stories and adventures of O’Neill, from the 
time that he left Ireland. First, O’Neill was 
along with the Justiciary of Ireland, Arthur 
Sitsestar at Baili-Shlaini” [Slane]. ‘‘ He re- 
ceived a letter from John Bath on Thursday 
the seventh of September, the year of the Lord 
at that time being one thousand six hundred 
and seven years. It was stated in the aforesaid 
letter that Maguire, Cuconnaught Maguire, 
Donough O’Brien, Matthew Oge O’Maeltuile, 
[and] John Rut, came with a French ship for 
O’Neill and the Earl of Tirconnell into the har- 
bour of Great Swilly, opposite Rathmullan, in 
Fanaid. O’Neill took his leave of the Justiciary 
fand] on the following Saturday he went to 


Mainistir-Mor” [the great abbey of Mellifont ], 
“where Garrett Moore was. On the next day he 
went to Sradbhaile-Duna-Dealgan” [Dundalk]. 

‘** He proceeded on Monday from Sradbhaile 
through Bealach-mor-an-Fhedha” [the Great 
Road of the Fews ], ‘‘to Bel-atha-an-airgit, across 
Sliabh Fuait, to Armagh, over the Abhainn- 
mhor” [the Blackwater ], ‘‘to Craobh” [Creeve ], 
“i.e, anisland habitation of his habitations. He 
stopped and rested at Craobh on Tuesday. He 
proceeded, in the name of God, on Wednesday 
from Craobh over the mountain downwards” 
[i.e. northwards]. ‘‘ He was that night in 
Muintir-Luinigh” [Munterloony ], ‘‘in the vici- 
nity of Loch Beigfine. On the morrow he pro- 
ceeded to Bun-Diennoide” [Burn Dennet, near 
Lifford], ‘‘ where he rested from mid-day till 
nicht-fall. After this he went over Fersatmore 
on Loch Feabhail” [Lough Foyle river, near 
Lifford], ‘straight forward to Adamnan’s 
Bridge” [at Ballindrait, near Raphoe]. ‘* The 
son of Donnell, Caffar, son of Hugh, son of 
Manus, was there awaiting him. They pro- 
ceeded to Rathmelton, the dawn rising upon 
them at that time. They went on to Rathmul- 
lan, where the ship we have mentioned was. 


13.5 


2354 


ANNQzZa RIOSshachTa EIREGNN. 


(1607. 


good, Mic Masnupa co nopuing Méip vo matib cocci ulad do bphit leo a 
hépimn.  Iciact vo deacaccap la hua nell an concaoip Cactepiona msean 


In this vessel they met Rury O’ Donnell, Earl of 
Tirconnell, with the gentlemen aforesaid, toge- 
ther with many of the tribe and followers of the 
Earl, laying up stores of food and drink in the 
ship.” 

Sir John Davies gives~the following account 
of the departure of these Earls, which pretty 
fairly accords with the foregoing : 

‘The Saturday before, the Earl of Tyrone 
was with the Lord-Deputy at Slane, where he 
had spoken with his lordship of his journey into 
England, and told him he would be there about 
the beginning of Michaelmas term, according to 
He took leave of the 
lord-deputy in a more sad and passionate man- 
ner than was usual with him. 


his Majesty’s directions. 


From thence he 
went to Mellifont and Garrett Moore’s house, 
where he wept abundantly when he took his 
leave, giving a solemn farewell to every child 
and every servant in the house, which made 
them all marvel, because in general it was not 
his manner to use such compliments. On Mon- 
day he went to Dungannon, where he rested two 
whole days, and on Wednesday night they say 
he travelled all night. It is reported that the 
Countess, his wife, being exceedingly weary, 
slipped down from her horse, and weeping said 
‘she could go no further.’ Whereupon the 
Earl drew his sword, and swore a great oath 
that ‘he would kill her on the spot if she would 
not pass on with him, and put on a more cheer- 
ful countenance.’ When the party, which con- 
sisted (men, women, and children) of fifty or 
sixty persons, arrived at Lough Foyle, it was 
found that their journey had not been so secret. 
but that the Governor there had notice of it, 
and sent to invite Tyrone and his son to dinner. 
Their haste, however, was such that they ac- 
cepted not his courtesy, but hastened on to 
Rathmullan, a town on the west side of Lough 


Swilly, where the Earl of Tyrconnell and his 
company met with them. From thence the 
whole party embarked, and, landing on the coast 
of Normandy, proceeded through France to 
Brussels.” 

Davies concludes this curious narrative in 
words, from which it can be clearly inferred 
that they had been chased out of the country 
by law fictions and issuing processes, calling 
upon O’Neale to appear and answer in the cause 
of the Lord Bishop of Derry against Hugh, Earl 
of Tyrone. Davies says: \ 

‘“‘ As for us that are here, we are glad to see 
the day wherein the countenance and majesty 
of the law and civil government hath banished 
Tyrone out of Ireland, which the best army in 
Europe, and the expense of two millions of ster- 
ling pounds, had not been able to bring to pass.” 

The following account of the manner in which 
they attempted to entrap him, and of his flight 
and reception at Rome, is given by P. O’Sulle- 
van Beare, in his Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., 
tom. 4, lib. 1; c.iv.: 

‘** Qvo tamen terrore ceteri Iberni a Religione 
Catholica profitenda nihil amouentur. Quod 
Angli animaduertentes, & rati ob huius edicti 
executionem non minus cruoris diffundendum 
fuisse, quam ob similem causam fuit effusum, 
Henrico, Eduardo, & Elizabetha regnantibus, 
nisi periculum tempestiue preuentum sit: ra- 
tionem ineunt hune obicem sine bello, & vulnere 
remouendi iuxta primum principale persecu- 
tionis puncttim, vt summi virl in Fide, & Catho- 
lica Religione constantes, belli scientia, & rerum 
gestarum fama clari sensim, & furtim excidan- 
Itaque Onellum, Odonellum, & alios Iber- 
nice partis sequaces, ac eos etiam Anglice fac- 


tur. 


tionis fautores, in quibus plus virtutis, & animi 
Christiani residere putabant, dissimulaté, & 
quasi aliud agentes statuunt de medio tollere 


1607.] 


with a great number of the chieftains of the province of Ulster. 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2355 


These were 


they who went with O’Neill, namely, the Countess Catherina, the daughter of 


vel occisos, vel in carcerem detrusos, vel rele- 
gatos. Quominus videantur id agere causa labe- 
factandi. Religionem Catholicam, artem, qua 
magnates Catholicos lesz Magestatis reos agant, 
machinantur. 
Hote Baronem Angloibernum, hominem non 
modo factionis Anglice solicitum, sed etiam 
schysmaticum iubent, vt illos ad rebellionem 
inuitet, seque faciat de conspiratis certiores. 
Christophorus (vt fama fert) ex Ibernica fac- 
tione Odonellum, & Macguierem, & ex Anglica 
Dalrz Baronem sua calliditate decepit, vt animi 
sensum incautius exprimerent, Onelli pruden- 
Qua 


re cognita Angli Onellum, Odonellum, & alios 


tissimi senis pectus explorare non ausus. 
capere constituunt. Onellus a quibusdam An- 
glis amicis edoctus ipse, Odonellus & Maceuier 
in Galliam traijciunt. WVbi legatis Anglis eos 
regi suo restitui petentibus Henricus Quartus 
Galliz Rex respondit, regiam dignitatem dede- 
cere, alienigenas fuga salutem petentes itinere 
prohibere. Ita in Galliam Belgicam profecti ab 
Alberto & Elizabetha serenissimis Archiducibus 
humanissimé, & honorificentissimé sunt excepti. 
Inde Romam cum se contulissent, 4 Rege Catho- 
lico ad victum non parcé adiuuantur Onellus 
per singulos menses quingentis nummis aureis, 
Odonellus totidem, Macguier, & reliqui, qui 
sunt illos secuti, pro suis quisque meritis : Pon- 
tifice Maximo quoque opem ferente. Odonellus, 
& Macguier breui tempore beneficio fruuntur 
vite munere defuncti, ile Rome, hic Genue 
Hispaniam petens. Dalrus Baro, qui nihil ad- 
uersi timebat, donec fuerit in carcerem, & vin- 
cula coniectus, summa difficultate effugit, mag- 
nosque labores pertulit priusquam incolumita- 
tem fuit adeptus partim corruptionibus partim 
amicorum precibus. Cormakus Onellus cum ac- 
cersitus Dubhlinne se exhibuisset, in Angliam 
missus in Londinam arcem custodiendus conij- 


Christaphorum Sanlaurentium 


citur Okahanus vocatus in iudicium se distulit 
sistere veritus id, quod erat, ne eadem cum Cor- 
mako poena plecteretur. Quem Angli diu ca- 
pere frustra laborantes in suas artes vertuntur. 
Erat eques Anglus Okahani compater quem 
Okahanus gentis sue more spiritualem affinita- 
tem incredibili obseruantia, & honore colentis, 
magni faciebat, valdé diligebat, & beneficijs or- 
nabat, eidemque plurimum confidebat: & ita 
ad cenam ab eo inuitatus non dubitauit, com- 
patris fidei sese committere Anglus ne nauci 
quidem estimans totam Christianam Religionem, 
nedum spiritualem cognationem inquirenti An- 
glorum manipulo ex composito Okahanum tra- 
didit. Qui detrusus est in eandem cum Cor- 
mako custodiam.” 

Dr. Curry asserts, in his Historical Review, 
that these Earls were guilty of no conspiracy ; 
and Mr. Hardiman, who read that portion of 
the State Papers which relates to this period, 
has written the following note on the subject 
of the flight of the Earls, in his Zrish Minstrelsy, 
vol, 11. p. 430: ; are 

‘“‘ The great possessions of these two devoted 
Irish princes proved the cause of their ruin. 
After the successful issue of the plot contriv- 
ing Cecil’s gunpowder adventure in England, 
he turned his inventive thoughts towards this 
country, where every English Minister may, at 
all times, be sure of finding ready instruments 
to carry any plan into execution. A plot to 
implicate the great northern chieftains in trea- 
sonable projects was soon set on foot, and finally 
proved successful. This conspiracy is thus re- 
lated by a learned English divine, Doctor An- 
derson, in his ‘ Royal Genealogies,’ printed in 
London, 1736: ‘ Artful Cecil employed one St. 
Lawrence to entrap the Earls of Tyrone and 
Tyrconnel, the Lord of Delvin, and other Irish 
chiefs, into a sham plot which had no evidence 


hav, 2 


2356 


annacta RIoshachtda €lREANN. 


[1607. 


Mes aongupa, a tmup mac Clod (.1. an bapun). Sfan,7 bmian, Ant 65 mac 


copbmaic, mic an bantin, Pip oonca 


but his. But these chiefs being basely informed 
that witnesses were to be hired against them, 
foolishly fled from Dublin, and so ‘taking guilt 
upon them, they were declared rebels, and six 
entire counties in Ulster were at once forfeited 
to the Crown, which was what their enemies 
wanted.” Tyrone fled privately into Normandy 
in 1607, thence to Flanders, and then to Rome, 
where he lived on the Pope’s allowance, became 
blind, and died, 20th July, 1610” [vrecte 1616]. 
‘«Tyrconnell fled at the same time, and died at 
Rome on the 28th July, 1608. Several original 
documents are preserved in the State Paper 
Office, London, connected with the above plot, 
including the correspondence of the weak and 
unprincipled St. Lawrence, which develope a 
scene of human turpitude seldom paralleled.” 
Mr. Moore, however, who has studied the cor- 
respondence of Lord Howth, and Delvin’s confes- 
sion, taken on the 6th of November, 1607, has 
come to the conclusion that the Ulster Earls 
were guilty of anew conspiracy. This is the 
only real and important development of a doubt- 
ful or unknown fact in all Mr. Moore’s work 
on the history of Ireland, and the Editor is 
tempted to lay it before the reader in the au- 
After alluding to the.dis- 
putes between the Earl of Tyrone, O’Kane, 


thor’s own words. 


and. the Lord Bishop of Derry, he writes: 
“This derangement of all his” [Tyrone’s] 
‘‘ affairs, combined with the feeling, ever upper- 
most in his thoughts, of deadly hatred to the 
English name, decided Tyrone to abandon all 
hope except from foreign swords, and to lose 
no time in preparing his countrymen for the 
struggle. In all his efforts towards this object, 
the faithful Tyrconnell still continued his ever- 
watchful co-operator ; nor was it long before 
they found, in Richard Nugent, Baron of Del- 
vin, a ready associate in this national enter- 


mac cuimn, mic { néill, God éce mac 


prise. This young lord had early been schooled 
in bitter enmity to the English, having been 
brought up in the Tower by his mother, who 
‘shared, voluntarily, there her husband’s impri- 
sonment. It was at Maynooth, the ancient seat 
of the Earls of Kildare, near Dublin, that these 
lords held the meetings at which they con- 
certed their plans; and in the garden of the 
same mansion it was that Tyrconnell first pro- 
posed to Delvin to take a part in daring designs. 
How painful to that noble family were the sus- 
picions incurred by them, may be judged from 
a letter addressed to Salisbury, some time after, 
by Mabel” [Leigh, an Englishwoman], ‘‘ Coun- 
tess of Kildare” [but who was not the mother 
of Bridget Fitzgerald, the wife of Rury, Earl of 
Tyrconnell] ‘‘ expressing her sorrow ‘ that the 
late treasons should have been plotted at May- 
nooth, and strongly protesting her own inno- 
cence.’ 

‘* While thus secretly this plot was gathering, 
there reigned everywhere, through the whole 
reaim, an appearance of perfect tranquillity. 
Tyrone, though thus anew engaged in conspi- 
racy, still continued his social relations with 
the Lord Deputy; and to judge of the state of 
the country from the account given of Mun- 
ster by Sir John Davies, seldom had a calm so 
settled and promising prevailed throughout 
the kingdom. 


says, ‘to perceive the quiet and conformity of 


‘It was quite a miracle,’ he 


the people.’ 

“But in the midst of this general tranquillity, 
an event occurred, which, as much from the mys- 
tery thrown around it, as from its own intrinsic 
importance, spread alarm throughout the whole 
country ; and the vigilance which it awakened 
in the ruling powers added considerably to the 
danger and difficulties of Tyrone. An anony- 
mous letter, directed to Sir William, Usher 


1607.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2357 


Magennis, and her three sons, Hugh the Baron’, John, and Brian ; Art Oge, 
the son of Cormac’, son of the Baron ;, Ferdorcha, son of Con’, son of O'Neill; 


Clerk of the Privy Council, had lately been 
dropped at the door of the council chamber, 
mentioning a design, then in contemplation, for 
seizing the Castle of Dublin, and murdering 
the Lord Deputy ; these acts to be followed, as 
the letter stated, by a general revolt, assisted 
by Spanish forces. . 
English authorities were not wholly unpre- 
pared, having already, through various chan- 
nels, both at home and abroad, received such 
accounts of Tyrone’s practices with the Court 
of Spain as rendered them aware of the stir- 
rings of mischief in that quarter ; and the se- 
cret informant by whom, principally, these 
warnings were conveyed, was the Earl of 
Howth, a recent convert to the new creed.”— 
Hist. Irel., vol. iv. pp. 453, 454, 455. 

The fugitive Earls complained, on the Conti- 
nent, of their having. been persecuted for reli- 
gion, and it was deemed expedient by the King 
and the State that this should be publicly de- 
nied. A proclamation was accordingly issued 
by the King, wherein he affirms that ‘ they 
had not the least shadow of molestation, nor 
was there any purpose of proceeding against 
them in matters of religion ; their condition 
being, to think murder no fault, marriage of no 
use, nor any man valiant that does not glory in 
rapine and oppression; and, therefore, ’twere 
unreasonable to trouble them for religion be- 
fore it could be perceived by their conversation 
that they had any.” 

It is scarcely necessary to remark here, that 
thig proclamation states a mere fiction, because 
those Earls were not allowed the free use of the 
Catholic religion, for no bishop was publicly 
allowed to exercise episcopal functions in their 
dioceses, except Montgomery, who acknow- 
ledged that the Sovereign was the head of the 
Church. Whatever were King James’s inten- 


For this intelligence the 


tions of proceeding against those fugitives for 
their religion, we have proof positive that after 
the submission of O’Neill and O’Donnell, and 
in the midst of “the most universal peace that 
ever was seen in Ireland,” the King’s counsgel- 
lors published, in Dublin, the “ Act of Unifor- 
mity,” of the 2nd Eliz., which strictly prohi- 
bited the attendance upon the Roman Catholic 
worship; and a proclamation was issued on the 
4th of July, 1605, wherein His Majesty de- 
clared to his beloved subjects in Ireland, that he 
would not admit any such liberty of conscience 
as they were made to expect, and commanded 
all the Roman Catholic clergy, by a certain day, 
to depart the realm. If this did not sufficiently 
indicate a purpose to proceed against them in 
matters of religion, ‘‘ the language of princes is 
As to 
the assertion that these Earls had no religion, it 


beyond the comprehension of subjects.” 


is so gratuitous that we must regard it as a mere 
piece of James’s pedantry, who had just learning 
enough to expose to the world his own gloomy 
prejudices and littleness of soul, and who during 
an ignoble reign of twenty-two years exhibited 
such folly and incapacity to his vigorous and 
enterprising subjects, as filled their minds with 
contempt for monarchs, and prepared them for 
that republican spirit which set in after his 
death, and ultimately brought about the deca- 
pitation of his son, and the final destruction of 
the Stuart family. 

* Hugh the Baron.—His eldest son, Henry, who 
was a hostage in the hands of the King of Spain; 
was found strangled at Brussels, but nobody has 
told us why or how. 

* Cormac: i.e, the brother of Hugh, Earl of 
Tyrone. He is usually called Cormac Mac 
Baron. 

* Con.—He is called Tyrone’s base son, by 
Moryson and other English writers. 


2358 annaza RIoshachta €lREGNN. (1608. 


bmiaimn mic apt 1 nell 50 nopuns mop Dia Tarmyb cenmotaz. Iciat vo 
cocan lapm lapla ua domnall Catbanp a oveapbpataipn co na dGpbpaip 
Nuala,7 mac an lanla Coo cfpoa tm pfecmume san a bit 1 naoip a bliaona. 
Roip ingM us docantaig bf Cactbaipp co na mac Cod 1 naoip oa bliadam 4 
Mac a deanbnatan oomnall occ, mac vomnall. Neaccain mac an 
calbas, mic vonnchand ceapbpig ui Oomnall so nonfim méip Dia coup 
beop a maille pnd. | ppeil na cpoice 1pin pposmap do coploc 1pm Lungs. 


ba mart an Luce aon lunge bactap aimnpive an ap veanb ofmin na no taopcc 


paite. 


muip, 7 na po posluaip saoch a héipinn ip na ofiotncoib lucc aon lunge 
baczan pip, baccap aiplsoa 7 ba huaiple an ctor npfinelang, ba ppp sniom 
7 sanc, (ignam 4 omb(pt nance dia nodeonalszead dia capIpiom ma natapda 
50 pop la a naop aoofoac poccain 50 haoip pippouca. Maipce cpowe po 
peepuo, maipnce mfnma po modain, mance aictfpee po pwsill an comaiple 
cpap a coainicc oul na oOpunge do Deacattap pon an (ctpa pin 7 Zan oanl 
a poctain pon cctlaib ma momlaine via noomnay outage, no dia natapoda 
bunad co poincin an bia. 


QOS CRIOST, 1608. 
Cloip Cor, mile Se cetz, a hocc. 


Eappaonca 7 impfpam anppoil vo empse etip an ngobepnoip baot 1 ndoipe 
colum cillé 1. Sin Seoipp) Palec, 7 Ua oocantaig cataip mac Slam orice. 


© His sister Nuala.—She was the wife of Niall 
Garv, but had deserted him when he went over 
to Sir Henry Docwra. 

4 Flugh, the Earl’s son.—He was afterwards 
page to the Infanta. 

© Donnell Oge—Hugh Roe O’ Donnell asserted 
that this Donnell Oge was a bastard.—See Mory- 
son’s History of Ireland, edition of 1735, vol. 1. 
p. 36; and yet his son is mentioned m remain- 
der in Earl Rory’s Patent. 

* Pawlett—He was a gentleman of Hamp- 
shire, to whom Sir Henry Docwra sold his house 
at Derry, “with 10 Quarters of land I had 
bought & layde to it (all with myne owne 
money), & my Company of ffoote, all togeather 


for less a greate deale then the very house alone 
had stood mee in, and withall the vice provost- 
shipp of the town of Derry (for the time of my 
absence), I conferred upon him, but which I 
neither valued nor had anything for.”— Docewra’s 
Narration. 

The following account of O’Doherty’s insur- 
rection is given by P. O’Sullevan Beare, in his 
Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend., tom. 4, lib. 1, ¢.v.: 

‘“‘Ceteros optimatesjlabefactandi cupidi Pro- 
testantes, multos contumelijs, opprobrijs, & ini- 
jurijs afficiunt. Cathirium Odochartam Inisone 
principem, de quo superius mentionem fecimus, 
vigesimum circiter annum agentem, quéd Onelli 
fuge fuerit conscius, Prorex arguit, asperis at- 


1608.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2359 


Hugh Oge, the son of Brian, son of Art O'Neill; and many others of his 
faithful friends. These were they who went with the Earl O'Donnell: Caffar, 
his brother, and his sister, Nuala°; Hugh, the Earl’s son’, wanting three weeks 
of being one year old; Rose, the daughter of O'Doherty, and wife of Caffar, 
with her son, Hugh, aged two years and three months ; the son of his brother, 
Donnell Oge*, the son of Donnell; Naghtan, the son of Calvagh, son of Donough 
Cairbreach O’Donnell ; together with many others of his faithful friends. They 
entered the ship on the festival of the Holy Cross, in autumn. - 

This was a distinguished crew for one ship; for it is indeed certain that the 
sea had not supported, and the winds had not wafted from Ireland, in modern 
times, a party of one ship who would have been more illustrious or noble, in 
point of genealogy, or more renowned for deeds, valour, prowess, or high 
achievements, than they, if God had permitted them to remain in their patri- 
monies until their children should have reached the age of manhood. Woe to 
the heart that meditated, woe to the mind that conceived, woe to the council 
that decided on, the project of their setting out on this voyage, without knowing 
whether they should ever return to their native principalities or patrimonies 
to the end of the world. 


THE AGE QF CHRIST, 1608. 


The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred eight. 


Great dissensions and strife arose between the Governor of Derry, Sir 
George Pawlett*, and O’Doherty (Cahir, the son of John Oge). The Governor 


que contumeliosis verbis exagitans. commutat, Catholicos incolumes ad vnum. di- 


mittit. 


Georgius 


Paletus Luci prefectus Anglus eques Auratus Cuilmorem maritimam arcem, quinque 


conuicijs onerat, minans se facturum, vt ille la- 
queo suspendatur. Odocharta tune iniuriam 
dissimulauit, Paletum armatis stipatum nudus 
militibus aggredi non ausus. Breui tamen vin- 
dictam sumpsit. Eo die oppido Luco egressus 
clhentium manum comparat, cum qua sub galli- 
cinium reuersus vigiles, circitoresque improuisd 
circumuentos trucidat, Paletum, & alios Protes- 
tantes occidit, oppidum diripit, & incendit: vx- 


orem Pseudoepiscopi ciuitatis captam pretio 


passuum millia distantem, quam Anglorum pre- 
sidium duodecim tormentorum machinis instruc- 
tam obtinebat, repentina irruptione capit, in 
eaque presidio collocato Felmium Macdauetum 
preficit ; & magnis motibus per Vltoniam exci- 
tatis bellum statuit ducere vsque ad aduentum 
Onelli, Odonelli, Osulleuani, reliquorumque ex- 
ulantium, quos a Christianis principibus adiu- 
tos auxilio redituros sperabat: 4 principio Apri- 
lis anni millesimi sexcentesimi octaui per menses 


2360 


GQNNazta RIOSshachcta EIReEGNN. 


[1608. 


Nin 66 hf nama po mbip an sobepnoip cap 7 capcupal pap o bpAcip, acc 
vo b{pt pp pin pfnnaince dia Copp sup 66 p(pp lap a bap map a blea pra 


pia né Podemad an ofmiad, 7 an eaponoip Fuaip, 7] no Léiccploh pon oail no 
fon cainve san a vrosail, 50 po on opeince 7 oimmpe sup bo puall na 


veachad pon pualang 7 oapacc conad fd vo pone a comarpliuccad pm a 
capib ionnap no vigelad an pap do paccad pain. ba plo cécup po cinnpiot 


quinque rem ita gerens, vt predis, & excur- 
sionibus multum Protestantibus offecerit, sepeé 
cum illis fuerit velitatus, leuesque pugnas com- 
miserit. Ad quod bellum suscipiendum moue- 
batur preter memoratas iniurias tum quod cum 
Ibernis Anglice factionis non minus crudeliter, 
quam cum ceteris Angli agebant, tum tyranni- 
dis magnitudine, cuius vacationem nulla res 
preter bellum afferebat. Iam vero Richardus 
VVinkel Anglus eques Auratus Iberniz castra- 
metator quatuor militum millia ducens arcem 
illam, cui Felmius preerat, obsidet. Felmius 
ratus se paruo presidio munimentum loci na- 
tura non satis munitum, diu non posse defen- 
dere, nec Odochartam opem laturum, quéd 
militum numero inferior erat castrametatoris 
exercitu, ignem inijcit arci duabusque nauibus 
onerarijs plenis tritici in commeatum missi 
Luci preesidio, quas ceperat. Duo quoque mil- 
lia hbrorum Hereticorum, que Luci Ministro- 
piscopi erant, in exercitus conspectu in ignem 
consumenda inijcit, spretis centum argenti li- 
bris quibus eos Pseudoepiscopus redimere cu- 
piebat, & ipse duobus phasellis cum militibus 
fugit, tormenta partim secum deferens, partim 
deijcien$ in mare. Cuius facti Odochartam, qui 
statuit Felmium obsidione liberare, pcenituit. 
Beartam quoque arcem castrametator obsidio 
vallat, vbi erat Maria Odochartz vxor Pristonis 
Vicecomitis filia Arcem Monachus qui illam 
tenebat, prodit, & ipse simul Fidei nuncium re- 
mittit pactus tamen, vt presidiari} imcolumes 
dimitterentur: quibus Anglus fidem sua reli- 
gione seruauit alios in vincula detrudens, alios 


pretio commutans, & Mariam Vicecomiti fratri, 
qui factionis Anglice erat, custodiendam tradens. 
Inde Castrametator ad direptionem, atque depo- 
pulationem agrorum, quos Odocharta posside-_ 
bat vertitur. Quo conatu illum Odocharta pro- 
hibere insistit, mille, quingentosque armatos 
ductitans non longé ab hoste statiuis collocatis. 
Plerique castrametatoris milites Iberni, & An- 
gloiberni Catholici erant, sed a sacerdotibus . 
Anglice factionis non bene docti existimabant, 
sibi licere pro principe Protestante contra Ca- 
tholicos pugnare, dum in spiritualibus non 
Ex 
horum principibus erat Henricus Onellus cog- 


haberent cum Hereticis communionem. 


nomento Iunior, qui antea sub Onello in Here- 
Ad locum, 


qui Keannmhuir nominatur. Odocharta in illud 


ticos fidé, & acerrimé dimicauerat. 


castrorum cornu, quod Henricus tenebat, cum 
quingentis armatis noctu facit impetum: val- 
lum subitO trangressus vigiles atque custodes 
interimit : prima tentoria repente circumit, & 
incendit : stragem vndique edit: mox in Hen- 
rici tabernaculum irruit, quo etiam regij mili-— 
tes semisomnes pauidi, & inermes ex aliorum 
tabernaculorum clade pervenerant. Hic atrox 
pugna committitur. Incipit Henricus suos con- 
solari, confirmare, adque se tuendos, & sociorum 
necem viciscendam hortari, hostis impetum for- 
tissime dimicando sustinere, laborantibus subsi- 
dium ferre; Odocharta contra suos crebris ex- 
hortationibus ad preliandum accendere, paui- 
dis addere terrorem, ad Henricum,’cuius vocem 
confirmantis audiebat, accedere. Henricus suis 
loco cedentibus Catholicis vndequaque circum- 


1608.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2361 


not only offered him insult and abuse by word, but also inflicted chastisement 
on his body ; s& that he would rather have suffered death than live? to brook 
such insult and dishonour, or defer or delay to take revenge for it ; and he was 


filled with anger and fury, so that he nearly ran to. distraction and madness. 
What he did was, to consult with-his friends how he should take revenge for 


the insult which was inflicted upon him. What they first unanimously resolved, 
on the 3rd of May, was to invite to him Captain Hart, who was at Cuil-mor (a 


uenientibus fortiter prelians, multisque vulne- 
ribus affectus exanimis sternitur. Superstites 
in castrorum frontem, vbi castrametator erat, 
fugiunt. Castrametatorem, & exercitum totum 
ingens pauor inuadit: nonnulli castris desertis 
sese fugee mandant: omnesque fugituri videban- 
tur, nisi Odocharta suorum paucitati timens, 
_receptui canere, pedemque referre iussisset. Ac- 
cepto damno castrametator perculsus ex plano 
in presidia confugit. Odocharta pagos, quos 
Henricus possedit, ingressus predatur, atque 
deuastat. Per Drumorrium lacum in insulum 
lintribus, atque pontonibus vectus arcem ex- 
pugnat, atque diripit. Rursus castrametator 
viribus refectis, maioribus copijs conscriptis, 
vberioribus Ibernorum auxilijs accitis contra 
Odochartam facit expeditionem. Auxilijs pre- 
erant Nellus Odonellus Asper, & Macsuinnius 
Tuethius. Quorum viribus Odocharta ratus 
suas esse impares in Beatham syluam sese cum 
multis diuitijs abdit. Qué erant omnino itinera 
tria, quibus hostes poterant illum aggredi, que 
simul regij arripiunt exercitu diuiso in tres 
partes inter tres duces castrametatorem, Aspe- 
rum & Tuethium. Odocharta quoque suis co- 
pis longée minoribus tripartitis tria simul iti- 
nera obsidet. De quibus ab vtraque parte dies 
circiter triginta missilibus contenditur non mul- 
tis vtrinque interemptis. Denique castrameta- 
tor commeatu deficiente in preesidia redit. Quem 
Odocharta secutus angustijs illis loci relictis per 
regios excursiones facit. Sub hoc tempus Asper 


in eam suspicionem Anglis venit, quod esset cum 


Odocharta in bellum conspiraturus. Ob quod 
primunt in Ibernis custodi# mandatus, Indé in 
Angliam transmissus in Londinensi arce detine- 
tur. Aliquot deinde diebus elapsis Anglus quo- 
que Prorex, & Clanricharde Comes maioribus 
copijs conscriptis castrametatori suppetias ve- 
niunt. 


que exercitui, siquidem vtrolibet erat inferior 


Odocharta ratus se esse imparem vtri- 


numero militum, in tutiorem locum sese reci- 
pere constituit, bellumque tantum ducere, donec 
superstites Ibernice iuuentutis ex Ibernica fac- 
tione, qui ex varijs regni angulis ad illum iter 
habebant, perueniant, iustumque exercitum ha- 
beat. Cum compositis ordinibus agmen duceret, 
sub fucis exortum hostis illum assequitur: sed 
missilibus vtrinque aliquandiu pugnato rursus 
redit, nullo memorabili accepto, vel illato damno, 
Aliquot post horis occurrit hostilium bombar- 
dariorum ala Odocharte agmen eminus plumbeis 
glandibus carpens, in quam Odocharta alteram 
imperat mitti: cum qua ipse quoque animosus 
iuuenis preter concilium, & senioribus inscijs 
ex agmine descendens duplici tragula confossus 
solus occumbit intra duas horas, quam fuit ab- 
solutione sacramentali peccatis expiatus, cuius 
infausta nex bello exitum omnium opinione ce- 
leriorem attulit. Namque ceteri preter paucos 
duce destituti in optantium, & inuitantium An- 
glorum gratiam, vt primum quisque potuit, re- 
diuerunt.”’ 

8 Than live: literally, ‘‘ so that he would rather 
[have] his death than his life, before he would 
bear the insult and dishonour he received.” 


i Reie-e 


2362 


GQNNadta RIOSshachTA ElREGNN. [1608. 


a haon comaiple an 3. Man Caipcin hape baor 1pm ccuil méip (bale pin 
pil pop up loca peabcenl alla ciop von voipe a OUbpamap) 00 TocuIpead ma 
docum, 7 a sabcul 50 ppuain an baile ap. Oo caod po ceddip 1;In dedorl Fo 
voine, 7 00 b(pt uapodapccad namacc pon pianlac an baile. Ro mapbad an 
sobepnoin la hedcchan mac nell mic sfpaile uf docapcang, 7 leucenanc 
conbon la Sfan mac aoda, mic aoda omb uf oomnall. Ro manbad ona 
pochaide ole cen mo tac pom. Oo sabad caipcm hen vegan, 7 bln Cppcorp 
an baile. Ro cplcoipccead, 7 po loipccead an baile leo 1antcan 7 cucpac 
eccala aoble app. 

Monuan am sid nap b6 maccnad an cuapal aipeac vaite a eapanona, 
Ro bad dipim odoaipnfip: na huile po prolang, 7 po clanoaig 1 ccoiecead ulad 
uile spep an ccomtosgbaal coceamd pm po ctpiall 1 nacchad pléca an pis, uaip 
ba verde camic a bap pom badém (18. luln an ccionn) la hapo mapapcat. 
na heineann, Robenc uincuel,7 la Sip oliuep lambepc, 7 a pon ina ¢lépam- 
naib compomnce etin done 7 an cul mop, 7 a cfnn vo bpht a ccapedlbat | 
50 hat chaz, 7 bap pochaide oucaplib, 7 oaip(chanb an coiccid po bad eimile 
opaipneip. Od ve e1ccin,7] Do Imteacc na maplad accpubnamanp, tainice a 
noomnup 7 a noucharg, a pponba, 7 a ppeapann, a note, 7 a noiongnada, a 
ccuanta caomtupcantaca, 7 a ninbeapa iaipec 1omda vo bin vo Zao1welarb 
coiccid ulad, 7 a tcabaint ma ppiadnaip: vo eaccaip cenélaib 7 a ccoppom 
fon accup, 7 pop ionnapbad im ale cmochen’ comaigzib 50 po éccrat a 
nepmon. 

" With the sword: literally, ‘‘ he gave the 


O’Doghertie, Knight, so contending, was slain, 
soldiers of the town the cold awaking of ene- 


and the Jurors saw the body and members of 
mies.” the said Cahire then and there slain,” &c. 


' His own death.— According to the tradition Sir Henry Doewra gives the following account 


in the country, Sir Cahir O’Doherty was killed 
under the rock of Doon, near Kilmacrenan. It 
appears from an Inquisition taken in the 6th 
of Jac. I, that he fell on 5th of July, 1608 : 

‘* The said Cahire O’ Doghertie, Knight, after- 
wards, to wit, on the 5th of July, in the year 
aforesaid, being in rebellion at or near Kilma- 
crenan, in the county of Donegall, together with 
the said other traitors, fought and contended 
with the army or soldiers of the said King, 
then and there remaining. The aforesaid Cahire 


of the causes that drove O’Doherty [etatis 21] 
into this rash insurrection. He does not appear 
to have heard that his friend Pawlett had horse- 
whipped this proud young chieftain : 
‘‘Presentlie after him” [ Roory O'Donnell], 
‘‘eame O’Doghertie alsoe, with a letter from 
my lord to mee, to pray mee to deliver him 
the possession of the Ile of Inch againe, which 
hee himself had past away before, first, by lease 
for xxi. yeares, & afterwardes in ffee simple for 
ever, both under the greate seale. I tould him 


1608.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 


2363 


fort on the margin of Lough Foyle, below the Derry we have mentioned), and 
to take him prisoner. [This was done], and he obtained the fort in his release, 
He repaired immediately at daybreak to Derry, and awoke the soldiers of that 
town with the sword”. The Governor was slain by Owen, the son of Niall, son 
of Gerald O'Doherty, and Lieutenant Corbie by John, the son of Hugh, son of 
Hugh Duv O'Donnell. Many others were also slain besides these. Captain 
Henry Vaughan and the wife of the bishop of the town were taken prisoners. 
They afterwards plundered and burned the town, and carried away immense 
spoils from thence. . 

Alas! although it was no wonder that this noble chieftain should have 
avenged his dishonour, innumerable and indescribable were the evils that sprang 
up and pullulated in the entire province of Ulster through this warlike rising, 
which he undertook against the King’s law; for from it resulted his own death’, 
on the 18th of July following, by the Chief Marshal of Ireland, Robert Wing- 
field, and Sir Oliver Lambert. He was cut into quarters between Derry and 
Cuil-mor, and his head was sent to Dublin, to be exhibited ; and many of the 
gentlemen and chieftains of the province, too numerous to be particularized, 
were also put to death. It was indeed“ from it, and from the departure of the 
Earls we have mentioned, it came to pass that their principalities, their terri- 
tories, their estates, their lands, their forts, their fortresses, their fruitful har- 
bours, and their fishful bays, were taken from the Irish of the province of Ulster, 
and given in their presence to foreign tribes; and they were expelled and 
banished into other countries, where most of them died. 


this warraunt was too weake to doe what it 
imported, and shew’d him reasons for it which 
either he could not or would not apprehend, or 
beleeve, but plainely made shew to conceive a 
suspition as though I were corrupted under 
hand to runne a dissembling course with him. 
To give him contentment, if I could, being then 
to goe for England, and to Dublin by the way, 
I spoke to Sir George Carey, that was then Lord 
Deputie, tould him how the case stoode, and 
what discontentment I sawe it drave him into. 
Hee told mee it was past the Seales (gaue mee 
a further reason too), ‘& vtterlie refused to make 


or medle with it. Hereupon hee tooke it more 
to hearte; sent Agentes to deale for him in 
England. They prevayled not till my lord was 
deade, & then with impatience lead away, with 
lewd Councell besides, & conceiuing himselfe to 
be wronged in many other thinges, hee was first 
broke out into open Rebbellion ; but that fell 
out a good while after.” 

Docwra then goes on to complain of various 
grievances, and shews clearly that he himself, 
O’Kane, and Sir Niall Garv O’Donnell, were 
very unfairly dealt with by the Government. 

k Indeed : eccin is here an expletive. 


Tanx 2 


aNNaza RIOSshachcad elREaNN. (1608. 


2364 


Niall sanb o vormnall co na veapbpatpb, 7 co nad mac neaccain vo sabarl 
im peil edn na bliadna po rap na cuba ppd g0 mbaor comaonca Cconpa, 7 
ud docantaig, a coup rappin co hat chat Niall, 7 neaccai vo con appaide 
co cop Lonoan 1ap paopad-néill 6 bap vo bnhe oliccid, 7 a mbht Wlam rpin 
con co ould a mbfchad. Cod 7 vomnall vo lesad ap a mbpmsolnay 
lapccain .1. yim mbliadamn ap ccino. 

lapla cine conaill Ruoparsge mac aoda mic magnara, mic Coda omb mic 
Qoda nuaid tj vomnanll vo Ecc ipm pom 28.lul,7 a adnacal 1 mamipoip.s. pnom- 
reip 1pm ccnoc mn no cnochad naocim Peaccan apptal, 1ap ccaof a cionad, 7 
a tapsabal, 1ap PRaoiprom, 7 1ap naitpicce Toccaide ma peactorb, 7 coapim- 
ceaccaib, 1ap neapicin cunp ¢pforc 7 a pola a lamhaib ppuicmb ppaitm- 
efclaib eccaily: na poma. Robad lac sap pecle,7 muic epicna vo bhe oce 
an ci clpoa ann pin. Ap ba plp cpoda copancac agmap, ionnpaisteac, 
ionsalac eiplde, po bad mfimc 1 mbAnn baogeal ag imodioth a ipp1,7 a atapda 
ace con5nam la a veapbpataip CQlod puad piayia po sab pom feipin cigeap- 
nap tine concall, Tiseapna cabantac ciodlaicteac ouap mon deigZeinis oa 
nap b6 nf odplec a pinnpfp anoanlaip ap a caitmige,] ap a congaimige, 
pean na capo a mfnma, na a mneittn, 1 mdoimb nac a pecoaib paogalca 


! Niall Garv.—The information on which 
Niall Garv was found guilty was furnished by 
Ineenduy, the mother of the great Hugh Roe 
O’Donnell, who died in Spain in 1602. 
pears from the Ulster Inquisitions that she got 
a grant of lands in the barony of Kilmacrenan 


It ap- 


for this important service.—See also Pat. Rot. 
10 Jac. I. The exact information which she 
furnished to the Lord Bishop of Derry, concern- 
ing the treason of O’ Doherty and Niall Garv, is 
preserved among the Ormond Papers in the 
Bodleian Library at Oxford, V. 251, headed, 
‘* Mother’s Contession to Bishop of Derry of 
O’Dogherty’s treason.” 

‘“My Lo: be yt knowen unto yo" Loh. that 
S' Neele Garve O’Donnel & O’Dogherty be- 
gan to go in treason against his Ma’, thus: 
O’Dogherty haue promised to take the Derry 
& the Culmor; & S' Neele promised to send his 
brother, Donell Mac Coine, to take Lifford, & 


that he and his brother, Hugh Boy, should take 
Belasenan & Dungall; & he haue send Dual- 
togh M: Gille Duff, & certen number of soul- 
diers, with O’ Dogherty, to receive half the goods 
of Derry for 5" Neile, & S* Neile promised half 
the goods of the other towns vnto O’Dogherty ; 
& the cause S" Neill had not fulfilled his pro- 
mise was, that his son came not out of Dublin 
at the time he thought Donnogh Boy O Friayll 
should stell him thence; morower S* Neele 
haue send Edmond O Mularky & O Donnell 
ffanadogh to the Culmor with Diarmoid m*° 
Daved and Cormac m° Daved, to diuid the 
treasure that was there, & after they divided it 
they loked it in a troncke, & they brought the 
key w™ themseves ; and there is another way 
S" Neill promised to serve upon the King’s 
subjects, he gathered all that were obedient 
unto himself in the Countrie of Conall & brought 
them to Crochan, & desired S' Richard to go 


\ 


1608.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2305 


Niall Garv' O’Donnell, with his brothers [Hugh Boy and Donnell], and his 
son, Naghtan, were taken prisoners about the festival of St. John in this year, 
after being accused of having been in confederacy with O’Doherty. They were 
afterwards sent to Dublin, from whence Niall and Naghtan were sent to London, 
and committed to the Tower, Niall having been freed from death by the decision 
of the law; and they [Niall and Naghtan] remained confined in the Tower to 
the end of their lives". Hugh and Donnell were liberated from their captivity 
afterwards, 1. e. in the year following. 

The Earl of Tirconnell (Rury, son of Hugh, son of Manus, son of Hugh 
Duv, son of Hugh Roe O’Donnell) died at Rome, on the 28th of July, and was 
interred in the Franciscan monastery situate on the hill on which St. Peter the 
Apostle was crucified, after lamenting his faults and crimes, after confession, 
exemplary penance for his sins and transgressions, and after receiving the body 
and blood of Christ from the hands of the psalm-singing clergy of the Church 
of Rome. Sorrowful [it is to consider] the short life and early eclipse of him 
who was there deceased, for he was a brave, protecting, valiant, puissant, and 
warlike man, and had often been in the gap of danger along with his brother, 
Hugh Roe (before he himself had assumed the lordship of Tirconnell), in 
defence of his religion and his patrimony. He “was a generous, bounteous, 
munificent, and truly hospitable lord, to whom the patrimony of his ancestors 
did not seem anything for his spending and feasting parties ; and a man who 
did not place his mind or affections upon worldly wealth and jewels, but dis- 


with him to do a service upon O Dogherty, & 
if he should go with him then he & O Dogherty 
will murder them all, but S™ Richard, in hope 
to have his son for him. And the Town of 
Lifford should be with S"N eill; moreover, ano- 
ther agreement betwixt S" Neill & O Dogherty, 
that S* Neill should possess the Castle of Bartt, 
& O Donnell’s duties upon Inishowen, as long 
as they were able to maintain yt themselves. 
My Lo: be it knowen unto you the fear of my 
soul will not suffer me to accuse any body in 
the world with such, vnless I were sure of it. 
‘* Hi. Dusan. 
“This lady also alledgeth that one of her 


servants was informed by one of O Dogherty’s 
company, that a messenger had been with 
O Dogherty from St Neile Garve the night be- 
fore the army went upon him in Glenvagh, 
whereby was advised to leave his fastness & not 
to fight.” 

™ To the end of their lives—Niall Garv and his 
eldest son, Naghtan, died in the Tower of Lon- 
don in the year 1626, according to Short Annals 
of Tirconnell, preserved in a manuscript in the 
library of the Royal Irish Academy. He had 
another son, Manus, who was Colonel in the 
service of the Confederate Catholics, and from 
whom the O’Donnells of Newport are descended. 


2366 


AGNNaca RIOSshachTa ElREGNN. 


[1608. 


act a ppodail, 7 a pecaoil(o pop sac naon va mZlo a leap 00 Then, nd vo 


tpuagh. 


Masguidin Cuconnace 6cc, mac conconnact 6icc, mic conconnact mic 
conconnacc, mic bniain, mic pilip, mic Tomap tTIZeapna peanmanach nfc puain 
cigeapnap Zan mfing, san meabanl, san perll, gan Plongaul acc a toga) pprav- 
naipr pean nulad 1 nionad a veapbnatap lod. Saof fpecna iloealbac mfnmnac 
monaicc(ncac, aipopeac (ppadal co mbuad ccéille, 7 ccpota, | gaca maitlpa 
an ¢fna vo écc 1 nZenua ip etal an .v2, Quguyc. 


" Died at Genoa.—According to the tradition 
in the family, he died of a burning fever. This 
Cuconnaught was the ancestor of the Maguires 
of Tempo, in the county of Fermanagh, who 
descend from his second son, Brian, as shewn in 
the annexed pedigree : 

I. CuconnaucHuT Macurre died in 1608. He 

was the brother of the celebrated Hugh Ma- 
guire, who was killed, near Cork, in a duel 
with Sir Warham St. Leger. 
_ IL. Brian Macuire. He was a minor at the 
death of his father, and was restored to a tract 
of land called Tempodessel, now Tempo, esti- 
mated to contain two thousand acres of land, 
which were his brother’s, lately deceased. Pyn- 
nar speaks of his estate in his Survey of Ulster, 
as published in Harris’s Hibernica, p. 169, as 
follows : 

‘“¢ Upon this Proportion there is a large Bawne 
of Sodds, and a good house of lime and stone. 
He hath made five leaseholders, which have, 
each of them, sixty Acres for twenty-one Years, 
and all his Tenants do Plough after the Irish 
Manner.” 

This Brian left one legitimate son, 

III. Hue Maguire, who married the daugh- 
ter of the head of the O’Reillys, by whom he 
had, A 

IV. Cuconnaucut Morr. He married the 
daughter of Everhood Magennis, of Castlewel- 
lan, in the county of Down. He mortgaged a 
great part of his estate to raise, arm, and sup- 


- O’Durnin were then living in Dublin. 


port a regiment of horse for the service of 
James IJ. According to the tradition in the 
family, which appears to be correct, he fought 
desperately at the pass of Aughrim, where he 
himself was killed, and his regiment cut to 
pieces, after having nearly annihilated the se- 
cond regiment of the British horse. He was 
struck down by a grape-shot, and left dead on 
the field; but one of his followers, named O’Dur- 
nin, is said to have cut off his head with his 
sword, and to have carried it in a bag to the 
island of Devenish, where he interred it in the 
family tomb of the Maguires. The late Bryan 
Maguire, of Tempo, and of Clontarf, Dublin, 
states, in a pedigree of his family, which he 
printed in 1811, that the descendants of this 
Cucon- 
naught, or Constantine More, had, 1. Brian, of 
whom presently ; 2. Hugh; 3. Stephen. The 
two latter died unmarried. 

V. Brian Maauire. He was restored to some 
remnant of his father’s estate, and married the 
daughter and heir of James Nugent, Esq., of 
Coolamber, by which marriage he was enabled 
to pay off certain debts with which the estate 
of Tempo was incumbered. He had five sons 
and one daughter, the two eldest of whom died 
unmarried. He died himself in the year 1700, 
and was succeeded by his third son, Robert 
Macuire, who is mentioned by Charles O’Conor, 
of Belanagare, in his Dissertations on the History 
of Ireland, printed in 1753, as ‘the head of the 


1608.] 


ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2367 


tributed and circulated them among all those who stood in need of them, 


whether the mighty or the feeble: 


Maguire (Cuconnaught Oge, the son of Cuconnaught, son of Cuconnaucht, 
son of Brian, son of Philip, son of Thomas), Lord of Fermanagh, who had 
attained the lordship without fraud, deceit, treachery, or fratricide ; but had 
been elected in the place of his brother, Hugh, in the presence of the men of 
Ulster; who was an intelligent, comely, courageous, magnanimous, rapid-march- 
ing, adventurous man, endowed with wisdom and personal beauty, and all the 
other good qualifications, died at Genoa’, in Italy, on the 12th of August. 


Maguires of Fermanagh. This Robert married 
the daughter and heiress of Henry Mac Dermot 
Roe, Esq., of Greyfield, in the county of Ros- 
common, but died without issue, and was suc- 
ceeded by his next brother, Colonel Hugh Ma- 
guire, the fourth son of Brian of Tempo, No. V. 
This Hugh was a colonel in the Austrian ser- 
vice, and married the Honourable Dowager Lady 
Cathcart, of Irwin Water, Herefordshire, and 
dying in Dublin, stne prole, in 1763, was suc- 
ceeded by his youngest brother, 

VI. Paivr Maguire, the fifth son of Brian. 
He married Miss Frances Morres, dayghter of 
Nicholas Morres, Esq., of Lattreest, in the county 
of Tipperary, by Miss Susanna Talbot of Mala- 
hide. This Philip had one son, No. VII., and 
two daughters, the elder of whom married Owen 
O’Reilly, Esq., of Mount-Pallas, in the county of 
Cavan, by whom she had two sons, Charles, who 
died_at Brussels in 1786, and Eugene O’Reilly, 
who was living in Englandin 1811. The younger 
daughter married Sir John Stuart Hamilton, Ba- 
ronet, of Dunnamanna, in the county of Tyrone, 
by whom she had several children, of whom the 
eldest surviving was Sir John Charles, who suc- 
ceeded his father. 

VII. Huen Macuire, of Tempo, one of the most 
puissant, high-minded, and accomplished gen- 
tlemen that ever came of the Maguire family. 
The Editor was acquainted with many persons 
who knew him intimately, and were entertained 


at his hospitable and sumptuous table at Tempo. 
He mortgaged Tempo, and left his family in great 
distress. He married Phebe Mac Namara, daugh- 
ter of George Mac Namara, Esq., of the county 
of Clare, by whom he had three sons: i. Con- 
stantine, a gentleman of polished manners and 
indomitable courage, who was murdered in the 
county of Tipperary, in 1834, at the very time 
that the Editor was examining the locality of 
Tempo-Deisil; he left one son, whose legitimacy 
was denied by his brother, Brian, but who now 
enjoys a small estate to which Constantine suc- 
ceeded in right of his mother, and some daugh- 
ters; 2. Brian, of whom presently ; 3. Stephen, 
who enlisted as a private soldier in the British 
service, but died soon after, broken-hearted; and 
five daughters, Frances, Stephania, Maria, Eliza, 
and Catherine. This Hugh died in October, 1800. 

VIII. Brian Maguire, the second son of 
Hugh of Tempo. He was an officer in the Ho- 
nourable East India Company’s native army 
in Bombay, which he joined in 1799. In the 
year 1811, a short memoir of this remarkable 
man, evidently the production of his own pen, 
was printed in Dublin by W. Cox, 150, Abbey- 
street, giving an account of his several duels 
with English officers, and of several circum- 
stances that occurred to him in India and Eu- 
rope, to which is annexed a Genealogy of his 
family, which shewed him to have been related 
to some of the best families of Ireland, being the 


2368 aNNacva RIOshachta elREGNN. (1609. 


Semuy’ mac eimip mic conulad més eyame vo écc ipin lo cedna 4 a 
-aonacal ipin margin pemnaice. 

Cacbapn mac Coda mic masnupa, an caon mac tiseapina plo bad mo ainm 
| oipveancup, allad, 7 apondy, ap aowecaipe, an péile po baof 1 ninip eime- 
mom. Qhtsm cuana meric cailcim, 7 Suaipe mic colmaim ay veanlaccad 7 ap 
onedc, pean nc Tapd neac a OPM PHIp pam ian na épa do éce pin pdm 
an .17. Sepcembep, 7 a adnacal ap aon la a veanbpataip layin iapla. 

Clooh O Neill mac aoda, mic pipoopca baptn oaingfnainn ope an 1apla 
ui neill vo écc, aon trpaoileaccain cenél neogain vo sabail ionmo a acan 
o1lamad bee ina ofohaid vo Ecc, 7 a adnacal 1 naom 1onao la veanbnaitpib 
a matap 2. lap an iapla ua noomnaill 7 la cacbanp. 


QOI1S CRIOST, 1609. 


Cloip Cort, mile, Se cév, andor. 


Cachbapp occ mac catbonpp, mic Magnupa, mic aoda oulbh ui vomnaill 
do Con vo cum bap 1 nat chat la sallarb an 18. 1ul. Nip b6 vimiad vo cenel 
cconanll meic Néill an oaig fl pm do oiponead 1 ccfnnap poppa ora Léiect 
ola paso a ccfnnayp iccin, an uaiple a pola an capve a cagmo ap bis, an 
bopnpad, an tuaicle, an cnebaine an comnapt, ap cotuccad phir an ccac do 
cuin(tan ma cline. 

bman na Samtac mac aint, mic bmain na murceipse 0o manbad la sallanb. 

Mac an band Cogan mac Zoppada, mic eogain, mic Soppada ollam ut 
domnall 1 noo pao (n5na inncleaccac, 7 pean cTIZe naoloead coitcinn vo 
écc 1ap cclan aoip, 1ap mbuaid naitpise. 


’ 


second cousin of the Earl of Ormond, and of the _ still remembered by his tenants at Tempo. 


present Lord Talbot of Malahide. In p. 29 of this 
little work (which was suppressed at the request 
of the more respectable of Mr. Maguire’s friends) 
is given a circumstantial account of a row which 
he had with some English officers at the island 


of St. Helena, which is a curious specimen of 


autobiography. But a far better book could be 
written on the life and adventures of his grand- 
father, who was really a man of exalted charac- 
ter, and of whom many interesting anecdotes are 


This Brian married Miss Honoria Anne Baker, 
daughter of James Baker, Esq., of Ballymoreen, 
in the county of Tipperary, on the 17th Decem- 
ber, 1808, and had by her several sons, some of 
whom are now, or were lately, reduced to the | 
condition of common sailors on the coal vessels 
sailing between Dublin and the coasts of Wales. 
Thus, in one generation, has the proudest blood 
of Ireland sunk to one of the vulgarest states of 
human existence, and commingled with that 


1609.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2369 


James, the son of Ever, son of Cu-Uladh [Cooley] Mac Mahon, died on the 
same day, and was interred at the aforenamed place. 

Caffar, son of Hugh, son of Manus [O’Donnell], a lord’s son, who had borne 
a greater name, renown, and celebrity, for entertainment of guests and hospi- 
tality, than all who were in the Isle of Heremon ; a second Cuanna-mac-Cail- 
chinni®, and a second Guaire-mac-Colmain for bounty and hospitality; and a man 
from [the presence of ] whom no one had ever turned away with a refusal of 
his request; died at Rome on the 17th of September, and was buried with his 
brother, the Earl. 

Hugh O'Neill, the son of Hugh, son of Ferdorcha, Baron of Dungannon, and 
the heir-of the Earl O'Neill’, the only expectation of the Kinel-Owen to succeed 
his father, if he had survived him, died, and was buried in the same place with 
~ his mother’s brothers, the Earl O’Donnell and Caffar. 


“ 


THE AGE OF ‘CHRIST, 1609. 
The Age of Christ, one thousand sie hundred nine. 


Caffar Oge, the son of Caffar, son of Manus, son of Hugh Duv O’Donnell, 
was put to death at Dublin, by the English, on the 18th of July. It would have 
been no disgrace to the tribe of Conall’, son of Niall, to elect this good man as 
their chief, if he had been permitted to go home to take the leadership of them, 
by reason of the nobleness of his blood and the greatness of his mind, and for 
his vigour, magnanimity, prudence, prowess, and puissance, in maintaining a 
battle against his opponents. , 

Brian-na-Samhthach, son of Art, son of Brian-na-mucheirghe [O'Rourke], 
was slain by the English. 

Mac Ward (Owen, the son of Godfrey, son of Owen, son of Godfrey), Ollav 
to Q’Donnell in poetry, an intelligent, ingenious man, who kept an open house 
of general hospitality, died at an advanced age, after the victory of penance. 


class amongst whom, a century ago, according and munificence with Guaire Aidhne, King of 

to Dean Swift, the true representatives of the Connaught at the same period. 

ancient Irish nobility were to be found. P Earl O’ Neill.—This should be Earl of Ty- 
© Cuanna-mac-Cailchinni:—He was Prince cf one, according to the technical language of 

Fermoy, in the now county of Cork, in the English law. 

seventh century, and vied in feats of hospitality 2 The tribe of Conall, son of Niall: i.e. the 


To *Y 


2370 QNNQta RIOshachta eiREGNN. (1611. 


QOS CRIOST, 1610. 
Cloip Cmorz, Mhle, Se cétz, a veich. 


QO1S CRIOST, 1611. 


Cloip Cops, mile, Se céo, a vech, a haon. 


Concoban o oibeanmgs eppcop otin, 7 combdeine po bad bnatain dono 
.5. Fpompeip 00 comuent dtin na ngall céccup, 7 po tToccad 1apam vo cum 
na heppcopoicze céona an a ofccaimllead, Ro hepsabao eipiom la sallanb, 
7 baot pm pe pooa aca po daocipe,7 FO pfhnamnd, 7 do painns(pcpacc Maoine 
J apecada 1omda 06 dia poad fon a nepip. Fo obpam ona moyin ap po 
omMplropiom an mart nencpadac apn an pplant putain. Ro puarlaice dia 06 
6 Zallaib oon cup pin,7 po sabad eipide do modiI~1 4 ap € po ba luptip 1 
nepinn in jonbaxo yn Sin Ancuip Chiceptep,7 po cuipead eipid do cum bap, 
Ro vichhoad cétcup, 7 po tlpccaice a boll ma cltpamnanb podalca, pedil- 
sfanta 1 nat cliat an ced la do pebnu. 

Ni baoi é1m cpopcuide 1 cTTip nepeann na po cplotnarg a Cnorde la huac- 
bap na mapcpa po pulaing, 7 po podcam an ceplam osh Csnmde, 7 an prpén 
Nip b6 cuma la haon 
do na cmlopcmdoib baccan 1 ccatpais ata chat an ionbond pin cia haca lap 


foincte pinchhoaip ap oons focnaicce via anmain. 


a mbfic ball o1a ballonb, 7 nip b6 hav a boll nama acc baccan Vionanapta 
pomfmla 1 nfplaime aca ag Zabail a pola nvibpwe co na léiccofp 50 Lan hi 
an ba veanb leo sup 66 haon vo maiptiyb naomoa an coimoead epioe. 

O’ Donnells 


and their correlatives, who were Seraphice Diui Francisci religioni sese teneris 


descended from Conall Gulban, the youngest 
son of Niall of the Nine Hostages, monarchs of 
Ireland in the end of the fourth century. 

"1610.—This year is left blank by the Four 
Masters. 

> Good qualifications —P. O’Sullevan Beare, 
who gives a most admirable description of the 
trial of this old prelate, draws his character in 
the following words, tom. 4, lib. 1, c. xviii. : 

‘Cornelius vir haud obseuro genere natus 


ab annis alligauit. Vbi mirifica pietate, longis 
orationibus, perpetuis peenitentiis, & omnium 
virtutum ornamento fulgens, doctrinam eru- 
ditus ingenio comis, & vrbanus, sermone nequa- 
quam rudis euasit.” ; 

° First beheaded.—This is not correct, for he 
was first hanged. The bishop was about eighty 
years of age at the period of his execution. 
When the hangman of Dublin, who was an 
Irishman, heard that the bishop had been con- 


1611.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2371 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1610". 
The Age of Christ, one thousand six hundred ten. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 16th 
The Age of Christ, one thousand siz hundred eleven. 


Conor O’Duibheannaigh [O’Devany], Bishop of Down and Conor, who had 

been at first a friar of the order of St. Francis, of the convent of Donegal, but 
who was afterwards, for his good qualifications’, elected to the episcopal dignity, 
was taken prisoner by the English ; and he was detained by them a long time 
in bondage and punishment ; and they offered him riches and many rewards, 
if he would turn over to their heresy, but he refused to accept of them, for he 
despised transitory riches for an everlasting kingdom. God released him from 
the English on that occasion; but he was taken again. Sir Arthur Chichester 
being at this time Lord Justice of Ireland, he was put to death. He was first 
beheaded", and [then] his members were cut in quarters, and his flesh mangled 
at Dublin, on the first of February. 
_ There was not aChristian in the land of Ireland whose heart did not shudder 
within him at the horror of the martyrdom which this chaste, wise, divine, and 
the perfect and truly meek, righteous man, suffered for the reward of his soul. 
The Christians who’ were then in Dublin contended with each other, to see 
which of them should have one of his limbs ; and not only his limbs, but they 
had fine linen in readiness, to prevent his blood from falling to the ground; for 
they were convinced that he was one of the holy martyrs of the Lord. 


simo vultu dixit.” O’Sullevan adds : 
“‘ Spectantibus hoc magnam admigationem 


demned, he fled from the city, and O’Sullevan 
says that none of the Irish race could be in- 


duced by threats, fear, or reward, to perform 
‘the office of executioner. Wherefore an Eng- 
lish murderer was released from prison and for- 
given the murder for executing him. When, 
however, he saw the calm fortitude and vener- 
able countenance of the prelate, he asked for- 
giveness of him for the butchery he was em- 
ployed to commit: ‘‘Quam ille se dare placidis- 


mouit, quod tortor miles robustus ztate florens, 
qui martyrum carnificio se vitam redempturum 
non ignorabat quasi sui incompos in scalis titu- 
babat, & Episcopus senex debilis intrepide scalas 
ascendit, in eisque loquens stabat robore per- 
fusus collo suo laqueum imposuit, sudariolo fa- 
ciem cooperuit iunctas manus carnifici vt vin- 
cerentur porrexit.” 


VoeXece 


9372 aNNaza RIOSshachTa EIRECANN. (1616. 


Olollapaccpaice 6 lucaipén paccand veappcarsche bao 1 ppapnad m 
eppeoip an tan pin, o no cimnpfcec soll 1accpom ma noip vo bapuccad, ba 
huaman lap an eppcop 50 ngébao uacbap 7 imfsla eipe la parcpm na mi 
imbenta oo bnfta pop a copprom ina Fradnaipe conad aipepm po cumdis 
sup na bapenmgib an paccapt oo bapuccad mamh. CAcbent an paccant 
nac pamice piom al(p uaman do belt pain ap aoipiom, 7 50 Unpad é 5an nac 
nuinfccla, 7 accbent nan bo comadair eppceop ondpaé vo bht san paccanz 
ina caoimteacc. Ro comanllyiom mopin ap po fodaim 7 po Fulains an o1ac 
céona vo tabainc paip an plot nme dia anmain. 

Niall 6 buoill eppcop Ratabot vo écc 1 nglionn elomse an peipead 
pebnuapi, 7 a adnacal 1 mp caoll. 


QOS CRIOST, 1616. 


Qoip Cort, mile, Se céd, a vech, a Sé. 


O Néll Govh mac pipdoncae (mic cumn bacaig, mic cumn, mic enpi, mic 
eoccam) po bao bantin 6 mapbad a atap sup an mbliadain a mbaof an Pap- 
lement oimpoeane 1 nat chat, 1584, d1a po ZoIneawd 1apla cipe heogam ap 
an Paplemenct yin, 7 oa po Zoipead o neill 1ap tcpioll do Ece 1ap ccian aoip 
ia) ccat(m a pee, 7] a pemip 50 pona péenamanl, 50 nag, 50 namnbenc 50 
nonom, 50 nucaple. 6a hann ona po éccpom pin pom an 20. tul, 1ap nontpise 
tcosalve ma plctorb, 7 1ap mbpht buada 6 Doman, 7 0 of(man. Gep bo cian 
o Apo maca (o otaiphge a pinnpean) acbath pomh po bad comapoa sun 
b6 buideac Ora Dia bechad nap b6 mfpa an Romh adnarcte m po dednaig an 


commbde a adnacal 1. an Rom.cfnn na cepopturde. 


“ Gleann-Eidhnghe: i.e. the vale of the River 
Eidhneach, now Gleneany, a valley in the pa- 
rish ofdmver, barony of Banagh, and county of 
Donegal, midway between the villages of Dun- 
kineely and Mount Charles. 

Ww [nis-Caoil, now Iniskeel, an island near the 
mouth of Gweebara Bay, in the barony of Boy- 
lagh, and county of Donegal. The patron saint 


of this island is Conall Caol, whose festival was ~ 


kept there on the 12th of May.—See Colgan’s 
Acta Sanctorum, pp. 204, 205. The bell of this 


Gis(fna cho cotaccac 


saint, called Bearnan-Chonaill, passed by pur- 
chase into the possession of Major Nesbitt of 
Woodhill in 1835, and was preserved by him 
till his death in 1844, since which it has unac- 
countably disappeared. It had been sold to 
Major Nesbitt by Connell Mac Michael O’Bres- 
Jen, then living at Glengesh, in the parish of 
Inver. This poor man was the senior of his 
name, and the representative of O’Breslen, who, 
as appears from an Inquisition, 7 Jac. I., was 
one of the Erenaghs of Inishkeel. The bell was 


1616.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2373 


Gilla-Patrick O’Loughrane, a distinguished priest, was with the Bishop at 
this time. When the English had decided that both these should be put to 
death, the Bishop felt afraid that he [the priest] might be seized with horror 
and dismay at the sight of the tortures about to be inflicted upon his own body 
in his presence ; so that he, therefore, requested of the executioner to put the 
priest to death before himself. The priest said that he need not be in dread 
on his account, and that he would follow him without fear, and remarked that 
it was not meet an honourable bishop should be without a priest to attend him. 
This he fulfilled, for he consented and suffered the like torture to be inflicted 
on him [with fortitude], for the sake of [obtaining] the kingdom of heaven for 
his soul. ig 

Niall O’Boyle, Bishop of Raphoe, died at Gleann-Eidhnighe", on the 6th of 
February, and was interred at Inis-Caoil”. 


THE AGE OF CHRIST, 1616. 


The Age of Christ, one thousand sia hundred sixteen. 


O’Neill (Hugh, son of Ferdorcha, son of Con Bacagh, son of Con, son of 
Henry, son of Owen), who had been Baron from the death of his father to the 
year when the celebrated Parliament was held in Dublin, 1584 [recte 1585], 
and who was styled Earl of Tyrone at that Parliament, and who was afterwards 
styled O'Neill, died at an advanced age, after having passed his life in prosperity 
and happiness, in valiant and illustrious achievements, in honour and nobleness, 
The place at which he died was Rome, [and his death occurred] on the 20th of 
July, after exemplary penance for his sins, and gaining the victory over the world 
and the Devil. Although he died far from Armagh, the burial-place of his 
ancestors, it was a token that God was pleased with his life that the Lord per- 
mitted him a no worse* burial-place, namely, Rome, the head [city] of the 
Christians. The person who here died was a powerful, mighty lord, [endowed] 


enclosed in an elaborately ornamented case, or paper on Ancient Irish Bells, in the Transac- 
shrine, having an inscription in the black let- tions of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxi. (now 
ter, greatly defaced, but in which the names of in course of publication), in which engravings 
Mahon O’Meehan and O’Breslen were still of this bell and its cover are given. 
legible.-—See a notice of this relic in Dr. Petrie’s * No worse: i.e. than Armagh. 





2374 ANNaZa RIOSshachtTaA EIREGNN. (1616. 


50 ngaoip, 50 n5hocay,7 50 namamp: mocleacca, 7] agnead an ci clpca 
annpm. Tiseapna cocctac congalac canectle 1onnpaigteac, ag ofofm a ips, 
7 a atapoa pm a biodbaohab. Tigeanna diada, dépcac clho~mp comoipcil 
EP campoib, ammin écchhnaip pp naamoib co ccabnad po umla, 7 pO a1d1OM 
via péip. Tigeapna na po panncaigs ponbann na poupbpis neic ole vo bht 
occa, act In po bad tore DIA Finny (panb 6 cOn mann, Ciseapna Fo beoppmacc, 
7 50 cclpccmolconb plata, 7 na po léicc goicct na meiple, atead na aigfn, 
pioc na pala vo €inse ina peimlp acc no congbad cac po peacc amail po ba 
cécta oo Plait. 

¥ Wisdom and subtlety of mind—Camden de- ‘“* Corpus laborum, vigiliz, & inediz patiens, 
scribes the character of this extraordinary man industria magna animus ingens maximisque par 


as follows, in his Annal. Reg. Eliz., A.D. 1590, negotiis, militie multa scientia, ad simulandum 
edition of 1639, p. 572: animi altitudo profunda, adeo ut nonnulli eum 


1616.] ANNALS OF THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND. 2375 


with wisdom, subtlety, and profundity of mind’ and intellect; a warlike, 
valorous, predatory, enterprising lord, in defending his religion and his patri- 
mony against his enemies ; a pious and charitable lord, mild and gentle with his 
friends, fierce and stern towards his enemies, until he had brought them to 
submission and obedience to his authority ; a lord who had not coveted to 
possess himself of the illegal or excessive property of any other, except such as 
had been hereditary in his ancestors from a remote period; a lord with the 
authority and praiseworthy characteristics of a prince, who had not suffered theft 
or robbery, abduction or rape, spite or animosity, to prevail during his reign; 
but had kept all under [the authority of] the law, as was meet for a prince. 

vel Heats Hibernizw bono, vel malo natum of the.County of Down, p. 312, that there is a 


tunc predixerint.” picture of this famous Earl, which was painted in 
It is stated in Dubourdieu’s Statistical Survey Spain, in the possession of the Earl of Leicester. 


¥ 


ae tstilh a 


“ghia ipa sate 
ae 


t* 
ey re 
Sat Wao est, .. 





APPENDIX. 


PEDIGREE OF O’DONNELL. 


Tue Editor hopes it will not be considered out of place to append to the Annals of the 
Four Masters the genealogies of a few of the most distinguished Irish families who figure 
in them, and even of one or two of whom they have but few notices ; and as these Annals 
treat more of the O’Donnells than any other family, their pedigree shall be given the first 
in order. 

The necessity of illustrating this pedigree in connexion with the present work has been 
for some time seen by the Editor, as it has been asserted in a work, entitled Military 
Memoirs of the Irish Nation, written by the late Matthew O’Conor, Esq., Barrister at Law, 
and published after his death, that ‘the O’Donnells of the present day cannot by grants, 
inquisitions, or other memorials, trace their pedigree for five generations.” It would be 
wonderful, indeed, if this were the case; but the Editor trusts that he will succeed in 
shewing, on the evidence of many monuments and memorials, which his late worthy 
friend, Matthew O’Conor, son of Denis, son of Charles the historian, did not take the 
trouble to examine, that the pedigrees of many branches of the O’Donnells now living in 
Ireland, and of others living abroad, can be traced with certainty to the old stock of the 
O’Donnells of Tirconnell. That the reader may understand the exact nature of Mr. 
O'Conor’s assertion, the Editor shall here lay before him the whole of his critical note on the 
family of the O’Donnells, as printed in his Military Memoirs of the Irish Nation, pp. 158, 159: 

“The O’Donnels, who remained in Ireland after the flight of the Earl, lapsed to poverty, 
and but few of them have preserved any authentic traces of their descent. Ignorance, and 
money, and the shameless compliances of dishonest heralds, have framed pedigrees for them 
that have no foundation. Rory O'Donnel, first Earl, is represented as having had a son, 
grandson, and great grandson, second, third, and fourth Earls of Tirconnell, whereas Rory’s 
only son died without issue, in the flower of youth. The alleged great grandson is stated 
to have had a daughter, married to Brian Ballagh O’Morcha, who died 100 years before 
such a person could have been born. On the failure of issue in Rory O’Donnel, the title of 

13 z 


2378 APPENDIX. 


Tirconnel devolved on his brother Caffre, who fled also to Spain. Caffre was married to 
Rose O’Dogherty, sister of Sir Caher O’Dogherty, who, after the death of Caffre, married 
Owen Roe O'Neal, and was buried, with her eldest son, Hugh O’Donnel, in the Irish Fran- 
ciscan convent of Louvain. The second son, Caffre Oge O'Donnell, on the death of his 
father, became Earl of Tirconnel ; on his death the title devolved on his son, Hugh, a 
distinguished officer in the sérvice of Spain. The writer of those pages has in his posses- 
sion a silk handkerchief, with a Latin thesis on divinity printed on it, dated at Salamanca, 
A. D. 1672, dedicated to this Hugh O'Donnel. This Hugh O’Donnel, a my mind, was the 
identical Balldarag O’Donnel who came to Ireland in 1690. The O’Donnels of the present 
day, or their genealogist, have no memorial or knowledge of his pedigree or origin. Neal 
Garbh, the supposed ancestor of the O’Donnels of Larkfield, Greyfield, Newport, and Old- 
castle, had betrayed Hugh Roe; had killed Manus, his brother, with his own hand; after- 
wards betrayed the English, was found guilty of high treason, and died in the tower of 
London, under sentence of death. He had a son, called Naghtan; whether he died without 
issue, I know not; but the O’Donnels of the present day cannot, by grants, inquisitions, or 
other memorials, trace their pedigree for five generations. I am sorry that they should be 
reduced to derive their descent: from such a traitor as Neal Garbh. -The descent from 
Colonel Manus O'Donnel and Hugh Boy O’Donnel, fictitious sons of Neal Garbh, are 
manifest fabrications, Neal Garbh having had no sons of that name. Five generations are 
said to have intervened from the death of Neal Garbh, in 1610, to the death of Lewis 
O'Donnel, in 1810, a period of 200 years; another manifest proof of fiction. Of the O’Don- 
nels in the service of France and Spain, no notice is taken by their genealogist, nor of 
Connell O'Donnel, the head of the family in 1689, who was Lord Lieutenant of the County 
of Donegal. He was the father of Hugh O'Donnel, of Larkfield, called Earl O'Donnel by 
the common people, and who died in 1754. He had three sons: Connel, a Field-marshal 
in the Austrian service, who, on Downs being wounded, commanded the Imperial army at 
the battle of Torgau; John, also a General in the same service ; and Constantine, the grand- 
father of the present Hugh O’Donnel, of Greyfield.” 

The Editor shall presently lay before the reader the evidences and memorials by which 
the O’Donnells of the present day can trace their pedigree ; but he deems it necessary to 
begin with— 

I. Manus, son or Hucu Duv O’DonneLt, who succeeded his father as chieftain, July, 1537°. 
He was married four times. It is by no means easy to decide what was the exact priority or order 


of his marriages”, but the following will be found to rest upon good authorities : 


@ Annals of the Four Masters. 2nd. ‘‘Ellenor, daughter of Gerald, Earl of Kildare, and 
» According to a manuscript in the British Museum . widow of M‘Carthy Reogh” [By Daniel Mac Carthy Reagh 
(copied by the Editor in 1844), the following is the order this Lady Eleanor had a son, viz. Sir Owen Mae Carthy 
and issue of the marriages : Reagh, whose daughter, Johanna, was married to Donnell 
Ist. Wife not named, nor issue given. O’Donoyan, chief of Clancahill], by whom he had one son 


APPENDIX. 2379 

ist. Johanna, daughter of Con More O’Neill, and sister of Con Bacagh, first Earl of Tyrone, 
by whom he had issue, Calvagh, Manus, Hugh, and several other children. 

2nd. Elleanor, daughter of Gerald, eighth Earl of Kildare (widow of Donnell Mac Carthy 
Reagh). 

3rd. Margaret, daughter of Angus Mac Donnell of Islay, Scotland. And 

4th. The daughter of Maguire of Fermanagh. He had fourteen children, the greater number 
of whom (vide note») must have been by his first marriage: 1. Calvagh; 2. Rose (married to 
Niall Conallagh O’Neill); 3. Margaret; 4. Manus; 5. Hugh; 6. Niall Garv (slain 1538) ; 
7. Eveleen (married to O’Boyle, died 1549); 8. Caffar (slain by the Scots at Tory Island, 1551) ; 
9. Grace (married to O’Rourke, died 1551); 10. Johanna (married to O’Conor Sligo, died 1533) ; 
11. Caffar (Tanist to Sir Hugh, died 1580); 12. Mary (married to Maguire, died 1566); 13. 


Manus Oge; and,.14. Nuala (married also to a Maguire). 
Of the busy and troubled life of this chieftain,, of the feuds in his family, and the rivalry of 


his sons, Calvagh and Hugh, there need be said nothing here. 


and two daughters: 1. ‘‘ Callough, who married the Count- 
esse of Argile;” 2. “‘ Roase, married to Neale Conelagh 
O’Neale ;” and 3. “‘ Margaret, married to Shane O’Neale.” 

3rd. ‘Daughter to M‘Guire, by whom he had issue one 
son, Manus Oge;”’ and 

4th. ‘‘ Joane, sister to Con Backagh O'Neill, Earl of 
Tirone,” by whom he had issue three sons: 1. Caher; 2. Ma- 
nus; and 3. Sir Hugh, who married ‘ Nine Duffe da. to 
James M‘Donnell, Lord of the Countrie of M‘Gronald.” 

This account seems the more conclusive, as it corresponds 
in the main with the sources from which Sir William Betham 
derived his information upon the same point, as given in the 
Antiq. Researches, p. 130; the only difference being the 
omission in the latter part of the first marriage, which, as 
there was no issue named, is not important; and that the 
name of the second wife is not given. ‘This concurrence of 
testimony, together with the high probability that Calvagh 
and Hugh were not brothers of the whole but of the half 
bloed, arising from their constant feuds and struggles for 
power, and that Hugh, and not Calvagh, was the son of Jo- 
hanna O’Neill, from the fact that that powerful family always 
supported him in his pretensions against his brother, would 
leave little doubt as to the accuracy of the arrangement, 
were it not that it is entirely and conclusively displaced by 
the information since supplied by the publication of the State 
Papers connected with Ireland, temp. Henry VIII. The 
Annals of the Four Masters record that Donnell Mac Carthy 
Reagh died in 1528, and that Joan, or Johanna O'Neill died 
seven years afterwards (1535), forty-two years old, “the 
most illustrious woman of her age for piety and hospitality.” 
In a letter from Brabazon to Ailmer and J. Allen, dated 
dth June, 1538 (State Papers, vol.iii. p,17), it is said: 


They form a considerable part of 


‘The late Erle of Kildare, his suster is gon to be maried to 
Manus Odonell, with whom is gon young Gerrot Delahides, 
and others which I like not. I was never in despaire in 
Ireland till now.”” And again, in a despatch from the Council 
in Treland to Cromwell, dated the same year (p. 28), ‘ Fur- 
thermore, one Alienor Fitz Gerald, sister to the late Erle of 
Kildare, late wiff of a grete capiteyne of Mounestre, named 
M‘Carte Riaghe, who hathe bene the principale refuge and 
succor of the yonge Gerald FitzGerald, and sithen his depar- 
ture out of the Englishry is now, with the same Gerald, two 
of James FitzGeraldes sonnys, and other his adherentes, de- 
parted out of Mounestre throwe Obrenes Countrre and Can- 
naght to O Donyll, to thentent the said Alienor shuld be to 
O Donyll maried: so as the combynacion of O Neill, being 
nere of Kyn to the said Alienor and Gerald” [Nore, Con 
O’Neill married Lady Alice FitzGerald, sister of Ellenor, and 
aunt of Gerald], ‘‘with O Donyll, and them unto whom the 
Trishe Scottes offtymes resortithe, and in a maner are at ther 
draght and pleasure, is moch to be doubted.” The third 
wife must have been Margaret Mac Donnell (the name 
omitted in the British Museum manuscript, but whose mar- 
riage is there placed as the first), for her death is recorded 
in the Annals of the Four Masters under the year 1544, 
leaving but the brief interval of six years for the marriages 
This places the marriage with 
It is stated in a 


and deaths of two wives. 
Maguire’s daughter as the fourth and last. 
note in vol. iii. State Papers, p. 491, that ‘‘O’Donnell’s first 
wife was O’Neill’s sister, by whom he had three sons, Cal- 
lough, Manus, and Hugh.” This note appears to have 
been written by one who had authority for the fact. Beyond 
this, the Editor does not venture to connect with the above 


marriages the names or number of the children respectively. 


13 22 


2380 APPENDIX. 

the history of the period, and a large portion of the 2nd and 3rd vols. of the State Papers, temp. 
Henry VIII, lately published, is occupied with details connected with the then chieftains of 
Tirconnell and Tyrone. It will, however, be not uninteresting to quote from the latter two 
passages relating to Manus O’Donnell ; the one illustrative of the extent of territory over which 
at that period the chieftains of Tirconnell had extended their sway ; and the other of the dress 
and appearance of the individual himself. Sentleger, in one of his despatches to Henry VIII., 
enclosed a note or minute of ‘‘ the more parte of the notable havons of Ireland to begin at Dublyn ;” 
among which we find: ‘‘ west and by northe, Brode Haven, Slygo, Assaro, Dongall, Calbege, Ar- 
rane, Shepehaven, Northerborne, Loghswylle, Loghfoyle. All these be in O’Donelle’s Countrey.’¢ 

And the same individual in writing of O’Donnell himself, says : 

‘‘ The said Odonell’s chiefe Counseler desired me very instantly, at his departing fro me, to be 
sewter to your Majestie for some apparaill for his Master. Ifit may stand with your Highness 
pleasure to geve him parliamente robes, I thinke him furnishte of other apparaill better than any 
Irisheman ; for at suche tyme as he mette with me, he was in a cote of crymoisin velvet, with 
agglettes of gold, 20 or 30 payer; over that a greate doble cloke of right crymoisin saten, garded 
with blacke velvet ; a bonette, with a fether, sette full of agglettes of gold; that me thoght it 
strange to se him so honorable in apparaill, and all the reste’ of his nacion, that I have seen as yet, 
so vile’’.4 

Nor is it necessary to trace the career of Sir Hugh, nor that of his gallant and famous son, 
Hugh Roe, nor that of Rory, Earl of Tirconnell. Their history has already been given in the 
text and notes to these Annals. That branch, once so celebrated, is now believed to be extinct. 

II. Hueu Ror, who is said to have been married to a daughter of Hugh, Earl of Tyrone, died 
in Spain the 10th September, 1602, without issue®. i 

II. Rory, who was married to Bridget, daughter of Henry, twelfth Earl of Kildare (after- 
wards married to Viscount Kingsland), on his flight to Rome, 1607, brought with him his infant 
son, Hugh, who, in 1618, was page to the Infanta in Flanders, and known on the Continent, after 
his father’s death (1608), as Earl of Tirconnell. 
Caffar, the brother of the Earl Rory, married Rose O’Doherty, by whom he had two sons: 


He died unmarried, in the flower of youth. 


Hugh, who died in 1660, without issue, and Caffar Oge, whose son, Manus, was styled Earl of 
Tirconnell on the Continent; and this was, indubitably, the very man called Ball-dearg® 
O'Donnell, who came from Spain to command the Irish in the war of James I., and of whose 
There is a curious account of him in Macarize 


© State Papers, vol. iii. p. 446. of inquiry.” 


4 JTb., vol. iii. p. 320. 

© MS. British Museum. 

f Mageoghegan, tom. iii. fol. 646; and Collectanea His- 
torica, MS. Trin. Coll. Dub., Class E. 3. 8. 

& Ball-dearg : i. e. the Red Spot, not Red Mouth, as 
Mr. Matthew O’Conor incorrectly renders it. Mr. Hardiman, 
after giving a short sketch of the career of this personage 
(History of Galway, p. 156), adds: ‘‘ What became of 
him afterwards” [i. e. after he had turned over to King 
William's side] “has not been thought worth the trouble 


Excidium, by Colonel Charles O'Kelly, who attempts to 
defend his conduct.—See Military Memoirs of the Irish 
Nation, by Matthew O’Conor, Esq., pp. 125, 159, 160, 
161. Colonel O’Kelly, in his Macarie Excidium, states, 
that “after the senior branch of the O’Donnells had become 
extinct, the head of the next branch went to Spain, where 
he was patronized by the king, and became a distinguished 
officer in the service of Spain; but that hearing of the 
civil war in Ireland, he left Spain without the king's 


license, and arrived in Ireland in September, 1690.” This 


APPENDIX. 2381 


final fate so little is known at present. On the flight of the Earl, the Countess did not aceom- 
pany him, which may be accounted for by the fact, that she was shortly after contined of a 
daughter. There is a history connected with this girl of so singular and romantic a character, 
that the Editor is induced to transcribe it from the pages of the Abbé Mageoghegan, tom. iii., 
pp- 645-649 : | 

‘On peut placer ici histoire de la résolution courageuse d’une héroine de la Maison d’ O’ Don- 
nel», Lorsque Rory O’Donnel Comte de Tirconnell eut quitté sa patrie en 1605, pour une préten- 
due conspiration dont on Vavoit chargé, il laissa la Comtesse son épouse enceinte. Elle vouloit suivre 
le Comte son mari dans les pays étrangers ot il s’étoit réfugié; et comme elle cherchoit les moyens 
de sortir secretement d’Irlande, elle fut prévenue par le Vice-Roi qui l’envoya bien escortée en 
Angleterre, oti elle accoucha d’une fille,» qui fut nommée Marie au Baptéme. Le Roi en fut in- 
formé, & quoiqu’ il eut persécuté le Comte de Tirconnell, il voulut honorer le pere en la personne 
de la fille; il la prit sous sa protection, et ordonna qu’elle fut nommée Marie Stuart au lieu de 
Marie O’Donnell qui étoit son véritable nom. 

‘‘Le Comte de Tirconnell étant mort a Rome, la Comtesse son épouse obtint une permis- 
sion de la Cour de retourner en Irlande avec sa fille; cette vertueuse mere se fit un devoir de 
donner a Marie une éducation chrétienne; elle la fit instruire avec soin dans les principes de la 
Religion de ses ancétres; elle lui représenta souvent, que la disgrace de sou pere étoit l’effet 
de son attachement a cette Religion a laquelle on doit sacrifier toutes les grandeurs de ce monde. 
Marie avoit douze ans lorsqu’elle fut rappellée en Angleterre par la Comtesse de Kildare son 
ayeule ; elle la présenta au Roi; ce Monarque lui assigna une somme considérable d’argent pour 
la marier, et la Comtesse de Kildare, qui étoit bien riche, la declara son héritiere ; desorte que 
Ja protection du Prince, une naissance illustre et une fortune brillante, la firent rechercher. pour 
le mariage par des Seigneurs de la premiere distinction en Angleterre; il y eut entr’autres un 
Seigneur de bonne Maison & puissamment riche, qui fit une cour assidue a cette jeune Princesse ; 
il s’adressa aussi 4 la Comtesse de Kildare sa Tutrice, & la gagna au point qu'il avoit lieu d'es- 
pérer un heureux succés; mais il étoit de la Religion prétendue réformée, il n’en falloit pas davan- 
tage pour en éloigner le ceur de Marie; cette illustre Héroine se voyant persécutée par Ja 
Comtesse & ses autres parens, en faveur d’une alliance qu’elle croyoit incompatible avec ’honneur 
Ww la conscience, forma la généreuse résolution de l’éviter par la fuite; un cas imprévu en accéléra 
Vexécution. 

h hla persécution étoit violente contre les Catholiques en Irlande; O Dogharty étoit sous les 
armes pour la défense de la Religion; le Gouvernement fit arréter quelques Chefs des Catho- 


- 


was surely Hugh, the son of Caffar Oge, son of Caffar, who standard of King William III., and retired to Flanders, 


was the brother of the Earl Rory, and was the very man ' 


who was called Ball-dearg O’Donnell by the Irish. He was 
joined in Ireland by about 8000 of the rabble, set up an in- 
dependent command, disclaimed the king’s authority, and 
made demonstrations of maintaining the cause of the native 
Irish, as distinct from King James’s, and restoring them to 
the dominion of their native country; but being thwarted 
in every way by Tirconnell (Talbot), he turned over to the 


where he was consigned to poverty and oblivion ; but of his 
ultimate fate nothing has yet been discovered. 

h “Cette histoire fut d’abord écrite en langue Espagnole 
par Dom Albert Henriquez, & imprimée avec permission a 
Bruxelles en 1627. Elle fut traduite en Francois année 
suivante par Pierre de Cadenet sieur de Brieulle, et imprimée 
avec approbation a Paris en 1628, chez la venve Guillemof, 
rue St. Jacques a la Bibhiothéque.” 


2382 APPENDIX. 


liques qui lui étoient, suspects; de ce nombre fut Conn ou Constantin O Donnel, et Hugue 
O’Rourke* proche parent de Marie Stuart; on les fit mener prisonniers en Angleterre pour 
s’assurer de leur conduite dans ces temps de troubles. Malgré la vigilance des gardes, ces Seigneurs 
s’échapperent de leurs mains, et trouverent le moyen de passer en Flandres. On ne manqua,pas 
de soupconner Marie Stuart d’avoir contribué a Pévasion de ses parens; elle en fut avertie par 
un Seigneur de la Cour; il lui conseilla, pour prévenir les malheurs qui la menagoient, de se con- 
former A la Religion de Etat, & d’épouser quelque Seigneur de cette croyance capable de la 
proteger contre ses ennemis, il lui insinua que c’étoit unique moyen de contenter le Roi & la 
Comtesse de Kildare son ayeule. En effet, elle fut citeé de comparoitre devant le Conseil pour 
rendre compte de sa conduite. 

“Marie vit bien quwil étoit temps de pourvoir a sa surété. Elle confia son secret a une 
Demoiselle Catholique qui lui servoit de Dame de compagnie, & a un valet de chambre dont 
elle connoissoit la fidélité et la prudence. Son dessein étoit d’aller trouver le jeune Comte de 
Tirconnell son frere en Flandres; il étoit a la Cour d’Isabelle Infante d’Espagne & Gouvernante 
des Pays-Bas, qui donnoit asyle a toute la Noblesse persecutée pour cause de Religion. Pour 
cacher son sexe il falloit se travestir, Marie fit venir un tailleur qui habilla en Cavalier avec 
la Demoiselle de sa campagnie ; pour mieux jouer son réle, Marie jugea 4 propos de changer son 
nom, elle se fit appeller Rodolfe Huntly; la Demoiselle de sa compagnie prit le nom de Jacques 
Hués, & le valet de chambre celui de Richard Stratsi, noms sous, lesquels ils furent connus 
pendant leur voyage. 

‘Tout étant préparé, ces trois Cavaliers prirent des chevaux de poste, & sortirent de Londres 
avant le jour, & apres bien des aventures rapportées par l’Auteur de cette relation, Marie s’embar- 
qua avec sa compagnie a Bristol, & aprés une longue & perrilleuse navigation, elle arriva a la 
Rochelle ; s’étant reposée de ses fatigues, elle continua sa route par Paris jusqu’a Bruxelles ; elle 
y trouva le Comte de Tirconnel son frere, qui la présenta a la Sérénissime Infante; cette Princesse 
la recut avec toute la tendresse et toute la distinction imaginable. Le bruit de la résolution 
courageuse de Marie Stuart se répandit bient6t par toute ’Europe. On la comparoit 4 Eufrosine 
d’Alexandrie, 4 Aldegoride & autres Vierges chrétiennes de l’antiquité. Urbain VIII. qui gou- 
vernoit l’Eglise alors, lui fit un compliment distingué dans la lettre suivante.’ 

** Dilectee in Christo filie Marie Stuard, Hibernensi Tirconnellii, Comitis Sorori, Urbanus 
Papa VIII. Dilecta in Christo filia, Salutem et Apostolicam Benedictionem. 

‘“*Obmutescat hoc tempore, sacrilega illa vox, que temeré docebat Christiane religionis Con- 
siliis, vim animorum hebetari et fortitudinis nervos emolliri. Declarasti, Hibernensis virgo, 
nationibus universis quam adamantinum robur eam mentem obarmet, in quibus excubat fides 
orthodoxa, contemptrix periculorum et domitrix inferni. O facinus dignum cui Roma faveat, et 
fama plaudat! Hereticum conjugium, non secus ac dolosum incendium perosa, fugisti delicias 


‘In the relation presented to the King of Spain, about © Donnell, Earl of Tyrconnell, page to the Infanta in Flan- 
the year 1618, by “ Florentius y® pretended Archb. of Tuam, ders.” — Collectanea Historica, MS. Trin. Coll. Dub., E. 3. 8. 
and supposed,” by Primate Ussher, “to be penned by |The words ‘presented to the King of Spain, by Floren- 
Philip O'Sullivan beare,” are named “ Don John O'Neill, — tius y* pretended Archbp. of Tuam,” above quoted, are in 
Earl of Tyrone, Colonel of the Irish in Flanders; Don Hugh the hand of Primate Ussher. 


APPENDIX. 2383 


Aulx, & contempsisti Regum minas. Ipse procellarum abissus, & terroris campus, occanus conatus 
est remorari fugam tuam quovis triumpho nobiliorem : sed transferantur montes in cor maris, non 
commovebitur in eternum mens habitans in adjutorio Altissimi. Patriam enim tuam, tantum- 
modo esse tibi existimasti, ubi regnum gerat catholica Religio Potuisti quidem fallere conquisi- 
tores Angliw minitantis, at enim comitata Angelis itineris tam periculosi custodibus, non latuisti, 
oculos Pontifice sollicitudinis, deducta enim in aulam Belgice Principis, pervenisti non modo in 
portum religionis sed & in theatrum Europe. Isthic dum te contuemur, dilecta in Christo filia, 
& eam egregiis virtutibus meritam feelicitatem precamur, 4 Deo qui stetit 4 dextris tuis ne com- 
movereris, & dignam te existimavimus cui Pontifice auctoritatis alloquia doceant eos labores 
oblivisci, quibus Angelicam tam. illustris glorie palmam redemisti. Benedicimus tibi intimo 
charitatis affectu, atque cum parentes & patriam Christo et Pontifici post habueris, scito te non 
demigrasse in exilium, sed in sinum clementissime matris properasse. Tam dulce enim nomen, 
& consentientem materno nomini \charitatem experieris in Roma Ecclesia, 6 dilecta filia, que 
Britannicarum insularum decus, & ceeli gaudium haberis. Datum Rome apud sanctum Petrum, 
sub annulo Piscatoris, die 13 Februarii, 1627. Pontificattis nostri anno quarto.” 

‘“‘ A notre chere fille en Jesus Christ Marie Stuard Comtesse de Tirconnell. Salut & Béné- 
diction Apostolique, Urbain VIII. Pape. 

“Tf faut enfin qu’elle reste dans le silence cette bouche sacrilége, qui n’a point eu de honte 
de dire que les résolutions qu’inspire le Chistianisme énervent lame, & mettent obstacle aux 
entreprises d’un ceeur généreux. Vous avez donné, notre chere fille, a toutes les Nations une 
preuve du Contraire, & votre exemple leur a fait connoitre quelle est la force & le courage que 
donne une foi orthodoxe, combien elle est au-dessus des dangers, & supérieure aux efforts meme 
de Venfer. Que ce courage est héroique, qu’il est digne de la protection de Rome & des éloges 
de la renommée. L’horreur que vous avez eu de l’alliance dun Hérétique, ressembloit a celle 
qu’on a du feu dont les surprises sont redoutables. La Cour n’a point eu d’attraits pour vous, & 
les menaces des Souverains n’ont servi qu’a vous rendre insensible. La mer, retraite des vents & 
des orages, séjour trop affreux de la crainte, s’est opposée a votre fuite ; elle ignoroit qu’elle vous 
faisoit plus d’honneur que le triomphe: mais quand les montagnes seroient ensevelies dans le sein 
des eaux, votre confiance dans les bontés du Seigneur n’en recevroit aucune atteinte, puisque votre 
patrie est celle ot la Religion est sur le Tréne. Vous étes venue a bout de vous dérober aux 
persécutions des Inquisiteurs d’Angleterre ; mais sous la conduite des Anges qui vous ont pré- 
servée des accidens de votre voyage, vous n’avez pu échapper A nos regards paternels ; car ayant 
été conduite a la Cour de I’Infante, sa Religion vous a recu dans son sein, et Europe vous a servi 
de Théatre. C’est 1a que vous considérant notre chere fille en Jésus Christ, nous demandons au 
Seigneur qui vous a soutenu, et nous sollicitons en votre faveur les succés heureux que vos vertus 
vous ont acquis. Nous vous ecrivons cette lettre, dans le dessein de vous faire perdre le souvenir 
de vos peines, & de vos travaux, peines & travaux dignes d’envie, puisqu’ils ont été pour vous la 
source une gloire immortelle. Recevez notre bénédiction pleine de tendresse, et puisque vous 
avez quitté vos parens, et abandonné votre patrie par ob¢éissance pour Jesus-Christ, & pour nous, 
soyez assurée de notre part que vous n’avez point trouvé un exil, mais une mere qui vous aime 
tendrement. Vous connoitrez par vous-meme que |’Eglise Romaine porte veritablement ce nom ; 


2384 APPENDIX. 


elle vous cherira comme sa fille bien-aimée, qui fait honneur aux Isles Britanniques, & remplit de 
joie les esprits bienheureux. Donné a Rome 4 Saint Pierre, sous l’anneau du Pécheur le 13 
Février 1627, & de notre Pontificat Yan 4.” 

What subsequently became of ‘“‘ cette jeune Princesse,” the Editor has found no record, unless 
it be true, as stated by Lodge, that the daughter of Rory O'Donnell was ‘“ the first wife of Luke 
[Plunket], who, 28th September, 1628, was created Earl of Fingall;” for as Rory had only two 
children [Lodge states only two, but he names the daughter Elizabeth; that, however, might 
have been a mere mistake of name], Hugh “‘ wanting three weeks of being one year old” when 
the Earl fled, and Mary born, as we have seen, after the flight; we can only conclude, that the 
Irishman and the Catholic “ avoit lew d’esperer un heureux succés,” however unfortunate in their 
suit her English wooers might have been. 

To return to the elder branch. 

II. Catvacu O’DonneELtL, eldest son of Manus, by Johanna O’ Neill, was married to a daughter 
of the Earl of Argyle™. He deposed his father in 1555; defeated his brother, Hugh, and John the 
Proud O’Neill in 1557, on which occasion his son Con’s share of the spoils was “eighty horses, 
and the famous steed of O’Neill’s son, called ‘the Son of the Eagle.’” Surprised in the abbey 
of Kill-O’Donell by John O’N eill, in 1559, and carried off, with his wife, a prisoner to Tyrone ; 
ransomed in 1561; visited England 1566; and 6n his return the same year, on his way to the 
North,. dropped dead from his horse on the 26th October. He left issue one son, Con, and a 
daughter, Mary (by a former marriage), wife of John O’Neill. She died of grief at her father’s 
imprisonment by her husband, 1561. 

III. Con O’DonneLt, who married a daughter of Sir Turlough Luineach O’Neill. On his 
father’s death, being excluded from the chieftainship by his uncle, Sir Hugh, his life was a series 
of struggles to recover the power he thought unjustly wrested from him. His alliance with Sir 
Turlough Luineach, the unsuccessful rival of Hugh O’Neill, the able and powerful chieftain of 
Tyrone, placed an effectual barrier to his success; and Sir Hugh’s friendship for the English 
government (which was undeviating and consistent), gave the latter an additional ally that ensured 
to him his position. Thus, in 1574, Con was invited by the Earl of Tyrone to visit his camp, 
when he was treacherously made prisoner and sent to Dublin. He escaped in 1575, and again 
‘‘ creat dissensions arose between O’Donnell (Hugh) and the son of his brother (Con, son of Cal- 
vagh), upon which Con went over to the side of O’Neill (Turlough Luineach) to wage war with 
his kinsman ;” and although he defeated Sir Hugh at Kiltole, in 1581, he could not deprive him 
of power. He died 13th March, 1583. He had issue nine sons, eight of whom survived him. The 
following is the probable order of their precedence: 1. Naghtan; 2. Calvagh Oge; 3. Manus ; 
4. Niall Garv; 5. Hugh Boy; 6. Con Oge; 7. Calvagh; 8. Caffar; and 9. Donnell. 

Of these nine, six appear to have died without issue, of whom five met violent deaths. Naghtan 
was slain in 1582°; Calvagh Oge, slain 1583?; Manus, slain 15899; Calvagh, ‘slaine by Donell, 


! Lodge’s Peerage, as edited by Archdall, vol. i. p. 99, dence between Con and the Lord Deputy, in Betham’s 4n- 
title ‘‘ Duke of Leinster.” tiquarian Researches. 

™ MS. British Museum, quoted above. ° Annals of the Four Masters. 

" Annals of the Four Masters. See a long correspon- P Ib. 4 Ib 


APPENDIX. 2385 


sonne to Hugh O’Donell;”' and Caffar, “slaine by the rebelle M‘Guire.”* The ninth son, 
Donnell, in an examination taken before Thomas Foster, Provost Marshall of Londonderry, 9th 
April, 1615, is mentioned, together with his brother, Hugh Boy, as having received letters from 
his brother, Sir Niall Garv, then a prisoner in the Tower of Londont. The only other mention 
of him occurs in the Ing. Ult. Pat., 10th James I.: ‘‘ Grant from the King to Donel M‘Quin 
O’Donell, Glancho and Reimon, 2 half q™ 128*, Rent £1 7s. 33d.” 

Three only are stated, by Duald Mac Firbis in his Genealogies", as having left issue, namely, 
Niall Garv, Hugh Boy, and Con Oge. And first : 

IV. Nratt Garv, fourth son of Con, was married to his cousin, the youngest daughter of Sir 
Hugh, and sister of his rival, Hugh Roe*. This alliance did not, however, effect a lasting recon- 
ciliation between the elder and junior branches of the family, of the elder of which Niall Garv was 
now the representative, as Hugh Roe was of the other, and not only of the junior branch, but also 
of the name. The character of Niall Garv has been generally painted in unfavourable colours, 
because of his hostility to Hugh Roe, and the part which he took against him in conjunction with 
the English. It is true that history does not present a more chivalrous and devoted Irishman 
than Hugh Roe proved himself to be during his short and eventful career; but before we entirely 
condemn the other for opposing him, we should recollect that Niall had the prior title, and that 
doubtless he was nurtured in feelings of hostility to what his own immediate family must have 
considered an unjust usurpation. The English government knew this well; and, in the year 1600, 
in order to destroy, if possible, the two great northern chieftains, determined to support the claims 
of Niall Garv against the one, and those of Arthur O'Neill, son of Turlough Luineach, in opposition 
to the other. It was one of the principal motives that determined the Government on sending Sir 
Henry Docwra to effect a settlement at ‘the Derry,” that their agent might possess opportunities 
of more immediate communication with these discontented chieftains. Thus, in the Narration of 
his Services, written by himself in 1614, we find: “ On the Ist of June*, St Arthur O’Neale, sonne 
to old Tirlogh Lenagh, that had been O’Neale, came in unto me with some 30 horse and foot, a 
Man I had directions from the State to labour to draw to our side, and to promise to be made Ear! 
of Tyrone, if the other, that maintayned the rebellion, could be dispossessed of the countrey.” 
And so the same influences were used to work with Niall Gary, for we find a similar result pro- 
duced. ‘‘ On the 3rd of October came in Neale Garvie O’Donell with 40 horse and 60 foote, a Man 
i was also directed by the State to winne to the Queene’s service, and one of equal estimation in 
Tirconnell that St Arthur O Neale was in Tyroane.” And the result of the conference was: “I 
promised him, in the behalf of the Queene, the whole country of Tirconnell to him and his heires, 
and my Lord Deputy and Council at Dublin did afterwards confirm it unto him under their hands.” 
Thus he was not the treacherous kinsman meanly betraying his leader for a bribe, but the excluded 
chief seeking to recover his ancient birthright, and who seized the English offers as the only means 
of crushing his powerful rival. While, however, he thought to use their alliance for his own pur- 
poses, he, in reality, was but an instrument to effect theirs: ‘‘ Right bravely did Neale Garvie and 


© Annals of the Four Masters. u MS. British Museum. 
$ Ib. w Library, Royal Irish Academy. 
‘MS. Trinity College, Dublin, F. 3. 15. ¥ 1600. 


144 


2386 APPENDIX. 


his Irish demeane themselves on all occasions, although it is true, withall, they had their own ends’ 
in it, which were always for private revenge, and we ours, to make use of them for the furtherance 
of the Publique Service.” His gallantry in the field is attested in many passages: ‘‘ We had a 
skirmish with him (Hugh Roe O’Donell) of an houre longe, wherein Neale Garvie behaved him- 
self Bravelie.” And again: ‘‘On the 24th October, he (Hugh Roe) came again..... The alarum 
taken, the garrison made forth again, and Neale Garvie behaved himself bravelie as before, charged 
home upon them, killed one, hurt one or two more with his own hands, and had his horse slaine 
under him.” In accepting the Queen’s offer of putting him in possession of Tyrconnell, and set- 
ting aside Hugh Roe, he had no other intention than of being installed with all the absolute privi- 
leges of ‘* The O’Donnell,” and not, by any means, that his power should be trammelled with the 
obligations of an English subject; and as soon as he discovered that his new allies were not likely 
to consent to this, “‘ thereupon begun Neale Garvie’s discontente, for presentlie he directed some 
men of his to be cessed upon this countrey’. O Dogherty and Hugh Boy’, with great indignation, 
refused to accept them. Complainte came before me; I asked him whereupon it was that hee chal- 
lenged this power over another man’s land; he tould mee the land was his owne, for the Queene 
had given him all Tyrconnell, and this was parte of it. J aunswered it was true, I knew well the 
whole countrey of Tyrconnell was promised him in as large and ample a manner as the O Donnells 
had been accustomed to hould it. But I took it there were many others in that countrey that had 
landes of their owne as well as they ; hee replied, not onelie the countrey of Tyrconnell, but 
Tyroane, Fermanaght, yea, and Connaught, wheresoever any of the O Donnells had, at that time, 
extended their power hee made Accompte all was his; hee acknowledged noe other kinde or inte- 
rest in any man els, yea, the very Persons of the people hee challenged to be his, and said he had 
wronge if any one foote of all that lande, or any one of the persons of the People were exemtped 
from him, &c.” The matter was referred to the Lord Deputy* and Council, who decided against 
those claims to unlimited power which Niall Garv asserted. Although differences such as this not 
unfrequently occurred, and mutual suspicions and jealousies ensued, he still vigorously cooperated 
with the English in their efforts to crush Hugh Roe. On the 2nd August, 1601, ‘with 500 
English souldiers he threw himself into the Abbay of Donegall; and ‘on the 19th September 
(Hugh Roe having last month laid seige to it) the Abbay took fire and was all consumed, except 
one corner, whither the English retreated and held out...... Here again, I must contess, Neale 
Garvie behaved himseife deservinglie, for though I had, at that time, many informations against 
him, that could not but breed some jealousies of his fidelitie, yett we sawe he continewed to the 
Jast; took such part as our ownmendid; had many of his men slaine at this seige, and amongst the | 
rest a Brother of his owne.” As he was extending his influence in the country, he endeavoured, 
more and more, to exercise his privileges as chieftain, independently altogether of his English allies. 
‘* Neale Garvie (as | said before) had, a longe time, carryed himself discontented; estrainged him- 
self from mee, and lived altogeather in those parts about Ballyshannon ; and, it is true, those ser- 
vices he had done, alwayes dulie acknowledged, I had very often, and very bitterly, complayned 
of him to my Lord, and my reasons were these: Hee did openlie and contynuallie contest with 


¥ Inishowen. 4 The Lord Deputy, i. e. Sir Charles Blount, Lord Mount- 
* “Of the sept of the Mac Davids.” —Doewra. joy, Knight of the Garter, and afterwards Earl of Devonshire. 


APPENDIX. 2387 « 


mee to have the people sworne to him, and not to the Queene; To have no officer whatsoever but 
himselfe in his countrey. Hee would not suffer his men to sell us theire owne goodes, nor work 
with us for money, nor till or sowe the ground any where neere us; nor yeeled us any carriages 
for the Army, as O’Doghertye, and all other that were under the Queene did...... Hee would 
not endure that any man of his countrey should be punished for any cryme, though never so 
haynous, and manifestlie proved, but take it as the highest injurie could be done unto him.” 
These complaints soon determined the Government on setting him aside when the fitting oppor- 
tunity offered, and finding some more pliant and less ambitious O’Donnell to occupy his place. 
Thus, after the battle of Kinsale, and the flight of Hugh Roe, we find: ‘ Shortlie after this was 
Roory O Donnell, brother to O Donnell that was fled into Spaine (and himself banished his country 
and living in Connaught), taken in? by my Lord Deputie, a profest enymy to Neale Garvie*, who 
apprehended such jealousies upon it as made him run courses that were afterwards his undoing. 
ic ta Now it fell out that my Lord wrote for Rorie O Donnell to come to him to Dublin; Hee, 
being in Connaught, desires first to putt over his Catle into Tyrconnell, which would otherwise 
be in danger, in his absence, to be preyd by those of that province that yett stood out in Rebellion. 
My Lord gives him leave, and writes to Neale Garvie that he should not molest nor trouble them, 
and soe Roorie takes his journey. Hee was noe sooner gone, and the Catell put over, But Neale 
Garvie, notwithstanding my Lord’s command, ceizes them as his owne, under pretents they were 
the goods of the countrey belonging unto him. Complainte made, my Lord writes to me to see 
them restored. I send unto him, and hee refuseth. My Lord, upon that, bidds mee discharge 
him of his Entertainments, and writes unto him, without delay, to come unto him to Dublin. Hee 
growes more discontented, and defferres his going. Thus it runnes on for at least 3 monthes 
togeather, and neither would he come at mee nor my Lord, nor, by any meanes, be perswaded to 
make Restitution. In the ende he assembles, of his owne aucthoritie, all the countrey at Kilmac- 
koran” [ Kilmacrenan ], ‘“‘a place where the O Donnell’s use to be chosen. There hee takes upon 
him the title, and with the ceremonyes accustomed, proclaymes himselfe O Donnell, and then pre- 
sentlie comes to mee to the Derrey with a greater troupe of attendances then at any time before, 
and they styling him, at every word, my Lord. As soone as I sawe him, I asked him how he was 
thus suddenlie stept into the name of a Lord; Hee tould mee they called him soe because he was 
O Donnell. I asked him by what aucthoritie he was soe, and hee said, ‘by my Lord Deputies.’ I 
bade him make that appear unto mee and all was well; Hee pluckt out a lettre written unto him 
from my Lord, about two years before, Superscription whereof was this, ‘To my very loving 
freinde, O Donnell.? Asked him if this were all the warrante hee had ; and he said yes. I asked 
him why he went not to my Lord all this while, nor came unto mee sooner, nor restored Rorie 
O Donnell’s catle. His answere was this ; you knowe the whole countrey of Tyrconnell was long 
since promised mee, and many services I have done that, I thinke, have deserved it ; but I sawe I 
was neglected, and, therefore, I have righted myself by taking the Catle and People that were my 
owne, and, to prevent others, have made myself O Donnell. Now, by this meanes, the countrey is 
_sure unto mee, and if I have done. anythinge amisse, lett all be pardoned that is past, and from this 


>i. e. Received to mercy, or pardoned; not humbugged. ej, e. Rory was. 


be Se) 


2388 APPENDIX. 


day forward, by Jesus hand, I will be true to the Queene, and noe man’s Councell will I follow 
hereafter but yours. You take a wronge course, said I, it may not goe thus; the first act you 
must do to procure forgivnes for your faults (if it may be) is to make restitution of the Catle, if 
you doe it not of your owne accorde, I know you will be forced unto it upon harder conditions ; 
yet, at that time, nothing I could say would prevaile with him, and soe he departed.” He after- 
wards consented to give up the cattle, but whilst Docwra was endeavouring to effect a reconciliation 
between him and Rorie, who was then at the Liffer, ‘‘ came lettres from my Lord to this effect, 
that he had now taken in Tyrone, and was fully resolved to beare no longer with Neale Garvie, 
and, therefore, if I were sure he had made himself O Donnell, it was treason by the lawe, I should 
Jay houlde on him and keepe him safe. My Lord, I was sure, was mistaken in the qualitie of his 
offence, for I looked upon the Statute Book and saw that Rigerous lawe was onelie for such as 
made themselves O Neales; for those that took upon them to be heads of other families, the 
Punishment was onelie a penalty of 100 markes. I pawsed, therefore, and was doubtefull with 
myselfe whether, by this misgrounded warrant, I should doe well to restrayne him or noe.”’? News, 
however, of the Queen’s death decided him, and Neal Garv is arrested the next day he came to the 
“Derry.” When told of the succession of James I.: ‘‘ Then am I undone, sayeth hee, for Roory 
hath better friendes about him then I.” ‘That speech encreased my jealousie,” says Doewra, 
‘and, thereupon, I tould him further I had order from my Lord to restraine him of his libertie. 
Then ame I a dead man, saith hee. I told him noe, he needeth not fear any such matter, neither 
his life nor landes were yet in danger ; his offence was a contempte onlie, and he must be brought 
to acknowledge a higher Power then his owne.” He escaped the third day after, but subsequently 
sent pledges to Docwra, that, on getting ‘‘a Protection” for his safe passage to Dublin, he would 
submit himself to the Lord Deputy, which he did.” The rival claims of Niall and Rory were 
now submitted for the decision of the Council in England, and the latter went himself to London, 
to attend, in person, to his interests. The influence of his friends and connexions (being married 
to the daughter of the Earl of Kildare), as well, doubtless, as the too ambitious character of his 
opponent, decided in his favour, and ‘“‘ within a while after came Roory O Donnell to Dublin, with 
his Majesties lettres to be made Earle of Tirconnell, and have all the countrey to him and his heires 
(except Ballyshannon and the fishing thereof), and such landes as Neale Garvie had held, &c.; the 
said Neale Garvie judicialie convicted of no crime, which I thought was strange; But whither it 
were with his right or wronge, with convenience or inconvenience to the State, was then no more 
to be disputed of.” The letter here alluded to is to be found, together with the entry of the Patent, 
in Erck’s Rep. Chancery Enrollments, pp. 24, 47, 59, which is here abstracted. 

‘* James Rex,—Right trustie, ete., we have ben informed that Rorie O Donell made his sub- 
mission, ete., besechinge our favoure, etc., to graunte unto him and his heires our territorie and 
countries of Tirconel in Ulster, the which his ancestors had for many yeres past, etc.; therefore 
our pleysure is, ete., that youe cause to be passed to the said Rorie, and his heires malles, with 
remaynders of lyke estate successivelie to his brother, Cafferie O Donnell’, and his cosin, Donell 


4 Caffar, as stated in the Annals of the Four Masters, fled two years and three months.” He died in Rome the same 
with his brother in 1607; and also ‘‘ Rose, daughter of - month as the Earl, in 1608.-—O’Gorman MS., R.I. A. 
O'Doherty, and wife of Caffar, with her son, Hugh, aged She was subsequently married to Owen Roe O'Neill, and is 


APPENDIX. 9389 


Oge M* Donnell O Donnell, our graunt of said territories, etc., with all the landes, rights, ete. of 
auncient tyme belonging to the Lords thereof: exceptinge all Abbayes and other spiritual livinges; 
& reserving such rentes, etc. as any of his auncestors yielded, etc.; as also the castle, town, and 
lands of Balleshenon, and 1000 a. adjoininge the fyshinge theare ; and libertye to erect fortes for 
service of the countrie ; with condition that the landes, etc., which were in the possession of Sir 
Neale Odonel, when he lived under Sir hughe Roe, late Odonell, and in amitye with him, especiallye 
Castleffynn, and its landes, may be reserved to bestow uppon Sir Neale Odonel, or such other as 
may deserve same. And our pleysure is that Rorie O Donel, doe renounce all claymes, etc. upon 
Sir Cahir Odoghertie’s and O’Connor Sligo’s country, ete. ; and because he shall receave so large 
a territorie as Tirconnell for his inheritaunce, etc. we have thoughte meet to grace him with, and 
requier you to graunte unto him the name, stile, and honor of Earle of Tirconnell; to Hovlde to 
him and his heires males of his bodie; with remainder to his brother, Cafferie; and that the heires 
males apparent be created Lordes, Barones of Donnegall, duringe the lyves of the Earles. And, 
further, that said Rorie shall have a custodiam of all abbayes, etc. within the countrie of Tirecon- 
nell, till we shall otherwise dispose of them, etc. Given under our signet at Tottenham, the 4th 
day of Sep'., 1603, etc. To the earle of Devonshier, our lievetenante of Irelande, etc.’ 

‘* Niall Garv was arrested by the English at Raphoe, in 1608, on the accusation of Ineenduv, 
the mother of Hugh Roe, before the Lord Bishop of Derry,” see note ', p. 2364, supra, and after 
a confinement of eighteen years by King James the First, died, at the age of 57 years, A. D. 1626.” 
= MS ..pRad A. 

This notice of Sir Niall Garv cannot be better concluded than by quoting a passage from 
Doewra, in which he alludes to the respective characters of him and Rory, always bearing in mind 
by whom it is written, and that the vices he condemns were acts of hostility to the English : 

‘‘ And where before the restrainte lay onelie upon Tyrone, hee now lay the like upon Tyrcon- 
nell alsoe, and sent him warraunt to make the Earle Justice of Peace and Quorum, and Lord 
Lieuetenant of that Countrey. How much to the prejudice of those that had faithfully served 
the State, I could, if it were required even at this day®, give many particular instances and proofes 
of, and take occasion further to make large discourses upon this man’s [the Earl of Tirconnell’s | 
violent and insolent carriage, sufficiently bewraying to any man that listed to see it, what the 
bent of his heart was from the beginning. But hee is deade, and the injuries that honest men 
received by him are past recoverie, and, therefore, I will onelie say this of him in generall wordes 
(and I thinke my Lord Deputie and Judges that were in that time will beare me witness, I say 
true): there were noe vices in poor Neale Garvie that had done us many good services; but the 
same were in him, and more, in a far more pernitious degree, that had never done any; and then, 
I confess, it made mee see clear myne owne Errour, and the wronge (I may call it) I had done to 
Neale Garvie; not that my conscience accuseth mee to have done anythinge towards him with 


malitious or corrupt intentions—(noe, thereof I take God to witness my heart is cleere); but that 


buried at Louvain, in the same grave with her son, as stated Catal. Siowe MSS. 
in their epitaph: ‘‘... Septuaginta major de nata Bruxellis © Even at this day.—This tract was ‘written by Sir 
1. Nov. 1660, suo cum Primogenito, Hugone O Donnell Henry Doewra, in the summer of 1614, and finished the Ist 


prestolatur hie casuis resurrectionem ”—Dector O’ Conor's — of September, the same year.” 


2399 APPENDIX. 


with simplicitie [ suffered myselfe to be made an instrument of his overthrowe, under the pretence 
of those misbeheavors, that were plainelie tollerated, yea, and allowed of in another, ffor it is 
true my Lord would hear noe complaininge of him howe juste soever.” 

Niall Garv’s character is also depicted by P. O’Sullevan Beare in his Hist. Cathol. Iber., tom. 3, 
lib. 6, c. v., where he is called “Vir animo magno, & audaci, & rei militaris scientia preditus.” 
And, again, in tom. 3, lib. 8, c. v, where the following account of his speech before the Irish 
Council is given : 

‘« Aspero” [i.e. Niello Aspero .1. Niall Gapb] “ ille tantum possessiones, quas habuit prius, 
quam ad Anglos defecerat, adiudicantur, & Baronis titulus offertur. TIlle ira percitus titulum 
accipere noluit, & in Iberniam postquam rediuit, Dubhlinne in senatum ad regium consilium 
productus senatores, & gentem Anglicam asperrimis verbis exagitat, non ab Anglis, sed ab ipso 
Catholicos fuisse deuictos, atque debellatos, & Iberniam Angliz Corone defensam a consilio, & 
Anglis improbé, & perfidé cum ipso agi, neque fidem impleri. Inde se ipsum, quod vnquam 
Anglis fidem habuerit, & eos adiuuerit, execratur, dirisque imprecationibus deuouet. Itaque, vt 
Asper erat, sic asperrime perorauit.’’— Fol. 201. 

By Nuala, the sister of the celebrated Hugh Roe O’Donnell, Sir Niall Garv O’Donnell had 
two sons, namely, Naghtan, who died a prisoner in the Tower of London, and,— 

V. Manus O’ DonnEvti.—He was a Colonel in the army of the Confederate Catholics under the 
celebrated Owen Roe O’Neill ; and, according to an Irish Journal of the Rebellion of 1641, in the 
possession of Lord O’Neill, he was killed at Benburb in 1646. The same date is given in one of 
the O’Gorman MSS., Lib. R. I. A. The late Matthew O’Conor, Esq., of Mount-Druid, asserts, in 
his Military Memoirs of the Irish Nation, p. 159, that Niall Garv had no son of the name Manus; 
but he never took the trouble to make the due inquiry, and has, therefore, left himself open to 
just censure for gratuitous assertions, which the Editor, notwithstanding his veneration for the 
memory of this writer, feels it his sacred duty to expose and refute. The existence of Colonel 
Manus, the son of Niall Garv, is proved beyond dispute by this Journal, which is an authentic and 
contemporaneous document; by two genealogical manuscripts of Duald Mac Firbis, one dated 1650, 
and the other 1666; as well as by the manuscript Depositions (Lib. T. C. D.) of Donegal in 1641, in 
which is mentioned ‘* Manus O’ Donnelle, whose father, Curnell Garrow O’ Donnelle, died in the Towre.”’ 

According to the Genealogy of the O’Donells of Austria, dated Dublin, lst May, 1767, copied 
at Vienna in the year 1828, by Colonel Sir Charles O’Donnel, this Colonel Manus, therein styled 
‘Magnus Colonellus, filius Neal Garuff O’Donell, occisus in bello Benburb,” married ‘ Susanna 
filia Hugonis Mac Guinness Comitis de Iveach,” and had by her one son, ‘* Rogerius O’Donell,” 
who is still vividly remembered by tradition as 

VI. Rory or Rocer O’Donnewt, of Lifford, in the county of Donegal. According to the 
Austrian pedigree, this Roger married Johanna, daughter of Egneghan O’Donnell, by Elizabeth, 
daughter of Thomas O’Rourke of Breifny, and had by her, Colonel Manus O’Donnell, of whom 
presently, and a daughter, Graine, or Grace, who married Connell O’Donnell, who was Lord 
Lieutenant of the county of Donegal in 1689. Some time previously to 1664, he settled, with a 
large train of followers, consisting of some of the various septs of Tirconnell (as O’Gallaghers, 


Mac Sweenys, O’Clerys, O'Tolands, &c.), at Ballycroy, in the south of the barony of Erris. 


APPENDIX. 2391 


O’DONNELL OF NEWCASTLE. 


VII. Cotone, Manus O’DoneEL, of Newport, was married to Eleanor, daughter of Roger 
Maguire, of the county Fermanagh, by whom he had issue three sons: Ist. Charles; 2nd. Manus, 
who died in 1797 without male issue; 3rd. Hugh; and two daughters‘: Mary, married to Charles 
(Calvagh Duv) O’Donel, son of Hugh O’Donel, by Margaret, daughter of Colonel Tirlogh O’Neale, 
of Oldcastle, in the county of Mayo (wde post the descendants of Con Oge O’Donnell); and Anne, 
married to Henry®, eldest son of Mac Dermot Roe of Greyfield, in the county of Roscommon, by 
whom she had issue, one daughter, Eliza, who. was married to Robert Maguire of Tempo?. 

It is stated in Betham’s Antiquarian Researches, that Colonel Manus O’Donnel’s will was 
proved in the diocesan Court of Tuam in 1737. It is much to be regretted that at the present 


the will is not forthcoming ; 


day 


for though the Editor has, upon more than one occasion, 
caused strict search to be made, there seems to be no trace of it now on record. It might doubt- 
less throw curious light on the family history connected with that period. Of him and his three 
sons the venerable Charles O’Conor of Belanagare writes as follows, in 1753, in his Dissertations on 
the ancient History of Ireland, first edition, p. 231, which shews the high respectability of the 
family at this period : 

* The late Colonel Magnus O’ Donnell,” [maternal] ‘ uncle to the O’Donnell just mentioned” 
[i.e. Hugh O'Donnell of Larkfield], ‘“ was an Officer of distinction in the late wars of Ireland, 
and left three sons, Charles, Hugh, and Magnus, all alive at present, acting a part worthy of such 
a parent and of such Ancestors.” 

Now, let the reader mark the words, ‘‘ worthy of such a parent and of such ancestors,’ and let 
him for a moment consider the character of the writer for probity, candour, and veracity, and he 
must confess that the above quoted words will set at nought the assertions of the Editor’s late 
respected friend, Matthew O’Conor, Esq., of Mountdruid, who frequently stated that there was 
no Colonel Manus of this branch of the O’Donnells, either during the Insurrection of 1641, or the 
civil war of the Revolution. But we have now shewn on sufficient authority that there were two 
colonels of this family in the seventeenth century, namely, Colonel Manus, the son of Niall Garv, 
who was killed at Benburb in 1646, and Colonel Manus, the son of Roger, and grandson of the 
former Colonel Manus. 


VIII. Cuartes(Calvagh Roe, as contradistinguished from his cousin and brother-in-law, Calvagh 


' Two daughters.—In De Burgo’s Hibernia Dominicana 
there is mention of another daughter, who is stated to have 
been married to Theophilus, great-grandson of Brian, first 
Baron of Enniskillen, and by whom she had issue Alexander, 
a captain in the Irish Brigade. But the Editor is inclined 
to think that De Burgo may have been led into error, by 
confounding this marriage with one or other of the two 
which certainly took place between the families; at least the 
Editor has not found elsewhere any trace of it, either recorded 
or traditional. 

& Married to Henry.—A most amusing account of this 
marriage is given in a manuscript Life of Carolan, the poet, 


written in 1831, by the late Daniel Early, of Drumshambo, 
for Myles John O'Reilly, Esq., to whom the manuscript 
belongs. 

h Robert Maguire of Tempo. Brian mac Constantine 
Maguire of Tempo, twelfth in descent from Odhar, from 
whom the name. The estates of his father were forfeited, 
but restored to Brian when he came of age. He married 
Miss Nugent, daughter of James Nugent of Colamber, in the 
county of Longford. She was an heiress, and by her he had 
five sons and one daughter. Brian died in 1700; his eldest 
sons, Brian and Constantine, died unmarried, the latter in 


1739. The third son, Robert Maguire, thirteenth in descent 


2392 APPENDIX. 

Duv) was eldest son of Colonel Manus O’ Donnell of Newport. He resided at Newcastle in the county 
of Mayo; and was married, in 1712, to Catherine, daughter of James O’More', Esq., chief of his 
name. He died in the year 1770, leaving issue three sons: 1. Manus; 2. Con (who died un- 


married); and 3. Lewis: and two daughters: Elizabeth, who married Thomas Cormack, Esq., of 








Mullennore and Castle Hill, in the same county; and Mary, married to Darcey, Esq., of ; 


in the county of Galway. His eldest son, Manus, was born in the year 1713, and entered at an 
early age into the Austrian service, in which he rose to the rank of Major-General, and was created 
Count of the Empire by the Empress Maria Theresa. ‘The Editor has been favoured with the 
perusal of several original interesting and curious documents and letters connected with the 
different branches of the family of O’Donnell at that period on the Continent and in Ireland, and 
of which he shall here append those that more directly refer to General Manus O’Donnell (or, 
as it seems they then spelled the name, ‘‘O’Donel’’). The better to comprehend the following, 
it may here be stated that there were then in the Imperial Service, besides the subject of the 
present notice, three O’Donnells of the highest rank and consideration, namely, Connell and 
John, the writer of the following letters, sons of Hugh O’Donnell of Larkfield, in the county of 
Leitrim, by his first wife, Flora, daughter of General Hamilton of the Imperial Service (ude post, 
descendants of Hugh Boy), and Henry (youngest son of Calvagh Duv, above mentioned), by far 
the most distinguished of the three, and whose descendants at the present day rank among the 
highest nobility in Germany, as those of his brother, Joseph, are equally illustrious in Spain 
In the year 1765, General (then Colonel) Manus O’Donnell 
was granted leave of absence, as appears from the following extract of the official document, 


(vide post, descendants of Con Oge). 


which is written in the German language : 
** 1st December, 1765. 

‘From the Imp' Roman & Royal Hungarian and Bohemian Majesty, Grand-duchess of Austria, 
our all-gracious Sovereign Lady, to make known to her Co' and Commandant of the O’Donell 
Cuirassier Reg*, Lord Magnus Count O’Donnell, that her aforesaid Majesty had been graciously 
pleased to appoint the same, by special most high favour, to be her Imp! Royal Co! Major of Cavalry, 
in virtue of a Patent made out under the most high signature, and to assign to the same, @ prima 
Februarii venturi, one thousand five hundred Guilders for yearly pay. That the same may, for the 
management of his affairs, repair to England, there expend his pay, & receive the same, at the 
War Office here, at every time of producing the customary attestation de vita et ubicatione, &e., Kc. 

“ Per sacrum Cesareo Regiam, &c. 


* Signed, Mauris Cr. bE Lacy.” 


from Odbar, married Miss Mac Dermot, heiress of the Grey field 
estate, county Roscommon. He died without issue.”—J/a- 
guire’s Pedigree, from a pamphlet in the Editor’s possession. 

This marriage is also stated in Early’s Life of Carolan, 
mentioned above. 

' Catherine, the daughter of O’ More.—Carolan composed 
the song called Seabac na hEipne agup Ohéil 
Cita Seanaig, i.e. “The Hawk of the Erne and of Bally- 
shannon,” for Calvagh Roe O'Donnell, on the occasion of 


bringing home his wife, the fair daughter of O’More, to his 
house, some time after the celebration of their marriage. He 
composed another song for his sister, Anne, the wife of Henry, 
son of Charles Mac Dermot Roe of Greytield, in the county 
of Roscommon. In this latter song Carolan calls Anna the 
daughter of the noble Manus, son of Rory the high chieftain. 
Hugh O'Donnell of Greyfield stated that the song called 
“ The Hawk of the Erne and of Ballyshannon” was composed 
by Carolan for his own grandfather, Hugh O'Donnell of 


APPENDIX. 2393 


Subsequently to his arrival in Ireland the following letter was written to him by his cousin, 
John O’Donel, above mentioned. The year is not stated, but from its contents, and the date of 


his leave, it would appear to have been written in November the following year, 1766 : 


“ St. Poélten, yf 20th Nov. This day I got y* letter. 
I will write to you in a few days all the news 
I think you’d desire from these parts. Adieu. 
Write to me soon. 

“My pear Cous*,—You may well imagine that I was vastly in pain to be so long without a line 
from you, and consequently rejoiced at the receipt of y™ from Ballyna* and Tuam, of the 12th Oct., 
which is the only pleasure you gave me since we separated. I beg you will not be so lazy 
towards me, who, you know, love you more than IJ can say or shew in effect. My Bro',! who was 
lately a second time to see me here, complains much of y* silence, saying he had not a word from 
you since your departure from Vienne, so that he was much embarrassed, not knowing whether you 
w* return to the Reg‘ or not, at a time that he was assured by the President of War that your Co! 
w" be soon advanced, and you to replace him. You see he has taken his measures to get no stranger, 
therefore, if you will return, and have a mind to be colonel, take the proper measures that depend 
on you, and that the service, as you know, requires in y* pres’ situation. If you cant return at the 
end of y" congé, write immediately to my bro’, give him sufficient reasons, and desire or pray him 
to procure you, in consequence, a prolongation, which, I sh* think, the shorter it can be, for your 
family affairs, the better; for tho’ it is easy to be comprehended, that a journey to Ireland, and such 
business of consequence as y™ to settle there, cannot be performed in such exactitude of time, still 
it is necessary to shew a certain zeal and fervour at y° eve of being made Co' Commandant of a 
Reg'; and this, not so much in regard to my bro", who knows you, as in regard to y° President, 
who, upon any neglect, might judge you to be careless or indolent. Hn fin you understand all this 
as well as I do, therefore, for God’s sake, neglect nothing ; write yourself to my Bro’, as I sayd 
before, and shew, in proper terms, y’ concern for not being able to finish y" business so as to be 
back at the time fixed by y" first congé, by which means he may be able to make y° proper repre- 
sentations to Lacy, who then, I am confident, will be satisfy’d, so that you be at y* Reg‘ in y° end 
of April, or in the beginning of May. Be sure to write timely, and to me at the same time, a letter 
that I can shew or send tomy Bro". Direct for me to St. Pélten, and not to Lintz, as you did this 
time, so that y" letter went first to Vienne, and was sent to me by Weichart. As for y" bro" Lewis, 
you'll remember we spoke together about him in y" passage here; there are, at present, several 
examples of Commissions being sold and purchased in our army; but you know the purchaser is 
lyable to other expences besides y*® commission, so that, according as I have heard such commissions 
were sold of late here and there in y* Reg", the most Lewis could be provided with out of £500, 


after equipping himself in a proper manner, would be a Cap‘ Lieutenancy, and to obtain this, or 


Larkfield; but this assertion is contradicted by the words of k Ballyna.—tThe seat of their kinsman, Ambrose O'Ferrall, 
the song itself, which call the hero of it the son of Manus, as _ of Ballyna, in the county of Kildare, and uncle to the present 
well as by the reference to O’More’s daughter, Catherine, who More O’Ferrall. 

was certainly married to Charles Roe O’Domnell, the eldest | My brother.—Connell, a lieutenant-general, and after- 
son of Colonel Manus. wards Governor of Transylvania. 


’ 14 B 


2394 APPENDIX. 


was he to be made Marechal, you know he is not a man to stir in it himself, or give one any help, 
and without this, you know my present situation puts me out of the way of bringing such things 
so easily, or so soon, to pass, so that, as I told you here, you and y* father should employ Cous" 
Harry, and if he can get Lewis an agreement in the Reg* he commands, it would be so much the 
better for reasons known to you. Harry is very capable of bringing many things to bear that 
others cannot. He is particularly well with her Majesty. The last time he saw her, she gave him 
a very fine present of jewels for his wife™, saying, as she would neyer wear any more herself, she 
divided them among her children, and kept them for his wife. My Brot is not Governor of Tran- 
sylvania, tho’ it was spoken of, and believed by several; Haddeck is there as yet. If he accepted 
of it, it would be more on my account than to please his choyce. I believe they intend something 
for him, but dont know w'as yet. My poor wife" is just recovering from a great sickness; y* little 
things are well; we all joyn in love to y" and d* f*. WSever, 
** A’ Monsieur ** J* O’DONEL. 

Monsieur Le Comte Magnus O’ Donnell, Colonel 

du Regiment d’O’Donnell dans le service de 

Leurs Majt* Imp" Roy"* et Apostle, a New 

Castle, near Castle Barre, Irelande.” 

“* Vienne, the 20th Decembre. 

“My pear Cousty,—I send a note from Grosspitch of what you have in bank here and in his 
hands, that you may see and give me whatever directions you’ll judge proper about the banks. 
You'll see I remitted here the money you advanced Mrs. C..... and beg you will advance her 
the like sum for the ensuing new year, which I’ll remit here as you’! direct. The Emperor is well 
satisfied with the horses you sent him, which I mentioned you before. Lacy is not at all in disgrace, 
but rather more in favour than ever, tho’ he pretends to meddle in nothing. Y* friend P* Charles 
Leichtenstein is also much in favour. There is no news worth your notice from these parts. I hope 
you will not neglect the Genealogy O’More wrote to me about; but he knows everything better 
than I do, and he is there at the source. It is only giving the Herald proper instructions and 
paying him well; for the latter I will be answerable to y" for it, and refund what you will let me 
know to be necessary. Bruckhausen will be here this Carnival, as he writes me to salute you, and 
is much satisfy’d with our friend O’Ferrall°, to whom I am indebted for some letters; but he knows 
me and does not take it ill. He knows he can command any service in my power to render him. 
I beseech you will assure his grandfather, as likewise of my cordial friendship and veneration for 
himself. Does my sister-in-law marry, and how does Matilda’s? marriage with Nugent go on? I 
suppose the other will drop all pretensions. Let me soon hear from you. 


‘“‘ Ever your affectionate Friend and Cousin, 
** A’ Monsieur ‘© Q’DONEL. 
Monsieur Le Comte Magnus O’Donel Gen! Maj. 
au Service de Leurs Maj. Imp. Apost. a New- 


castle, Castlebure, Irelande.” 


™ His wife.—A cousin of the Empress, a princess of the  nells of Larkfield, by Edward O'Reilly of Harold’s-Cross).— 
illustrious house of Cantacuzeno.— Vide post. Vide post. 


" Poor Wife.—‘' A Spanish lady” (pedigree of O’Don- © O'Ferrall.—The brother of Ambrose O’Ferrall, Esq., of 


APPENDIX. 2395 


The first part of the following letter is entirely taken up with details of money, and other 
business matters, it then proceeds : 


“ Vienne, 6th June, 1778. 


* * * ¥ ® * = * * z = * 
* * * = * * The armies are still facing one another on the 
respective frontiers, as I told you in my last, but as yet no hostilities. I refer to y" own judgment 
if you would think proper to shew yourself under these circumstances. It might not be worth 
your while to offer your services, and if you did, it might very well be they would not accept, 
whereas several that were in the same case were refused, and none were taken but those who were 
in the activity of the service, except Lieu‘ Gen’ Killiers, and that because the Empress had left 
him his full pay, which now the Emperor did not think fit he should enjoy for nothing. This is 
what I heard said; but sure it is that none of the rest were called for or accepted of. For my 
part, tho’ I would serve them with all my heart, I find my head and memory too weak to accept of 
the office if it even had been proposed to me. Harry, who is healthy and strong, offered his services 
in a manner that the Emperor was well pleased with, and gave him assurance that he would get a 
command, but has not yet. My daughter? writes me that he intends to come soon to see me here. 
You know O’Ferrall is first Lieutenant. I had a letter from him yesterday, from the Army in 
Moravia. He is in good health and impatient to be so long without coming to strokes. I hope 
soon to have the comfort of a letter from you. About the Genealogy, I refer you to my last letter, 
Begging you will present my friendship to O’More, and remembrance to all enquiring friends, I 
am, my dearest Cousin, till Death, 
** Yours, with all my heart, 


** A’ Monsieur ** QO’ DoNEL. 
Monsieur Le Comte O’Donnell, General 
Major au service de L. L. M. M. Impl. et 
Royl. a Newcastle, Castlebarre, Irelande.” 


General Manus O’Donel never returned to serve on the Continent. Two years subsequently 
to the date of the last letter, as appears by his marriage settlement, that is, on the 8th December, 
1780, he married Margaret, daughter of Henry Browne, Esq. of Castlemacgarret, in the county of 
Mayo, by Mary, daughter of Robert Nugent, Esq. of Grossfield, England, and by whom he had 
issue, an only child, Elizabeth, who married Robert Gage Rookwood, Esq., second son of Sir 
Thomas Gage, Bart. of Hengrave Hall, in the county of Suffolk. General O’Donel died in 1793, 
aged 80, as appears by the inscription on the family tomb at Straid Abbey in Mayo. This tomb 
exhibits his arms: Argent, issuing from the sinister side of the shield an arm slieved holding a 


Ballyna, or Ballina, in the barony of Carbury and county of | Neal O’Donnell of Newport. She married Count Nugent of 
Kildare. See Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Charles | Westmeath, formerly of the Imperial Service, by whom she 


O’ Conor of Belanagare, p. 165. had John Nugent, Captain R. N., Inspector of Coast Guards. 
» Matilda.—His niece, the daughter of his half-brother, 4 My daughter.—Therese, married to Henry’s eldest son. 
Con O’Donnell of Larkfield, by Mary, sister of the first Sir — Vide post. 


14 B 2 


2396 APPENDIX. 


passion cross ; and his crest, on a wreath, two arms armed, bent and counterly crossed, each 
holding a sword ; that on the dexter side transfixing a boar’s head, the other a heart : 


‘* PRAY FOR THE SOUL 
OF 
COUNT MANUS O’DONEL, 
MasorR GENERAL IN HIS IMPERIAL Masesty’s SERVICE, 
WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE 
21st DecEMBER, 1793, 
AGED 80 YEARS. 
ALSO, FOR THE SOULS OF HIS FaTHER AND MOTHER, 
AND 
CHARLES O’DoneL, JUN". 
ERECTED BY PETER QUIN, BY ORDER OF RoBERT G. Rooxwoop, Esa. 
1813.” 


1X. Lewis O’DoneEL, Esq., of Killeen, second son of Charles Roe of Newcastle, was born in the 
year 1715. He was for some time in the Austrian service, in which he attained the rank of captain; 
but, returning to Ireland and marrying in this country, he did not return again to the Continent. He 
resided at Killeen, in the county of Mayo. He married Bridget, daughter of Randal MacDonnell, | 
Esq. of Massbrook, in the same county, by whom he had issue three sons: 1. Charles, who died un- 
married, aged 18; 2. Manus, a captain in the British service, who distinguished himself by his 
bravery in Colonel Spencer’s regiment in Holland, where he was severely wounded in the hip, as 
he was defending a passage froma ford on a river over which the late Frederic, Duke of York, had 
passed in his flight from the pursuing French; he afterwards died of his wounds; and 3. Lewis 
(of whom presently) ; and three daughters: Bessy, married to Denis Kelly, Esq., of Kellysgrove, 
in the county of Galway; Mary, married to Edward Burke, Esq., of the same county; and Bridget, 
married to Edward Bolingbroke, Esq., of Oldcastle, in the county of Mayo. 

X. Lewis O’Donzt, Esq., of Ross, in the same county. His three elder brothers dying with- 
out issue, he succeeded to his father’s property. He married, in 1821, Judith, daughter of John 
Bourke, Esq., of Ballina. He died and was buried at Ostend, in the year 1841, leaving issue one 
son, Charles, who is now ‘‘ The O’Donnell,” born 27th November, 1823; a lieutenant in Her Ma- 
jesty’s 88th regiment of foot (the ‘‘ Connaught Rangers”); and three daughters: Jane Louisa; Mary 
Baptist; and Judith. We will now return to 


O’DONEL OF NEWPORT. 


VIL Hue O’DonneELL, Esq.. of Newport, commonly called Hugh More. He was the third 
son of Colonel Manus of Newport, and married Maud, daughter of Browne of Brownestown, Co. 
Mayo, by whom he had issue five sons: 1. Hugh, who died s. ».; 2. Francis, whose son Hugh died 
in the E. I. Company’s Service, without issue; 3. Neal, by whom the second senior line was con- 
tinued ; 4. John, M.D., who died unmarried ; 5. Connell, who died unmarried ; and three 
daughters, viz.: Mary, who married Con O’Donnell, Esq., of Larkfield ; 2, Henrietta, who mar- 


APPENDIX. 2307 


ried neas Mac Donnell, Esq., of Westport ; and Anne, who married John O’Donnell, Esq., of 
Erris. 

IX. Neat O’Donet, Esq., of Newport, in the county of Mayo, locally called Niall Garv. He 
was created a baronet of Ireland on the 2nd of December, 1780. He married Mary, daughter of 
William Coane, Esq., of Ballyshannon, and had issue four sons, viz.: 1. Hugh O’Donel, lieute- 
nant-colonel of the South Mayo Militia, and colonel of the 110th regiment of the Line, who died 
wathout issue male; 2. James Moore O’Donel, M. P., killed in a duel by the late Major Bingham, 
of Binghain’s Castle, in the Co, Mayo, and ob. s. p.; 3. Neal O’Donel, who succeeded to the title; 
and 4. Connell, who died s. p.; and two daughters, 1. Margaret, married to Sir Capel Molyneux, 
Bart.; and 2. Maria, married to Dodwell Browne, Esq., of Castlebar. 

Sir Niall Garv O’Donel died in January, 1811, and was succeeded by his eldest surviving son, 

X. Str Neat, locally called Niati Beac O’Donet, third baronet. 
fourth daughter of Richard, second Earl of Annesley, and had issue three sons, 1. Sir Hugh, third 


He married Catherine, 


baronet, who died on the 29th of July, 1828, without male issue; and 2. Sir Richard Annesley, 
the present baronet; 3. Neal, who died unmarried; and four daughters, viz.: 1. Mary, a nun, of 
the Presentation Order; 2. Anna Maria, married, in 1827, to Martin Conolly, Esq.; 3. Margaret. 


who died unmarried ; and Catherine, wife of the Rev. Yonge. 





He married, on the 16th 
of April, 1831, Mary, third daughter of the late George Clendening, Esq., of Westport, by whom 


XI. Str Ricnarp AnnesLey O’DoneEx, fourth and present baronet. 


he has issue two sons, George and Richard. Let us now return to 


O’DONNELL OF LARKFIELD. 


IV. Hucu Boy, son or Cont O’DoneEL, and brother of Sir Niall Garv, Baron of Lifford. 
He is mentioned, in the Ulster Inquisitions, as having received a grant, in 1613, of a small quantity 
of land in the barony of Kilmacrenan, county of Donegal, at the same time, and of the same ex- 
tent as we have seen above granted to his brother Donnell. “To Hugh Boy M‘Quin” [mac Cumn, 
i.e. son of Con] “the two towns or § q'$ of Fiart and Glannyreagh, otherwise Carrowfiart, in 
Rossguill, 128 4., Rent £1 7s. 3}d.S A similar grant to him of the same lands, two years earlier, 
is to be found in Pat. Rolls, 8th Jac. I. 


carrying on a treasonable correspondence with Sir Neal Garve, then a prisoner in the Tower (1615), 


He is also named, together with his brother, Donnell, as 


in an examination already quoted ; and again, a similar charge brought against them in ‘the 
Confession of Cormack Mac Redmond Moyle Maguire, taken before me, Sir Toby Caulfield, Knt., 
at Charlemont, the 11th of June, 1615.” He died in 1649. It appears from an elegy on his death, 
that this Hugh Boy was considered ‘THE O’DonNELL, after the fall of Colonel Manus at Benburb, 
in 1646, the chieftianship passing to the uncle, by the Irish custom of tanistry, as ‘senior et dig- 


* Hugh Boy, son of Con.—It is stated in these Annals, 
under the year 1608, that Hugh Boy, son of Con O’Donnell, 
was taken prisoner, because his brother, Donnell, slew the 
murderer of his brother, Calvagh, and was only released on 
Sir William Betham, on the 
authority of Lodge’s MSS., now in his possession, makes 


Donnell surrendering himself. 


this Hugh Boy a son, and not a brother, of Sir Niall Garv ; 


but this is a great mistake, which the depositions of 1641, 
1652, and Duald Mac Virbis’s Genealogical Manuscript, and 
There was a Hugh 
O'Donnell, of Ramelton, in the assembly of the Confederate 
Catholics at Kilkenny, 10th January, 1647.—Ledwich’s 
Antiq., 2nd ed., p. 472. 

5 Ing. Net. Pat. 10 Js. I. Rep. R. C. . 


several others, enable us to correct. 


2398 APPENDIX. 


nissimus vir sanguinis,” instead of to the probably infant son of Colonel Manus. According to 
Lodge’s Manuscripts, he married Mary Maguire, daughter of Lord Enniskillen, by whom he 
had issue two sons: 1. Dominick; and 2. Johnt; on the former of whom Owen Roe Mac Ward 
composed a poem of 248 verses, beginning, “Gable Fodla pul Chonaill; Props of Fodhla 
(Erin) is the blood of Conall;”" and on the death of the latter (who, according to the last qua- 
train but one, died in 1655), there is an elegy by the same poet, consisting of 232 verses, and 
beginning, “Oo coipnead ceannap clann 3-Cuinn ;” the authority of the sons of Con was 
humbled®. Of the fate of Dominick, the Editor has learned nothing, but it appears from the 
poem just referred to that 

V. Joun O’DonNELL was an officer in foreign service, and was considered the head of the family 
of the O’Donnells. This, however, was evidently in accordance with the law of tanistry, not that of 
primogeniture. He died in 1655, as appears from the elegy on his death already referred to. He 
married Catherine O’Rourke, by whom he had Hugh, who died s. p. and 

VI. ConneLt O’DonneLL. He returned to Ireland some time after the death of his father, 
and was made Lord Lieutenant of the county of Donegal by James IL. in 1689 ; and was evidently 
considered ‘* The O’Donnell,” until, as already mentioned, Ball-dearg O’Donnell returned to Ire- 
land in September, 1690, and was received by the Irish as “‘ The O’Donnell.” But this personage 
afterwards joined the standard of King William III., and soon after retired to Flanders, leaving 
Connell O’Donnell the acknowledged head of the name in Ireland. This Connell married Grainé, 
or Grace, the daughter of Roger O’Donnell of Lifford, and sister of Colonel Manus O? Donnell of 
Newport, by whom he had, according to Lodge’s Manuscripts, three sons: 1. John, whose only 
son, Hugh, died without issue ; 2. Charles, who died s. p.; and 3, 

VII. Hueu O’Donnewu of Larkfield. He was called ‘‘The O’Donnell,” and even ‘ Earl 
Tirconnell,” by the common people; but he could not have been called Earl according to the laws 
of England, as is quite evident from Earl Rory’s patent. After the defeat of King James IL. this 
Hugh removed from the county of Donegal, and took refuge first at a place called Mullaghbane, 
near the head of Lough-da-éan, now Lough Macnean, in the county of Fermanagh, and shortly 
afterwards settled at Larkfield, near Manor-Hamilton, in the county of Leitrim. He married twice: 
first, Flora Hamilton, daughter of John Hamilton, Esq. of Cavan, and sister of General John Count 
Hamilton of the Austrian service, and he had by her two sons: 1. Connell Count O’ Donnell, 
Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Maria Theresa, Governor of Transylvania, and a Field-mar- 
shal in the Austrian service, who, on Downs being wounded, commanded the imperial army at 
the battle of Torgau, and who died unmarried in 1771; and 2. John Count O'Donnell, a General in 
the same service, who, according to De Burgo, married Anna Corr, by whom he had a son* and a 


daughter, Therese, who married Joseph Count O’Donnell, of Austria. Hugh married, secondly, 


' O’Clery and Mac Firbis’s Genealogies, R. I. A. Charles Count O’Donnell, who was Major-General in the 
“ O’Reilly’s Catal. Irish Writers, p. 97. Austrian service, and was killed at Neresheim, in 1805 ; but 
w Ib. this Major-General Charles O’Donnell was not his son, but 


x 4 son.—Sir William Betham states in his pedigree the son of Manus, who was son of Calvagh Duv, as will pre- 
of the O’Donnells, published in his Irish Antiquarian Re-  sently appear from his own letter. See descendants of Con 
searches, that this John Count O’Donnell had a son, Oge, infra. 


APPENDIX. 2399 
Margaret, daughter of Hugh Montgomery, Esq., of Derrygonnelly, in the county of Fermanagh, 
and had by her two sons: 1. Con O’Donnell, of Larkfield, of whom presently; and 2. a son whose 
name is forgotten by the family, and who went over to his half brother’s in Vienna, and died 
abroad, young and unmarried ; and two daughters: 1. Grace, who married James Johnson of 
Drumiskin, in the county of Fermanagh, by whom she had a numerous issue ; and 2. Catherine, 
who married Arthur Johnson of the Ring, near Enniskillen, by whom she had one daughter. 

Of this Hugh O’Donnell, who died in 1754, and his sons by his first marriage, Charles O’Conor 
of Belanagare has the following notice in his Dissertations on the ancient History of Ireland, edition 
of 17535) p..231 

“The Tyrconall Race produceth at this day Persons, who reflect back on their Ancestors the 
Honours they derive from them, particularly Conall and John O'Donnell, sufficiently recorded in 
our Gazettes, for their Exploits in the late Wars, in the Service of the Empress, Queen of Hun- 
gary. These excellent General Officers are the sons of a very worthy Person, Hugh O’Donnell 
the chief of the Tyrconell Line, and of Flora, the Sister of the late General Hamilton, who, if I be 
well informed, died in the Imperial Service.” 

VIII. Con O’Donnett, Esq., of Larkfield. After the death of his father and half brothers, he 
was considered by the Irish as ‘‘ The O’Donnell.”” He married Mary O’Donnell (sister to the first 
Sir Neal O’Donel of Newport, who was ‘‘ The O’Donnell” according to the English law of primo- 
geniture), and had by her: 1. Hugh O’Donnell, Esq., of Larkfield, of whom presently; 2. Connell 
O’Donnell, who died at Liege, in Germany, young and unmarried ; 3. John O’Donnell, who died 
unmarried about the year 1800; 4. Con O’Donnell, who married Mary, second daughter of Denis 
O’Conor of Belanagare, and sister of the late Owen O’Conor Don, M. P. for the county of Roscom- 
mon, and had by her four sons, viz.: 1. Con O’Donnell of the city of Dublin, Barrister at law ; 
2. John O’Donnell; 3. Connell O’Donnell; 4. Niall O’Donnell; and two daughters, viz.: Matilda 
O’Donnell, who married James Nugent of Ballinacor, by whom she had a large family; and 2. 
Mary, who married Peyton John Gamble of Boxborough. 

IX. Huau O’Donne tt, Esq., of Larkfield and Greyfield’, married Honoria, eldest daughter of 


Y Greyfield.—This, which was the ancient estate of the 
Mac Dermots Roe, passed from that family about eighty-six 
Henry Mac Dermot Roe had by Anna, the 
daughter of Colonel Manus O’Donnell, an only daughter, 


years since. 


Eliza, who was married to Robert\Maguire of Tempo, in 
the county of Fermanagh, by whom she had no issue. 
After the marriage of Eliza with Maguire, the brother of 
the latter, Hugh Maguire, who had been a Colonel in the 
Austrian service, and had married the Honourable Dow- 
ager Lady Cathcart, came on a visit to Greyfield. Henry 
Mac Dermot Roe, who had been living after a sumptuous, 
extravagant manner for years before, borrowed a large 
sum of money from Colonel Maguire, for which he mort- 
gaged to him the estate of Greyfield. Shortly after this 
Anne O'Donnell died, and Henry Mac Dermot Roe. went 
to Tempo, where he lived with his daughter for a few years 
before his death. After his death Colonel Hugh Maguire 


foreclosed Henry’s mortgage to him, and brought the 
ground to sale; under which William Knox, Esq., pur- 
chased the lands. After the departure of Henry to Tempo, 
his brother, Counsellor John Mac Dermot Roe, took posses- 
sion of Greyfield House, and his followers resisted the High 
Sheriff (Edward Lord Kingston, still vividly remembered 
in that country as “the good lord’’), who attended Colonel 
Maguire and Mr. Knox to get possession of the house and 
lands of Greyfield, and fired out of the windows; and in a 
skirmish near the village of Keadue, several lives were lost, 
ina field still called Péipe a? mupoap, i.e. the Field 
of the Murder. Finally, after several days’ resistance and 
bloodshed, the possession was delivered to Mr. Knox, at the 
desire of the said Eliza, who came at the head of several of 
her friends, and desired those in the house to give it up to 
the sheriff. These lands are now farmed by the O’Donnells 
of Larkfield, some of whom reside in Greyfield House. 


2400 APPENDIX. 


Myles Lyons of Lyonstown, in the county of Roscommon, and had by her three sons, viz.: Con 
O’Donnell of Larkfield, of whom presently ; 2. Hugh Lyons O’Donnell, born 16th June, 1795 ; 
and Robert O’Donnell, born in 1800; and one daughter, Rose O’Donnell, who married Richard 
Phibbs of Branchfield. 

After the head of the Newport or Baronet branch of the O’Donnells had obtained the cele- 
brated relic called the Cathach or Caah, as being ‘‘ The O’Donnell,” Con O’Donnell of Lark- 
field, who died in 1825, published several letters in the Dublin Evening Post, to prove that his own 
father was ‘*The O’ Donnell,” and, therefore, was the true owner of this relic ; but in these articles 
he made many bold assertions, which would require more than his mere dictum to establish, but 
the Editor does not deem it necessary to revive the controversy. This celebrated relic, which is 
mentioned in these Annals at the years 1497 and 1499, was from remote times held in the 
highest veneration by this family, and was carried by them into all their battles. In the ancient 
Book of Fenagh, a manuscript in the British Museum, Cotton. 115, the following notice of it oc- 
curs in a memorandum in English, in the hand-writing of Tully Conry: ‘Also he” [St. Caillin 
of Fenagh] “doth admonish the sept of Conall Gulban, which is the O’Donells, to look well to 
the Caagh, that it should not come to the handes of Englishmen, which yf yt did it should be to 
the overthrowe and confusion of the sept of Conall Gulban, and to the great honnor of the 
English, &e.” This relic was carried away from Tyrconnell by a Colonel Daniel O’ Donnell, who 
followed the fortunes of King James II. into France, and who repaired it in 1723. This Colonel 
Daniel was of the race of Hugh Duy, the brother of Manus, who died in 1563, and, dying without 
issue, in Belgium, mentioned in his will that it should be given to whoever proved himself to be 
the head of the O’Donnell family. It was found in a monastery in Belgium by the late Abbot of 
Cong, who, on learning the nature of Colonel O’Donnell’s will, told the late Sir Neal O’ Donel 
about it, on his return to Ireland. Sir Neal, who believed himself to be ‘* The O’Donnell,” applied 
for the relic through his brother Connell, then in Belgium, who succeeded in obtaining it for Sir 
Neal O’Donel, as “* The O’Donnell,” thowgh Lewis O’Donel of Ross was unquestionably senior tb 

Sir Neal.—See p. 2396, supra. 
X. Con O’ Donne Lt, Esq., of Larkfield. He married Mary, daughter of Richard Phibbs, sen. of 
Branchfield, in the county of Sligo, and had, by her one son, Con O’Donnell, who was living in 
1837. This Con, No. X., died on the 28th of August, 1825. Let us now return to Niall Garv’s 
third brother. 


CASTLEBAR, SPANISH, AND AUSTRIAN, O’DONELS. 


IV. Con Ocx?, third son of Con O’Donnell. He was slain 1601, and left issue one son*, 

V. Manus O’Donnett, who, according to a pedigree of Count O’Donell of Austria (copied 
from a heraldic genealogy, with the seal of Chichester Fortescue, Ulster King at Arms, by Colonel 
Sir Charles O’Donnel, at Vienna, in 1828, and then in the possession of the Countess O’Donnel, 
née de Geisruch), was married to ‘“ Maria, filia de Doole Campbell, ex familia Ducis Argyle in 
Scotia.” He left one son, Calvagh Roe, as appears also from an addition made in the handwriting 


of the Venerable Charles O’Conor of Belanagare, to Mac Firbis’s genealogical manuscript. 


2 O’Clery and Mac Firbis’s Genealogies, R. I. A. 4D. Mac Firbis, MS. R. I. A. 


APPENDIX. 2401 


VI. Catvacn Roe O’DonneELt, * Carolus O’Donnel Colonellus, = Eleonora Mac Sweeny, filia 
Gualteri Mac Sweeny de Fanad in comitatu Donagalensi>.” Among the poems of Farrell Oge Mac 
Ward (who lived in 1655), there is one addressed to this O’Donnell, at the time of his marriage 
with Elenor Mac Sweeny, of which the following eight verses are the only portion that appear to 
remain, and which were found ina MSS., in the Collection of the Rev. Dr. Todd, F. T.C.D., p. 479, 
by Mr. Eugene Curry. In O’Reilly’s Catalogue of Irish Writers, p. 197, this poem is entitled : 
“On the O’Donnells, particularly Calbhach, son of Manus,”—248 verses, beginning, “‘ tneoin an 
ceannaip clann Odlaig: powerful the authority of Clan Dalaigh :” 


“Oo caippngip Fionn, pfippoe ve, “‘ Finn® foretold (we profit by his knowledge), 


vo Cuin Cianan a ccuimne, 
feap @’anma tap aon ele, 


ood caob caplaig an caippngipe. 


Suinge Leib ag Ciop Eamna; 
’p ag puilib na plin Ceamna; 
a ccaitcuip Zan cuing ccpore, 
o’aizpip Chun ip Chonaine. 


Clipoeocad pop Zan taom ezaip 
meanma gliaid buidne bedpnaip; 
le cpeaomaib Lid ip Lamang 
’p Lead meanmain in 1oloanaig,. 


Ni luga uo Oils Néid 
az leanmam an 00 Leizéio, 
a nooig cabna 0’a cneadaib, 
caplaig a 615 ap c’oileamuin, 


(@ Chalbaig, 00 can cura 
dpopeace an pon Cogsa po, 
50 bein a vocnaccza ve, 
ceim pocnacta nac pipce. 


Oonnchad mac Neill mic Donnchard 
rap muczad Fac mon Cconpaiod 
copac sac Zapma 06 ve 
sa canba ap mo bud maoldze ? 





> Austrian Pedigree. 


© Finn: i.e. Finn Mac Cumhaill.—See note on prophe~ 


cies, p. 1797, supra. 
4 St. Ciaran: i.e. the patron saint of Clonmacnoise. 
e€ Emania.—The ancient palace of the kings of Ulster. 
f Bearnas: i.e. Bearnas-mor-Gap, near Donegal. 


St. Ciaran‘ reiterated the prophecy, 


‘That a man of thy name [would be] above ali 


others; 
Concerning thee the prophecy was made. 


The ancient fort of Emania® courts thee; 
Thou art the expected one of old Temoria; 
Thy espousals with open hearts they seek, 
As Con and Conary they sought of yore. 


Now to its wonted height shall be exalted 
The martial spirit of the hosts of Bearnas* ; 
By thy achievements and career of valour, 
And by thy noble polytechnic mind. 


Nor -was Aileach Neid§, too, less expectant 

Of one like thee to arise unto her, 

Hoping thou wouldst relieve her anguish, 

Now that her youths are under thy fostering 
care. 


O’Calvagh! long has it been thy ardent wish 
To bring relief to this land of Lughaidh®, 
And sweep away its oppressions, 

An achievement, now, alas! coveted by few. 


Donough, son of Niall, son of Donough’, 
He who extinguishes every furious onset, 
And, therefore, holds first rank in fame*— 
What advantage more to be boasted of ? 


g Aileach Neid.—Now Elagh, one of the ancient palaces 


of Ulster. 


h Land of Lughaidh.—One of the many arbitrary bardic 


names for Ireland. 
i Donough.—Probably the brother of Ellen. 


k Fame.— Vide Annals Four Masters, passim, where it 
l4c 


2402 APPENDIX. 


Ingean Ohduzeip nac claon coin ; The daughter of Walter, who perverts not 
justice; 
ashais ¢aom, calomiob miocaip; Whose address is pleasing as her face is beau- 
tiful; 
bean 54 mbi cneigze an tosa,— Whose graces are peculiarly her own,— 
ap i an péile a haonpoga. The especial patroness of hospitality. 
Nop na Suibneac gan oul ve The ancient customs of Mac Sweeny’s mansion 
cuz Eibilin 0G haine; By Ellen are most bountifully observed ; 
ni neamdoizce céim a ccopp To her fair fame no reproach attaches 
ap béim oeanlaigze ap odaonocz.” On the score of munificence and kindness.” 


Calvagh Roe O*’Donnell very probably held the rank ascribed to him in the Austrian Pedigree, 
in the army of the King, during the parliamentary wars; and one passage in the preceding fragment 
appears to allude to a military career. The Editor has heard that he was the first of the O’Don- 
nells who went to Mayo ; but, however that may be, there is no doubt that his son was settled 
there, having married the daughter of Colonel O’ Neill, of Oldcastle, in that county. This son was— 

VII. Hues O’Donnect, who married ‘“ Margaritha O’Neale, filia Terentii O’Neale et Cecilie 
O’More, filie Roderici O’More, Colonelli et Comitis de Leix!.” 

Here it may not be amiss to digress for a brief period, in order to ascertain who this Colonel 
O’Neill, whom we thus find possessed of property in a district so little connected with his name as 
the county of Mayo, could have been ; and when and how that property was acquired. In. this 
inquiry a strange picture is presented of the reverses of fortune in which many of the great Irish 
families were involved during the seventeenth century. 

One of the highest branches of the family of O’Neill was represented by the O’Neills of the 
Fews. Hugh, second son of Eoghan, or Owen, the great-grandfather of Con Bacagh, first Earl 
of Tyrone, was chieftain of the extensive territory still known as the Upper and Lower Fews, in the 
county of Armagh. He left a son, Art, who was declared ‘‘The O’Neill” on the death of Don- 
nell, the brother of Con More O’Neill™. Art died in 1514, and left a son, Phelim, or Felimy Roe, 
who struggled hard against the progress of English power in the North, in the reign of Edw. VI.; 
and his son, Henry, who was married to the widow of Matthew, Baron of Dungannon (she died 
June 2nd, 1600), shared, upto the death of Elizabeth, in the fortunes of his step-son, the great Earl 
of Tyrone. On the accession of James I. a general pardon was granted to him, as ‘“‘ Henry O’Neale 
of the Fews,”’ dated ‘‘ 20th February, in the first year®,”’ and which he only survived a short while; 
for we find that he was succeeded the same year by his son, Tirlough, to whom his lands were 
confirmed, as appears by the following entry: ‘To Tirlough Mac Henry O’Neyle, Esq., was 
granted on the day of September, in the first year’ (1603), ‘the whole territory or country 
of the Fues in Ulster, and all lordships, castles, manors, &c., within said territory : to Hold to 
him, his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, in capite, by the service of one Knight’s fee, at the rent of a 





horse and two pair of spurs, or 40s. Irish, at the Election of said Tirlogh, his Heirs and Assigns°.” 


appears that the Mac Sweenys had the hereditary right of ™ MS. Trinity College, Dublin, E. 4. 18. 
leading O’Donnell’s gallowglasses. " Erck’s Rep. of Chan. Enrol., p. 31. 
' Austrian Pedigree. ° Thid., p. 171. 


APPENDIX. 2403 


This Turlough married Sarah, daughter of Sir Tirlogh Lenogh O’Neill», by whom he had issue two 
sons, Henry and Art, and three daughters, the eldest of whom, Catherine, married Sir Tirlogh 
O’Neill of Kinard, by whom she had two sons, Tirlogh Oge and the celebrated Sir Phelim, both 
leaders in the insurrection of 1641. He died at Glasdrommen, county of Armagh, in 1639, having 
previously conveyed his estates to certain trustees, as appears from an inquisition taken at 
Armagh: 

“Tirlogh Mac Henry O’Neale, late of Glasdrommen, in the territory of Fues, Knt., was seized 
in fee of certain lands (set forth) in said county, did on the 8th of March, in the 8th year of the 
reign’, obtained royal license to convey all the said lands, by the style or name of the territory of 
Fues, to certain Trustees (named), to the use of himself and his wife, Sarah, during their natural 
lives, and the survivor of them ; afterwards to the use of Henry O’Neale, son and heir apparent 
of the said Tirlogh ; and after his decease to the use of Tirlogh O’Neale, son and heir of the said 
Henry, and the heirs male of his body lawfully begotten ; with divers other remainders ; and 
afterwards to the use of the right heirs of the said Tirlogh O’Neale the younger. The said Tirlogh, 
by deed dated 1st May, 1639, conveyed to Arthur, his second son, certain lands specified therein. 
The said Tirlogh O Neale, Knt., died 24th February, 1639. The said Henry O Neale, his son 
and heir, was then of full age, and married. The said premises were held of the King for military 
service in capite’.” 

Sir Tirlogh was buried at Creggan, in same county’. Henry, his son and heir, had some 
time previously been married to Mary, daughter of Sir John O’Reilly, Knight, county of Cavan‘, by 
whom he had one son, Tirlogh, named in the above remainders. This Tirlogh married Cecilia, 
daughter of the famous Rory O’More, the prime mover of the insurrection of 1641, and thus 
became, by ties of marriage as of blood, connected with the troubles of the period. From the 
Relation of the Lord Maguire, ‘‘ written with his own hand, in the Tower,” it would seem that he 
participated in those events; though, strange to say, he was not included afterwards in the procla- 
mation that offered rewards for the heads of his father-in-law, his uncle, Art, and his cousins, 
Tirlogh and Sir Phelim : 

“Being in Dublin, Candlemas Term was twelve month” (1640), says Maguire, “the Parlia- 
ment then sitting, Mr. Roger Moore did write to me,” &e. . . . . - - 3 “and the 
next day, after the receipt of the letter, being Sunday, (by Mr. Moore’s aiaice) we departed from 
Col. Mac Mahon’s house, to prevent (as he said) the suspition of the English there (many living 
near), to Laghrosse, in the county of Armagh, to Mr. Torilagh O’Neale’s house (not Sir Phelim’s 
brother, but son to Mr. Henry O’Neale of the Fewes, and son-in-law to Mr. Moore), and left word 
that if Sir Phelim or any of those gentlemen did come in the mean time, they should follow us 
thither (whither only went Mr. Moore, Captain O’Neale, and myself), and these we expected till 
Tuesday subsequent, before any of them did come'.” 

But, although he escaped the tragic fate of many of those who were involved in that unhappy 
affair, it would appear that the Parliamentary Government did not entirely overlook his partici- 


P MS. Trinity College, Dublin, E. 4. 18. s Fun. Entries, vol. viii. p. 327. 
91633. t MS. in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, E. 4. 18. 
T Ing. Ult. Ann. Chas. I. u Warner’s History of the Irish Rebellion, Appendix, p. 9. 


14°'c'2 


2404 APPENDIX. 


pation in it; for both he and his father were among the earliest victims of the grand scheme of the 
“transplantation.” Henry O’Neill was compelled to surrender his “territory of the Fewes,” and 
accept, in lieu of it, from the Commonwealth, a tract of land in the county of Mayo, large in extent, 
yet still but a poor compensation for a principality which. his family had ruled for several genera- 
tions. The Editor has not found in the Act of Settlement, nor in private hands, the confirmatory. 
grant of the original transfer ; but, subsequently to the death of Henry O’Neale, we find the 
enrolment of a grant to his son of a portion of the lands originally bestowed”, “dated 9th Feb- 
ruary, 32 year, and inrolled 5th March, 1680”: 

‘“To Terlagh O Neale, son and heir of Henry O Neale, late of Ardcharra, Co. Mayo, and for- 
merly of the Fues, Co. Ardmagh, Esq., the towns and lands of Leccarrowconnell, Lecarrowrory, 
Uncles, Uncle, Knockenrony, Carrownoonah, Killives, Cloongue, Pollagh, Knockroe, Braendrum, 
Aghalouske, Shehave, Carrownaragh, Treenbeg, Logafooka, Carrowanhan, Bellagariffe, Boghola, 
Ardhoroe, Cullileagh, Newcastle, Myleeke, Collagh, Bollinelly, alias Clooneen, Bellaghagh” [or 
Oldcastle] “‘and Ardhoom ; at a crown rent of £26 9s. 10Zd.; situate in the Barony of Gallen, 
and county of Mayo*.” 

Tirlagh had issue by his marriage, Henry, a captain in James the Second’s army; and Margaret, 
who, as previously stated, married Hugh, son of Calvagh Roe O’Donnell. On the flight of James II., 
and the succession of William III., Henry, having been attainted, is supposed to have escaped. to the 
Continent; but, although the estate was thus forfeited, it would seem that the Crown made no dis- 
position of it at the time, but allowed his relative, Tirlagh, son of Art, son of Sir Tirlagh O’Neill 
of the Fews, his sister, and his nephew, Charles, or Calvagh Duv O’Donnell, to enter into and re- 
tain possession for several years subsequently. In the year 1703, as the Editor has been informed, 
on a discovery being made to the Court of Requests [the Penal Laws then coming into full ope- 
ration | that these lands were held by recusants and Papists, a final forfeiture took place, one por- 
tion being bestowed upon the Charter School of Sligo, and the remainder granted, for a considera- 
tion of £330, ‘to William Moore, Esq., of the city of Dublin, the 22nd of June, 1703,” being 
“‘the estate of Henry O’Neill attainted, and all other his estates in Ireland’.” 

Art or Arthur O’Neill, the second son of Sir Tirlagh of the Fews, married Catherine, daughter 
of Sir Henry O’Neill of Kinard, and had a son Turlough, who married Catherine, daughter of 
Robert Hovedon, of Ballynameetah, and had a son Arthur, Junior, who married Alice O’Donnell, 
and had by her two sons, Neal O’Neill and Owen O’Neill, the former of whom, who died about 1708, 
married Catherine Magennis, and had a son, Henry, who was under age in 1708, and living in 1758, 
when James Knox, Esq., of Moyne, brought ejectments against him. On the 10th of February, 
1724, this Henry filed a bill in the Exchequer in Ireland, against Robert, the father of Samuel 
Ormsby, which sets forth ‘said Henry as Administrator of all and singular the goods and chattles, 
rights and credits, which did belong to Neal O’Neil, Gentleman, in his lifetime, as appears by the 
jetter of Administration therewith granted to him, that one Henry O’Neil, since deceased, having 
in his lifetime a considerable Estate in the North of this Kingdom, was transplanted into Connaught, 


W Bestowed.—A portion only, for it says ‘‘ Henry O’Neale, * Rep. Ree. Com., vol. iii. p..271, R..32, chap. ii. 
late of Ardcharra ;” and Ardcharra is not included in the Y Rep. Ree. Com., R. 2nd An. 11th pt. back vol. iii. 
new grant, although a neighbouring townland, p. 390. 


APPENDIX. 24055 


and did there obtain a final settlement of several lands in the county of Mayo in satisfaction of his 
antient Estate. 

‘“‘ That Arthur O’Neill, brother to said Henry, being dead, left his son and heir, Terlagh O’Neil, 
who, being Intitled to'8 Townlands, part of said antient Estate, did Intrust said Henry, being the 
eldest branch of the family, to claim his proportion of said antient Estate, which said Henry did, 
and having obtained a decree thereon for a parcell of lands in the county of Mayo aforesaid, part 
whereof were obtained in trust, as aforesaid, for said Terlagh, it was agreed between them, the 
said Henry and Terlagh O’Neil, that he, the said Henry, should, on obtaining a Decree for said 
lands, perfect a lease unto said Terlagh for 99 years, of a sixth part of such Transplantation Lands 
as he should so get, at. the yearly rent of 5 shillings for each quarter of such lands, the same being 
a just proportion of said Antient estate due to said Terlagh. 

‘That said Henry O’Neil did enter into several engagements in writing, concerning said divi- 
dend, proportion, and Trust, in discharge whereof, and in consideration of £200, said Henry, Senior, 
by Deed of Lease, dated the 3rd of August, 1656, did Demise unto said Terlagh, his Executors, 
Administrators, and Assigns, in part of said Transplantation lands, viz‘: the quarter of land of 
Meelick, and the quarter of land of Lecarrowrory and Lecarrowconnell, in the said county, for 99 
years, to commence from the date of the said lease, or some other time, if any issue male of the 
body of the said Terlagh O’Neil, or of the said Arthur O’Neil, his father, shou’d so long continue. 
By virtue of which demise the said Terlagh entered on the premises, and became thereof possessed, 
and died, possessed thereof, Intestate; after whose death, Arthur O’Neil, Junior, son and heir to 
the said Terlagh, having taken out letters of Administration to his said father, did enter on the pre- 
mises, and continued possessed thereof for several years, and having married one Alice O’Donnell, 
departed this life, leaving issue by her, the said Alice, the said Neal O’Neil, his eldest son, Plaintiff’s 
father, and Owen O’Neil, on whose decease said Alice O’Neil, alias O’Donnell, became possessed of 
the premises, and, being so possessed, intermarried with one John O’Neil, Gent., since deceased.” 

The term of ninety-nine years expired in 1755, and the O’Neills appear to have been ousted 
in 1758, by Mr. Knox, to whom, in the interval, the fee of these particular lands had come. 

Hugh O’Donel, No. VII., by his wife, Margaret O’Neill, left issue an only son,— 

VIII. Cuartes O’Donnet, known as Calvagh Duy, i. e. Calbaé Oub, i.e. Charles the Black, 
as distinguished from his brother-in-law, Calvagh Roe, or Charles the Red, of Newcastle. On 
the forfeiture of the O’Neill property in Gallen, in 1703, he became lessee, under the Ecclesiastical 
Court of Tuam (the only species of tenure the new laws left open to the Catholic), of some church 
lands in the barony of Murrisk, in the same county. He married Mary, eldest daughter of 
Colonel Manus O’Donel, by whom he had issue three sons, viz:: 1. Manus, of whom presently ; 
2. Joseph, from whom the O’Donnels of Spain are descended; 3. Henry’, the founder of the 
O’Donells of Austria, as shall be presently shewn. 

IX. Manus O’Donet of Wilford Lodge, in the county of Mayo, was born about the year 1720. 
He married Eleanor, daughter of ——_—— Bole, Esq., of the county of Longford, by whom 
he had issue three sons, and two daughters: 1. Joseph, of whom presently; 2. Hugh, who went 


2 Henry.—A name unusual in the O’Donnell family, and their. intermarriage with the Kildare family) it was very 
here evidently taken from the O’Neills, with whom (since — general. 


2406 APPENDIX. 

+o the West Indies, and settled at Vera Cruz, where he was living in 1798, as appears from a letter 
of his brother, Charles, copied below, but no further account of him has reached his relations in 
Ireland; 3. Charles, born 1760, went out while yet a boy to his uncle, Henry, to Germany*, and 
entered the Austrian service, in which he rose to the dignity of a Count, and rank of Major-Ge- 
neral. In 1798, the widow of his brother, Joseph, being desirous of removing her son, the late 
Mr. Joseph O’Donel of Castlebar, from this country, then in a state of insurrection, wrote to Ger- 
many, to her brother-in-law, on the propriety of sending him abroad. The first of the following 
letters bears reference to this subject. It is particularly interesting, not only for the amiable light 
in which it presents the character of the writer, but also for the direct reference which it makes 


to the scattered members of his family. Though written in English, the idiom is evidently foreign. 


“ Vienna, the first Xbre, 1798. 

“‘ My DEAR SISTER-IN-LAW,—Tho the letter Ihad the pleasure to receive from you was very 
ancient, being dated from the 29th of June, for all that I did not get it but since a short while ; 
and that delay, my dear Sister-in-law, is the cause of me not answering you sooner. I would have 
received your letter, no doubt, long ago, if acquainted with the change that happened with me, you 
could have directed it me more exactly. But as, according to the informations that were given you 
about me, you thought me stil Commander of a FreeCorps, and in Bavaria, you directed mein con- 


a There is an anecdote, connected with the reception of 
this young cadét by his uncle, strongly illustrative of the 
spirit of nationality cherished by the expatriated Irish. It 
is this: 

At the time he went to join his uncle, the latter was 
General of a division of the Austrian army, then somewhere 
on the French frontier. Young O'Donnell arrived and slept 
at a convent in the neighbourhood, where there were some 
Irish priests. On the following morning he started for the 
Austrian camp; but, to the surprise of the friars, who knew 
the object of his jowney, he returned to them in the evening 
in a very disconsolate humour. 

“Yies.77 


‘Well, what reception did he give you?” ‘Cold enough; 


‘*Did you see your uncle ?” inquired his friends. 


he refused to acknowledge me.” 

“Why?” ‘I don’t know, unless it was because I spoke 
English to him.”’ 

‘¢ How was that? Come, tell us all about it.” ‘‘ When 
I was introduced into his tent, he embraced me warmly, and 
spoke most kindly to me, and inquired about home, and my 
journey, and how I’d like to be a soldier. But when I spoke 
to him in return, his manner began to change; and, after a 
little, he said there must be some mistake, that I could be no 
nephew of his; to return here, and he’d find means of send- 
ing me back to Ireland.” 

“What language did he address you in ?”’ 
Krish.” 


“ He spoke in 


“And you?” 

“ Don’t you speak Irish, then?” ‘‘To be sure I do, better 
than English; but, though he spoke Irish, I thought he’d 
understand the ether better.” 

“Oh! you foolish boy; go back, speak nothing but Irish, 
and he'll soon discover his mistake.” 


“‘T answered him in English.” 


The advice was good. 
The youngster stayed in Germany. 

This anecdote was related, as the Editor has been informed, 
by a clergyman who had been many years in France, and 
heard it there. 

This nationality seems hereditary in the name. Genera- 
tions of foreign birth do not weaken it. The Editor has seen, 
in a letter written this year (1847) by one of the family in 
Germany (the great-grandson of one of the parties in the 
above anecdote) to a relative in Ireland (the grand-nephew 
of the other), the following passage, which shews this 
clearly : 

“Un descendant du fondatrice du convent Irlandais a 
Rome—malheureusement j'ai oublie son nom, s’est appro- 
prié l’Epeé de Roderic, et Yemporta en Irlande, pour la 
placer peut-etre dans quelque cabinet de curiosités. Tachez 
de la réclamer, car personne que nous qui sommes des 
O Donnel n’a le droit de la posseder. Ce sacrilege a été 
commis il a quelques années. Tachez a tout prix de la ravoir. 
Qu’elle reste en Irlande, et chacun de nous viendra la voir.” 
And again: ‘¢... car quoiqu’ éléves en Autriche, nous n’en 
ayons pas moins les cceurs Irlandais.” 


_APPENDIX. 2407 


sequence, it was natural that I, being no more now in Bavaria, your [letter] must have run a long 
time before it came to me hands. It is true that I was Commander of a Free Corps and in quar-- 
ters in Bavaria; but his Majesty the Emperor, having thought it proper to remodel the Free 
Corps in his Army, I am now six months neither Commander of a Free Corps, nor in Bavaria. 

“‘T am very glad to have received at length news from Irlande. Having quitted that country 
as a child, I was not able to keep up with the parents? I had there, the correspondence that in the- 
following I strived fruitlessly to have with them. While me uncle in Spain® was a-live, he wrote 
exactly to his brother? in this country: which lives no more neither: and by that means I got 
now and then information of everything relative to my parents. But since his decease, I had the 
discomfort to hear nothing no more of them. It was by that uncle I had in Spain, that I knew 
my brother Joseph’s returning to Irelande from the Spanish service wherein he was; of his mar- 
riage in Irelande ; of his going to Sancta Cruze; finally of his dieing there. I feel very deep all 
the troubles which oppressed that poor brother, and I am concerned of the affliction to which, as 
his spouse, they must have delivered you up. As for your son, Joseph, my nephew, I am most 
ready to do for him all that lies in my power. Nevertheless, the occasion to make him enter the 
Imperial service, at this moment, is not the best. A war of six years that we had, and was 
finished for some [time more] than a year, filled up the Army with so much supernumerary officers, 
that now there is but slight advancement to be got; my nephew, consequently, would have no hopes 
of a promotion for a good while, whatsoever could be his good qualities. As I am situated at the 
present, having no regiment, and only serving in the army, I could directly be of no use to him. 
My opinion is, therefore, my dear Sister, that Joseph should not quit Irelande. The tranquillity 
being now reestablished in the kingdom, it will permit him to pursue some profession, and if he 
applies himself to it, he will certainly make more fortune there than by soldiership. Yet, should 
a war begin, which our political situation makes probable, and that my nephew would persiste to 
become a soldier, supposing that he is endowed with the strong constitution necessary in military 
state, I will charge myself of him with great pleasure, making no doubt that, if war breaks out, I 
will get a regiment to commande, wherein I will be able to place him. 

“Having the intention to send my sister Elise five hundert florins of our money, which is 
58 pounds, or thereabout, and to renew to her every year, I pray you, my dear sister-in-law, to 
informe me on which Banker in Dublin it would be the more convenient to let that money be 
paid. In the first letter you will write me, be so kind to give me an exact account of my family, 
of which I have got no news since a too long a while. When did my poor Mother die? Tho’ I 
was a child as I seperated from her, I remember me of her with tenderness. What a misfortune 
it is to be in the necessity to quit one’s own country, and to be exposed to the discomfort to never 
see no more the dear and respectable persons to which we are beholden of our existence. My 
father’s decease happened some years after my going abroad. You would please me highly by 
giving me some accounts of my brother, Hugo, established in Sancta Cruse, and in informing me 
of the manner I should direct to him, that I might hope to get an answer from him, [I often. 


5 Parents.—He doubtlessly meant ‘‘relatives,” from the father’s second brother. 
French ‘‘ parens.” 4 Brother.—Count Henry O’Donell, the third brotiver, and 
© Uncle in Spain.—General Don Joseph O'Donnel, his ancestor of the O’Donells of Austria. 


2408 APPENDIX. 


endeavoured to put myself in correspondence with him, but continually without success. I was 
told that General Manus O’Donel, who returned to Ireland about twenty years ago, and married 
himself in that country, died there not long since. 
> * * * * * * * * + * + * * ~ * * 
“J fear you will have great difficulty to understand this letter ; I assure you I had very much 
to write it, having almost entirely forgotten the English tongue. I wish it may come to your 
hands ; at least shall I direct it as you indicated me. Now, having nothing no more to writ to 
you, I finish my letter, by praying you to believe, tho I have not the pleasure to know you per- 


sonally, that I am, with all my heart, 
‘“‘My dear Sister-in-Law, 


** A’ Madame * Your most affectionate brother-in-law, 
Madame Marie O’Donel, 4 Dublin, ‘* CHARLES O’DONEL. 
ou Castlebarre, en Irelande. 


‘Be so kind to direct me your letter : 

“* A’ Monsieur 
Monsieur Charles O’Donel, Colonel ati Service 
de sa Maje. Imp' Roy, a Vienne, en Autriche.” 


The following letter was written by Colonel O’Ferral, of the Austrian service, a brother of the 
late Ambrose O’Ferrall, of Ballyna, in the county of Kildare, and uncle of the Right Honourable 
Richard More O’Ferrall. It is addressed to the writer of the foregoing letter, and on the subject 
of the annuity to which it refers : 

“« Florence, the 1st of October, 1799. 

‘““ Dear CousiIn® aND MOST WoRTHY Frienp,—The laudable and generous resolution you have 
made, of remitting an annual allowance to your sisters, inspires me with so much respect and admi- 
ration, that I should look upon it to be unpardonable not to do everything in my power to pro. 
mote it. However, my brother only sends me my interest money once a year, and that in the 
month of March ; and though he is very punctual in this, he don’t like anticipating ; therefore, 
till next March, I shall not be able to comply with your desire. Yet, in the mean time, you will 
be so good as to write to your sisters to name some person in Dublin, who is authorized to receive 
the money for them, because there being no bankers in the country towns, my Brother might 
find the same dificulty to send it to Castlebar that you did to remit it to Ireland; and then, to 
avoid all mistakes, send me the address as plain and sure as possible. 500 florins, at 8 flor. 30 xrs 
per pound, Irish, makes £58 15s., which is necessary for you to know in order to inform your 
friends of it. 

“‘ The easiest way of reimbursing me is, when you hear from them or from me, that the money 
has been paid in Ireland, to get the amount paid by your agent in Vienna, to Mons. Skeyde, agent 
de guerre, 4 Vienne, for my account, advising me at the same time of it. I shall also wait un ti 


© Dear cousin.—They were both descended from the cele- _ insurrection of 1641. O’Donnell in the fifth degree.— Vide 
brated Rory O’More, the idol of the Irish people during the supra. ; 


APPENDIX. 2409 


you have got an answer from your sisters, in order to be able to give my brother proper directions 
in regard to this payment. 

‘« Tf Siegenthal don’t come, I have a fair chance of being made Colonel; but it all depends upon 
chance, which I, with Christian patience and resignation, wait for. Our regiment makes part of a 
Corps, sent under Lt. Gen. Srolich, to reestablish order in this country, and to scour the Pope’s 
dominions ; but Rome, Ancona, and Civita Vecchia, are still in the hands of the French ; yet we 
hope they will soon surrender. You know by this, that Suwarrow is gone, with all his Russians, 
to Switzerland ; and Melas, I fear, is not strong enough to act offensively here. I hope the Eng- 
lish diversion will be of great use tous. In London there has been 100 guineas to 5 bet, that we 
shall have a general peace this winter. I am not of that opinion. I and all those who were at the 
Siege of Mantua have been attacked with violent agues. We lost a good many men by its con- 
sequences. I am only now recovering, and have my four servants confined to their beds with it. 
Farewell, my Dear, believe me most sincerely, 

“Your affectionate Kinsman and humble Servant, 
‘* Endorsed “—__._ Q” Ferra, 

Recu le 18 X**.” 


In 1803 we find Colonel O’Donel promoted to the rank of General, and on the revival of the 
war, that his nephew, after the manner of his fathers, preferred “‘ soldiership,” with all its toils, 
to any other profession. 

“ Balyna, Clonard, 24th Feb., 1803. 

** Dear Mapam,—lI received your letter of the 11th January, and in the melancholy situation 
I have been in these six weeks past, with my eldest sister dying, I must candidly acknowledge I 
quite forgot to answer it. My Brother has been here since the 15th October, and leaves us on 
Tuesday next, to embark in three or four days after on his route to Vienna. General O’Donel is 
now stationed at Lembergh in Poland, where he has a command. He wrote to my Brother above 
a year ago, desiring him not to pay any more money to his sisters, as he expected his nephew, on 
whose education and advancement he proposed laying out the money he heretofore remitted them. 
I remain, dear Madam, 

“Your faithful humble Servant, 
“To Mrs. Mary O’Donel, 35, North ** Amp. O’FERRALL. 

Gt. George’s-street, Dublin.” 


But the intentions of the one and the wishes of the other were destined not to be fulfilled, for 
on his way to his uncle, the nephew, on reaching Hamburgh, was detained for several months a 
prisoner ; at the end of which period he, together with several other British subjects, was sent 
back toEngland; and the year following his return the news of General O’Donel’s death, he having 
been mortally wounded at the battle of Neresheim, put an end to any further views of his entering 
the Austrian service. 


f O’Perrall,—Christian name illegible. 
14D 


2410 APPENDIX. 


“‘ Clonard, 27th Aug., 1806. 
«Dear Mapam,—I have to request you will have the goodness to inform me who is the heir 
at law of your brother-in-law, the late General Charles O’Donel, and to favour me with his or her 
address. I have the honour to be, dear Madam, 
“Your most obedient and very humble Servant, 
‘To Mrs. M. O’Donel, 35, Great « Amp. O’ FERRALL.”’ 
George’s-st. North, Dublin.” 
“* Ballyna, Clonard, 4th Sept., 1806. 
‘Dear Mapam,—I am favoured with your’s of the 1st Instant, and have to inform you that 
your brother-in-law died intestate, and that his next heir should write to His Excellency Count 
O’Donel8, who will be able to let him know the situation of his affairs, and the value of the effects 
he left, which, as he was equipped as a General in campaign, cannot be inconsiderable. I remain, 
dear Madam, 
‘Your most obedient and very humble Servant, 
“To Mrs. M. O’Donel.” ‘¢ Amp. O’FERRALL. 


«“ P, §.—Count O’Donel’s address : 

«* A’, S. E. Monsieur Le Comte O’Donel, Conseiller 
intime et Chambellan de S. M. Imp’. R‘. Apos- 
tolique 4 Leopol en Gallicie.” 


As he died without issue and unmarried, his heirs were of course his sisters and his nephew ; 
but, as appears by the annexed translation of the legal document, or power of attorney, referred to 
in the following letter, the last was also heir to his title, according to the law of Germany : 


‘“* Ballyna, 8th October, 1806. 

‘“¢ Dear Mapam,—I have the pleasure of sending you the enclosed, which will put you under 
the necessity of looking out for a person versed in the German language to copy it off, and then 
you will please to conform yourself to the instructions at the foot of it. I remain, dear Madam, 

‘‘ Your most obedient, humble Servant, 
“To Mrs. M. O’Donel, 35, North ‘© AmB. O’FERRALL. 
Gt. George’s-st., Dublin.” 


‘“‘ For the well-born Herr Joseph Von Skeyde, chief war agent in Vienna, by which the same, 
in best form of law, is hereby empowered by us, the declared legitimate heirs at law of our Herr 
brother and respected uncle, Herr Major General Charles Count O’Donel, deceased from wounds 
on the 16th October, 1805, to deliver in name and lieu of us the declaration of inheritance to the 
inheritance left by the said Charles Count O’Donel, cum beneficio legis e inventaris, before a wor- 
shipful judicio delegato militari mixto in Austria, or where else it may be requisite to transact all oral 
as well as written business, to take up the inheritance, to acquit the same, to give out Reversales, 


5 Count O’ Donel.—Joseph Count O’Donnell (Henry’s eldest son), Minister of Finance to Francis I. 


APPENDIX. 941] 


and to take measures for all that it would be incumbent on ourselves to do: which things we not 
only do and promise to indemnify him, the said Herr, chief war agent, but also impart to him the 
further power that in case of prevention, and if he in this case for any reason be unable to take 
upon himself these things, that he be authorized to substitute in lieu of himself any other 
Lawyer he please. 

‘“‘ Further, to testify this deed, have we signed this with our hands, and made the impressions 
of our armorial seals : 


S a nt Sisters of Intestate. 


“© (Seal) JosepH Count O’DonEL, 
The Nephew of Intestate. 
“« Or, instead thereof, if requisite : 
““N.N. legally declared Guardian of the Minor, 
Herr Graff [i. e. Count | Joseph O’Donel.” 
The attestation ran as follows : 


“‘ Notum facimus atque testamur tenore presentium, hoc mandatum procuratorium ab here- 
dibus legitimis defuncti Caesareo Regii Generalis vigiliarum Praefecti Domini Comitis Caroli 
O’Donel coram nobis personaliter constitutis, nempe ejusdem sororibus atque nepote ex fratre 
Domino Josepho Comite O’Donel (vel tutore Domini Comitis Josephi O’Donel), manu sigilloque 
propriis munitum fuisse. 

* Datum, &c.” 


X. JosrpH O’Donet (eldest son of Manus as above) was born in or about the year 1751. As 
soon as he was of sufficient age to enter the army, he was sent out to Spain, to his uncle, Joseph, 
then a most distinguished officer in the service of Charles IIJ., and where, of course, he was sure 
of promotion. In 1776 he had attained the rank of captain, when the fatal termination to a duel, 
in which he was a principal, involved him in those troubles to which his brother, Charles, refers 
in a letter already quoted (p. 2406). The rank of his adversary was sufficiently exalted to make 
it necessary for him to quit Spain. He returned to Ireland in the end of that year. In 1779 he 
married Mary, daughter of Dominick Mac Donnell, Esq., of Massbrook, in the county of Mayo 
(she died 1831), whose sister, Bridget, married Captain Lewis O’Donel of Newcastle, in the same 
county (vide ante, p. 2396). In 1781 he sailed for the West Indies, to join his brother, Hugh, at 
Vera Cruz, from which he wrote a letter, still preserved, to his young wife in Castlebar, and where 
he died soon after from the effects of climate. He left behind in Ireland an only son, 

XI. JosepH Manus O’Donet of Castlebar, in the county of Mayo, who was born in 1780. Desi- 
rous to enter a foreign service, arrangements were made with his uncle, General Charles Count 
O’Donel, that he should enter the Austrian service under him; but it was not till 1803 that he 
started for Germany. The result has been already stated. On his return to this country he became 
a lawyer, and, strange to say, neglected to look after the money and the title of his uncle, to both 
which he was the true heir. He married Margaret, daughter of the late Randal Mac Donnell, 
Esq., of Ballycastle, in the same county. He died in August, 1834, aged 54, and is buried in 

14D 2 


2412 APPENDIX. 


the family vault at Straid Abbey, leaving issue one daughter, Mary, who died unmarried, 
August, 1843, aged 34; and three sons: 

XII. Manus Lewis O’DongEt, Esq., of Castlebar, born 1812, the present representative of Con 
Oge, the brother of Sir Niall Garv, and the true heir of General Charles O’Donel, who was slain 
at Neresheim in 1805; 2. Charles Joseph O’Donel, Esq., Barrister at law, born 1818; and 3. 
Lewis, born in 1824. 

THE O’DONNELS OF SPAIN. 

It is to the Editor a subject of deep regret that he has been unable to procure as full and 
authentic details of the modern history of this family, as might enable him to enter as fully into 
the subject as the position of that family and its historic celebrity would demand. During the 
last forty years of almost incessant war in the Peninsula, few names have more frequently than 
their’s been mixed up with some of the brightest as well as some of the most melancholy events of 
that period; and perhaps few families in Spain have suffered more from the evils attendant upon 
civil war. The following notices are brief, but, as far as the Editor can ascertain, they are strictly 
correct. 

IX. Josern O’DonneEL, second son of Charles, or Calvagh Duy, was born about the year 1725, 
and at a suitable age entered the Spanish service. In the army of Spain the O’Donnells were as 
sure of rank and promotion as the nobles of Castile ; for since the time when Hugh Roe was 
received with regal ceremony in the mountains of Asturias, and entombed with regal pomp in the 
church of Valladolid, there was sure to be found, in the Court of Spain, and high in the favour of 
its Sovereigns, some one of the tribe of the great Trish chieftain. He is described in the Austrian pe- 
digree (which is dated 1767), as ‘“‘ Josephus (filius Caroli, filii Hugonis O’Donell et Margarithe 
O’Neill) in servitio Hispanico Capitaneus.”” What the particulars of his career were, the Editor 
has been unable to learn ; for although it is evident from the letter of his nephew, General Charles 
O’Donel (quoted supra, p. 2406), that a constant correspondence existed between him and his rela- 
tions in Ireland and Germany, there appears to be no trace of it now remaining. It is said that he 
attained to the very highest rank in the army, and that he intermarried into one of the proudest 
families in Spain; however that may be, it is certain that he left four sons, who, when the British 
army landed in the Peninsula, in 1807, held high commissions in the Spanish service, and were 
much distinguished during the war. Their names were: 1. Henry; 2. Charles; 3. Joseph; and 
4, Alexander. 

X. Don Henry, Conde d’Abisbal, was born in or about the year 1770; for he was yet a 
child when his cousin, Joseph, returned to Ireland in 1776". On the invasion of Spain by the 
French, he was a general officer, and had a command in the eastern provinces. At the famous 
siege of Gerona, in 1809, he cooperated with Blake in trying to raise the siege ; and when it was 
converted into a blockade, and when, “amid famine and pestilence, the inhabitants, with the 
highest, rarest, and noblest description of courage, still remained unshaken, hoping the best, yet 
prepared to brave the worst,—looking for succour, but determined on resistance,—relief arrived. 


h In 1776.—This would appear from an anecdote that wife of the first Sir Neal), of the dress of his little Spanish 
states, that, from a description given by Captain Joseph — cousins, she had her twin sons, Neal and Connell, clad in a 
O’Donrel, on his return to Ireland, to Lady O’Donel (the — similar costume. 


APPENDIX. 2413 


General O’Donnel, with one hundred and sixty mules loaded with provisions, succeeded, on the 
side of Bispal, in breaking through the enemy, and reaching the town. The same officer, by a 
bold and skilful maneuvre, subsequently succeeded in passing the besieging army, and retreating 
with his troops’. The force he selected for this duty was composed of the ‘‘ Ultonia” regiment. 
In February, 1810, he was appointed to the chief command in Catalonia, where he created an 
army, and by his skill and courage almost rescued the province from the French : 

‘“¢ The skilful and daring operations in which he had successfully engaged had acquired for him 
the confidence of the people. Augerau had supposed that little more remained, after the reduction 
of Gerona, than to complete and rivet the subjection of the province. In this he was mistaken. 
A combat took place in the neighbourhood of Vich, between a body of Spaniards, under O’Donnel, 
and the division of General Souham. The former bore themselves with courage, and assailed the 
enemy with a steadiness and resolution to which they were unaccustomed. Never, by the confes- 
sion of their own officers, was the courage of the French army more severely tested than in this 
action. O’Donnel, however, at length judged it prudent to retire, leaving the enemy in possession 
of the field. Souham, imagining the Spaniards had fled from fear, prepared to pursue. O’Donnel 
then commenced a series of skilful maneuvres, by which, having led his enemy forward, he suc- 
ceeded in achieving several brilliant and important successes. The French losses in these engage- 
ments were very heavy ; and they were still further aggravated by desertions from the foreign 
troops, who went over to the enemy in considerable numbers. These results were far from satis- 
factory to Napoleon. Marshal Augerau had boasted, in his despatches, that the Ampurdau was 
completely subdued ; but the comment of succeeding facts on this assertion had not been favourable 
to its credit with the Emperor, and Augerau was superseded by Marshal Mac Donald*.” 

So precarious was the tenure by which, in a short time, the French army maintained its hold 
in Catalonia, that in July, the same year, Marshal Mac Donald was compelled to array his whole 
force for the escort of a convoy : 

‘** While Mac Donald was engrossed in this service, O’Donnel was not inactive. He attacked 
the French force near Granollers with great impetuosity, and succeeded in gaining an advantage, 
which would have been decisive, had the Somatenes, who received orders to attack the enemy in 
rear in the heat of the engagement, obeyed their instructions. As it was, the convoy succeeded, 
but with difhiculty, in reaching Barcelona!” 

On the 10th of September he marched on Mataro, with the intention of attacking the position 
of Mac Donald at Cervera ; and on the 14th “ succeeded, by a brilliant manceuvre, in surprising 
the brigade of General Schwartz, which occupied Bisbal and the neighbouring villages. The 
French made a gallant, though vain, resistance. Not a man escaped ; all who did not fall by the 
sword were made prisoners, and Schwartz himself was in the number of the latter. This was the 
last achievement of O’Donnel in Catalonia. He received a wound in the engagement which made 
it necessary he should resign the command ; and the Marquis of Campoverde was appointed his 
successor. The success of Bisbal diffused energy and spirit throughout the whole population of 


the province™.” 


'Retreating with his troops.—Napier’s History of the k Tb. vol. ii. p. 303. ' Th, vol. iii. p. 12. 
Penin. War; and Annals of the Penin. War, vol. ii. p. 272. m Jb. vol. iii. p. 14. 


2414 APPENDIX. 


For this he was created the Conde d’Abisbal. In 1812 he was named a member of the Regency ; 
but towards the close of the war rejoined the army, and commanded at the capture of Pancorvo. 
On the return of Ferdinand VII. his full rank was confirmed, and fresh honours bestowed on him. 
After holding the command of the army of the Bidoassa, he was placed at the head of the troops 
destined for the expedition against South America, who demanded to be led by him, and no other. 
In the subsequent meeting of the force at Cadiz, it was alleged by his enemies that he acted an 
equivocal part, by first siding with the mutineers, and afterwards betraying them ; but no evi- 
dence appears to establish or even support this. It is highly probable, however, that he was 
connected with the Constitutional party in 1819. After the Restoration, the Conde d’Abisbal 
retired to France, and died at Montpelier, May 17, 1834. He had issue one son: 

1a Leopold, Conde d’Abisbal, in the late civil war, a Christino and a Colonel in the Queen’s 
service. In the battle of Alsazua he was taken prisoner ; and the following day, at Echerri- 
Aranaz, he was taken out and shot in cold blood, by orders of Zumalacarragui. He died without 
issue. The title is extinct. 

2. Don Carlos O’Donnel, the second son, was also a General in the Peninsular war, or, as it is . 
called in Spain, the war of Independence. He was a staunch Royalist. At the battle of Mur- 
viedro, the 25th October, 1811, he commanded the centre of the Spanish army : 

“ By an oversight of Blake, the left wing’was so widely detached, that the centre was incon- 
siderately weakened. Suchet immediately took advantage of this error, and directed a powerful 
attack on the Spanish centre, in order to isolate the wings. In this point the Spaniards fought 
with desperate bravery, and, though at first forced to retire, were again rallied by their leader, 
and drove back the enemy with signal courage. Receiving, however, no support from the wings, 
the centre was obliged at length to give way; but by a skilful disposition of cavalry, which con- 
tinued to shew front to the enemy, the infantry retired in perfect order™.” 

At the peace he was made Captain-General of Old Castile. During the late war he was a 
Carlist. He had four sons,—three Carlists, and one Christino: 1. The eldest, Pepe, accompanied 
Don Carlos to Portugal, and passed through England, and afterwards organized the Carlist cavalry. 
He was killed while pursuing a party of Carbineers into Pampeluna. 2. The second, a Carlist, was 
made prisoner and confined in Barcelona, whence he was taken out and barbarously massacred by 
the populace. (Charles O’ Donnel, the father, is believed to have died of a broken heart on hearing 
the fate of his two sons.) 3. The third joined Don Carlos in Guipuscoa, August, 1836. 4. The 
fourth, Don Leopold, a Christino, was one of the most conspicuous Generals during the late war. 
He commanded the army of the north, while the British Legion was in Spain, and was prominently 
engaged in the principal operations of the war, in which he was wounded more than once. On the 
final success of the Queen’s forces he was appointed Captain-General of Cuba, one of the highest 
offices under the Crown (an appointment he still holds), and received the title of Count de Lucena. 

3. Don José O’Donnell, the third son, was also a General and a Royalist. In the battle of Cas- 
talla in 1812, between the French and allies, he commanded the Spanish army. In the war of the 
Constitution in 1820, he commanded the lines of San Roquet, and attacked Riego in Andalusia. 
On the success of the Constitutionalists he retired into private life. 


" Annals of the Peninsular War, vol. iii. p. 147. 


APPENDIX. 9415 


4. Alexander, the fourth and youngest son, was the only one of his family who did not join 
the patriot side in the war of Independence. He joined the French, and commanded a Spanish 
regiment, to which Joseph Buonaparte gave his own name. Before the conclusion of the war, he 
was sent to take the command of a regiment in the unfortunate expedition to Russia. He was 
taken prisoner there; and the Emperor Alexander, having ordered all the Spaniards formerly 
belonging to the French army to be collected into one corps, which by special permission assumed 
his name, the command was conferred upon Colonel Alexander O’Donnel, and he sailed with his 
regiment for Spain. This distinction saved him, and his rank was confirmed. He has, or had, 
two sons (Christinos), Pepe and Emilio, both officers, in 1839, in the Urban Guards at Seville. 


THE O’DONELLS OF AUSTRIA. 

This illustrious family, distinguished both in the field and cabinet, are descended from— 

IX. Henry O’DoneE Lt, the third son of Charles Duy, son of Hugh O’Donnell, and Margaret 
O’Neill®?. He was born about the year 1729. At an early age he entered the Austrian service, 
and rose rapidly to distinction. He is said to have been one of the handsomest men in the Austrian 
army, and an especial favourite with the Empress ; both which accounts seem not improbable, 
since we find that in the year 1754, while he was yet scarcely six-and-twenty, he received in mar- 
riage a cousin of the Empress, a princess of the illustrious House of Cantacuzeno, descendants of 
John Cantacuzenus, the Byzantine emperor and historian, A. D. 1246. No event can display in a 
more striking light than this marriage the estimation in which the great Irish families, when driven 
into exile, were held on the Continent, when we thus see ‘“‘the greatest and proudest Queen of 
Europe,” and in a Court that was, and is still, proverbially aristocratic, bestowing the hand of her 
own kinswoman on a young soldier, whose only fortune were his sword and his pedigree. In 1767 
(the date of the Austrian O’Donell Genealogy quoted above), he was ‘“‘ Camerarius Czsarei ordinis 
milit. Marie Therese,” and Colonel of a corps of cuirassiers, which from him was called ‘“* The 
O’Donell Regiment?;” a name by which, the Editor believes, it is still distinguished. Some time 
after his marriage, he wrote to his brother, Manus, to Ireland, to have whichever of his sons he 
intended sending to Austria carefully educated in the Irish language, that he might instruct his 
own children in the language of their ancestors ; a circumstance which seems to corroborate 
the anecdote related in note, p. 2405. General John O’Donel thus speaks of his influence at Court: 

““ , . . As I told you here, you and your father should employ cousin Harry ; and if he can 
get Lewis an agreement in the regiment he commands, it would be so much the better, for reasons 
known to you. Harry is very capable of bringing many things to bear that others cannot. He 
is particularly well with her Majesty. The last time he saw her, she gave him a very fine present 


of jewels for his wife, saying, ‘as she would never wear any more herself, she divided them among 
her children, and kept those for his wife.’ ” 


° Antg, p. 2404. troops sent to cooperate with the Duke of York and the Earl 
» “ The O’ Donell Regiment.”—In 1773 it wascommanded _ of Moira, in the expedition to Holland, in 1794. It was 
by Manus O’Donel (afterwards General), as appears by the then commanded by Henry O’Donell’s nephew, General 
superscription of a letter to him (vide ante, p.2394). ‘The Charles O’Donell, already mentioned. 
O’Donell Regiment” afterwards formed a portion of the 4 There is no date of year to this letter; bat this fact 


2416 APPENDIX. 


He subsequently attained the rank of Lieutenant-General, and was made Count, with the title 
of ‘Graf O’Donell von Tyrconell.” He left issue four sons: 1. Joseph; 2. John ; 3. Charles; 
and 4. Henry; the three last of whom died in the Austrian service, and without issue; and one 
daughter, who married Count Vansovich, a Polish noble'. 

X. JosErH Count O’DonELL, born 1755, was educated for a diplomatic career. While pur- 
suing his studies, he became acquainted with his cousin, Therese, the daughter of Count John 
O’Donel’ of the Larkfield family, and it appears they became mutually attached to each other, to 
the great derangement of her father’s plans for her establishment; for she was affianced at the 
time to General Manus O’Donel, then on leave of absence in Ireland, and for whom her father 
seems to have entertained the sincerest friendship. The Editor has already given, in a previous 
part of this Appendix, some letters from the same correspondent by whom the following were 
written; but these he reserved to place in a position more appropriate to the subject to which they 
relate. Neither letter bears the date of the year in which it was written, but from the political 
event referred to in the second, namely, the recent accession of Polish territory, the Editor would 
ascribe its date to 1772, as, on the 5th of August in that year, by the treaty of Petersburgh, 
Gallicia and Lodomiria were ceded to Austria; and from the same letter, it is evident that the 
first was written the preceding June. ‘They also appear, from the allusion to the Court, to have 
been written from Vienna. Taking this date for granted, we cannot be surprised that the veteran 
soldier was beaten from the field by the young diplomatist, since the former must have been close 
on his sixtieth year‘ (that is, nearly as old as her father), while the latter was in his eighteenth. 


“27th June.” [ Vienna, 1772.—Ep. ] 

** My pear Covsinx,—The pleasure I had in receiving your last letter, without date’, would 
certainly have engaged me to answer you immediately, were I not detained for some time by a 
little contradiction I found myself in with her Majesty about the time of your arrival here. Yowll 
remember I informed you my desire of having Therese transferred to a convent of this town, but 
would wait your answer, to know when you intended to be here, before I would put myself in her 
Majesty’s way, imagining she would ask me about you, which I did till the end of April. Then 
the gentlewoman she sent in the beginning to bring my daughter to Presbourg, let me know that 
her Majesty was to go in a couple of days to that town; and, as she would probably see Therese, 
thought it was proper I should shew myself at Court, believing the Empress would fain speak to 
me. Accordingly I went to Court, and found by the Chambellan de Service, that her Majesty said, 
if I came there, he should tell me to wait. After she had dispatched some ministers, I was called 
for. Her first words were to ask for you with a sort of amazement that made me imagine she 
might have heard of a rumour spread here a considerable time before, of your being marryed in 
Ireland ; yet as she did not directly mention it, and that I myself gave no credit to it, I did not 
seem to understand anything of the kind, but took occasion to enlarge a little on your zeal for her 


shews it was subsequent to and about 1765, the year of the S Ante, p. 2398. a 

Emperor’s death; after which, it is said, the Queen sunk ' His 60th year.—He died 1793, aged eighty years.— 

into deep melancholy. Thus confirming the date already as- See his epitaph, p. 2396, supra. 

signed to it, 1766. « Without date.—A strange reproach from the writer of 
r Austrian Pedigree, these letters, who gives only the day of the month himself. 


APPENDIX. 2417 


service, your candour and good nature for me and my children ; assured her that you would be 
here at farthest about the middle of Summer ; and that, if her Majesty approved of it, I would be 
desirous, in the mean time, to transfer my daughter to a convent of this town, which she not only 
approved, but said she was very glad I found such a good partie for my child: ‘ qui lui servirait 
méme de Pere*.’ I told her I thought myself happy to know her so well established*. ‘ Oui, dit 
Elle, est ce qwil apporte bien bien de quoi avec ?? I said you were well in your affairs, that I did 
not know how much you would bring along with you at present, but knew your desire was to 
take all you had out of that country, provided you could find means to bring it to bear, which I 
feared would be very difficult. Then she asked me if I was sure you would come. I said I was 
very sure. ‘Kh bien, dit Elle, je vais a Presbourg demain, si vous avez la patience d’attendre mon 
retour et que vous voulez me confier votre fille, je vous la s’amenerai,’ which she did, and, giving her a 
dinner at Shonbrun, sent her in the afternoon to the Convent of St. Laurent, where she awaits 
your arrival. Some days after I received your good-natured letter; but as your stay is longer 
than I had foreseen, and contrary to the assurances I gave her Majesty, I went to Princess Ester- 
hazy, and pray’d her to excuse me to her Majesty, and inform her of the circumstances ; which 
she took upon her. I told this lady your intention was to come last year, but that I advised you 
myself not to derange or be detrimental to your affairs by coming so soon, but should rather wait 
till all was on a proper footing. She performed the commission, but somewhat slow, so that ’tis 
only a few days since she told me, that she informed her Majesty of all those particulars; that her 
Majesty was satisfied, saying, she knew I would not tell her anything but what was truth; and 
that you did very well to settle your affairs, particularly as you took a wife ; and laughed at my 
concern. In short, this is what hindered me from expressing immediately to you the real satis- 
faction your letter gave me. Therese and I agree with all our hearts to the marriage articles. 
Her conduct is so good that I find every comfort in her I could wish. She will be a comfort to 
you. She is yours’,—you are her’s; and God Almighty bless you both. She and I am truly 
acknowledging for your memory of her and Hugo. It is a proof of your good nature; but we 
hope and pray God will preserve your life for our greater comfort. My dear Manus, I am now at 
the end of the 60th year of my age, my head and my health in general weakening daily ; still I 
hope God will spare my life to see you and Therese happy together. Come, my Dear, as soon as 
you possibly can, without neglecting your affairs. Write immediately to Therese or tome. Hugo 


joins in our embraces to you, and we are, with heart and hand, 
** Your own for ever, 


‘© O’DOoNEL. 
“‘O’Ferral” is well, and Brochanzer, whom I saw three days agoe, says everything good of him. 
My sincere friendship to O’More? and my Mother-in-law, when you see them. 
“To the Honourable Count Magnus O’Donel, Major- 
General in their Imp! Majesties’ Service; at New- 
castle, near Castle-Barre, Ireland.” 


w De Pere.—The Empress was a wit. y Vide ante, p. 2407. 

x Well established.—General Manus was very wealthy; z Q’More—Probably Manus O’Donell’s grandfather, or 
his father, Charles Roe, of Newcastle, having acquired a uncle. His mother was Catherine O’Moore of Ballina, ia 
large fortune. the county of Kildare. 


14 £ 


2418 APPENDIX. 


Here we have in real life some of the elements of a first-rate story :—a father, an old warrior, 
betrothing his (of course blooming and beautiful) daughter to his friend and comrade in arms, not 
much younger than himself, and taking for granted, because the latter is excessively acceptable to 
himself, he must be equally agreeable to the fair fiancée ; an Empress for a confidant, evidently 
not over well inclined to the match, the young lady being somewhat of a protegé, and perhaps 
other views entertained for her ; an illustrious Princess as peace-maker ; a convent for a bower ; 
and, strangest of all, the lovely heroine agreeing to the arrangement “ with all her heart.” Cer- 
tainly the last incident, though it be the most strange, seems to make the whole thing common- 
place enough ; and if the assurance were from herself, we might despair of any result sufficiently 
worthy of such promising materials; but since it happens that young ladies in convents are rarely 
consulted in matters of the kind by their more experienced parents (being supposed not to have 
any wish pro or con upon the subject), it is not only possible, but very probable, that Mademoiselle, 
though aware of the engagement, might have had but little sympathy in all the tender embraces 
so warmly transmitted in her name. Nor would we, in coming to that conclusion, be much mis- 
taken. ‘ L’homme propose, dieu dispose.” Fathers will make matches to please themselves, and 
daughters will spoil them for an equally good reason. Here is the dénouement : 


“ Xbre, the 25th.” [ Vienna, 1772.—Ep. | 

“Tt will appear surprising to you, my dear Manus, to be so long without any answer to your 
last letter of y° 11th Xbre, which the confusion and trouble of mind I have been in this long time 
past has occasioned. However, friendship and sincerity do not permit me to conceal any longer 
from you a circumstance that you seem’d to foresee and hint in y* letters to me, but that I must 
own that I did not apprehend, which shews that you are a better judge of the female kind than I. 
Therese has broke thro’ the measures you were so kind to combine with me for her establishment 
by declaring she would chuse rather to remain single all her life than to marry any other than 
Harry’s eldest son. This young man was with me in my house the whole last winter, frequenting 
the Chancellerie to make himself fit for employment in that part of Poland our Court has acquired 
of late. He was still with me when I got my daughter transferred to a convent of this town, as I 
was expecting your arrival in June or July following ; but, soon after her arrival, you informed 
me of your longer stay in that country. These two young people saw one another sometimes in 
my house, when I had her to dinner now and then. They took a mutual liking to each other, 
without letting me know it other than by their looks and countenances, which I observed, and, 
questioning the girl, her confusion and tears explained her sentiments. At last she owned she had 
a great inclination for him, but, knowing my engagements with you, and how intent I was upon 
it, her intention was to overcome, if possible, her inclinations, and sacrifice them and herself rather 
than displease or disobey me, &c. I told her there was no question of such efforts in regard to 
you or me; that you would be as far from taking her against her will as I would be from impos- 
ing her on you, if I found or thought she had not for you all the sentiments you deserved. She 
said, she was and ever would be very acknowledging of your good-natured intentions for her; but 
that if she got leave to follow her choice, it would be never to marry if she could not get Monsieur 


Peppi*. I told her, it never was my desire to compel her wishes in that respect; but that she 


® Peppi.—-Peppi or Pepe, the short familiar name for Joseph, from the Italian Giuseppe. 


APPENDIX. 2419 


would do well to put such notions out of her head, whereas she could not expect to get that 
young man; that I had no fortune to give her, and that his father had two or three matches in 
view for him already on his arrival in Poland ; that she should dine no more with me till he was 
off, remain in her convent, set her mind at rest, and let me know her thoughts hereafter. I 
gave him to understand my displeasure, without entering into any particulars. He took other 
lodgings, but attempted several times to come to an explanation, which I always avoided, till about 
a couple of days before his setting off for Poland, he surprised me in my room, and with a trans- 
port of tenderness threw himself in my arms, begging I should forgive him the sentiments he 
could not hinder himself to conceive for my daughter; that he was persuaded you would have 
nothing against it ; and beseeching I would write to his father, who, though he had other parties 
in view for him, would prefer his happiness, &e. ce. I told him, tho’ I knew you would be as far 
from taking her (knowing she preferred another) as I would be from giving, or advising you to 
take her, yet it was not my business to write to his father, nor would I ever any more write 
about her to any one after you. Now I know not as yet what Harry will or can do. Therese 
persists in her sentiments, and refused since his departure a very advantageous proposal made me 
for her by a nobleman, whose birth and fortune would establish her spelendidly, without pretend- 
ing to a farthing from me while I lived; but she will hear of no one but Monsieur Peppi. I must 
own I had a great reluctance to write to you on this subject, and waited hitherto to see what turn 
her mind would take after his departure ; but finding she persists, and reflecting it may be of 
consequence to you to be informed of it, as well in regard to the settling your affairs, or perhaps 
other views of matrimony you might have in that country, I now acquaint you of all, with the 
same sincerity I had recommended her to you, as long as I thought her heart corresponded with 
mine, and that she would be a suitable partner for you, without which, as I told you often before, 
the views of establishing my child would never engage me to undertake imposing on any one, much 
less on so dear a friend as you, and hope this female flirt will not alter your friendship for me, as 
it rather augments mine for you. 

‘‘] hope you will soon write to me, and send me your commands, if any you have hereabouts. 
My children join with me in best wishes for your prosperity in all respects ; and be assured that 
no one can be with more truth and affection than I, my dearest Cousin, 


‘* Your faithful friend, kinsman, and servant, 
4 *¢ O’DoneEL.” 


As the conclusion of this letter would indicate, so was the event. Joseph O’Donell is recorded 
in their pedigree as having married Therese, the daughter of General Count John O’Donell, and by 
whom he had issue one son, Maurice (of whom presently). His wife dying, he subsequently married 
Josephine of Geisruch (a noble Styrian family, of which the late Cardinal Archbishop of Milan was 
also a member), by whom he had issue one son and two daughters (all living): Count Henry, born 
12th June, 1804, Imperial Chamberlain and Councillor of State in the Government of Trieste; 2. the 
Countess Eveline, born 23rd December, 1805; and 3. the Countess Adela, born 3rd February, 1807, 
and married 21st December, 1829, to Charles Count Sturgk. Count O’Donell was eminently suc- 
cessful in his diplomatic career. In 1805 he was Chamberlain of the Palace and Privy Councillor, and 
was afterwards Minister of Finance to the Emperor Francis I. He was succeeded by his eldest son: 

1452 


2420 , APPENDIX. 


XI. Maurice Count O’DonELL, a General in the Austrian service, and (&. &. Hamm. und 
HFA), married, 6th November, 1811, Christine de Ligne, daughter of Prince Charles de Ligne; 
she was born January 4, 1788. He died December 1, 1843, leaving issue two sons and a daughter: . 

1. Maximilian, Count O’Donell of Tyrconnell, born 29th October, 1812. 

2. Count Maurice, born 6th June, 1815. Married 18th July, 1844, Helen, Princess of Can- 
tacuzeno, born 18th September, 1819. She died in the second year of her marriage, leaving issue 
one son, Henry Charles George Joseph, born 2nd July, 1845. 

3. The Countess Euphemia, born 13th March, 1823. 

In the German Peerage of the Almanac de Gotha, the present family are given as follows : 


“ @M Monell. 
{ Rath. Befterreich. ] 


“A, (Maximilian Barl Lamoral Graf ©’ Bonell bon Tyreonell, geb. 29 Oct. 1812, kk. Mittmeister bet Bar. 
Mengen Cuir. Kr. 4. 





Getchwister. 
“1. (Maria Karl Hohann, ged. 6 Funi, 1815, oerm. 18. Juli, 1844. mit. Belene qed. fFurstin Wantakujeno. 
qeb. 18 Sept. 1819. Grohn: Heinrich Karl Georg Joseph, geb. 2 Juli, 1845, 
“9, Euphemia, ged. 13. starz. 1823. 
SAutter. 


“ Grafin Christine geb. ve Ligne, T. wes t fFursten Karl Ve Ligne, qed. 4 Januar, 1788, berm. 6. Mov. 1811. 
mit Moris Grafen O'Bonell (R. k. Kamm, und F WL), wellen Mite feit 1 Dec. 1843. 





“B, Graf Heinrich. geb. 12 Juni, 1804, k. k. Kamm. und GBofrath beim Evubemium zu Tricst. 
Schmeftern. 

“1. Ebeling, geb. 23 Dec. 1805. 

“2. Apelheid, qeb. 3 febr. 1807, CtlrB., perm. 21 Dec. 1829, mit. Karl Grrafen Sturgk.” 

That the reader may see at a glance how the different families in Ireland, Spain, and Austria, 
descended from Charles or Calvagh Duv (the son of Hugh, son of Calvagh Roe, son of Manus, son 
of Con Oge, the brother of Niall Garv, the last inaugurated O’ Donnell), stand related to each other, 
the following genealogical table is subjoined : 


1. Calvagh Duv or Black Charles O’Donel, m. Mary, 
d. of Col. Manus O’Donel of Newport. 
t 








| Bs ; Tal 
2. Manus. 2.73 oeentt from 2. Henry, from 
| =a whom the whom the 
3. Joseph, Capt. Spa- 3. General Charles, O’ Donnels O’Donnells 
nish service. killed at Neres- of Spain. of Austria. 
heim in 1805. See ! 
4, Joseph. } ‘ 3. Joseph Count 
3. Henry Conde 3. Charles. O’Donell. 


| 
5. Manus O’Donel, de Abispal. 
Esq. of Castlebar, 
now the represen- 


| 
4, Leopold Count 


I 
| - 
4. Leopold Conde de Lucena, Ge- * Maurice Count 


tative of Con Oge, A et ea Pia Christina, d. of 
the brother of Sir ee i ‘ x aac Prince Charles 
Niall Garv, Baron pet de Ligne. 


of Lifford. 5. Maximilian Count 


O’ Donell of Tircon- 
nell, now living. 


APPENDIX. 2421 


PEDIGREE OF O’DOHERTY. 


Tus family was the most powerful of the Kinel-Connell next after the O’Donnells ; and though 
they remain in respectable circumstances, and exceedingly numerous, their pedigree has been 
neglected. The Editor has not been able to continue the line of the chiefs of this family beyond 
Sir Cahir, who was slain in 1608; but he is satisfied there are collateral branches whose pedigrees 
could be proved by the aid of local tradition and recorded documents. The following line was 
copied by the Editor from the dictation of a fine old man named John O’Doherty, at Bree, in the 
parish of Cloonca, barony of Inishowen, and county of Donegal, in August, 1835, when this John 
was in the eightieth year of his age. He said that it was the constant tradition in the country that 
Conor-an-einigh, or the hospitable O’Doherty, was the first of the name who became full Chief of 
Inishowen, and that from him he was the twelfth in descent. The names of the generations were 
well known and written in his grandfather’s time, and were as follows: 


1. Conor-an-einigh O’ Doherty, the twenty- 
seventh in descent from Niall of the 
Nine Hostages, d. 1413. 








| 
- Donnell, d. 1440. 


2 2. Hugh. 
3h, Brian Duy, d. 1496. 3+ John More. 
d 4. Cone Carragh, d. 1516. 4. pornae Carragh. 
5. Felim. 5. Brian Gruama. 
6. Jolin d. 1582. 6. Cuvey. 
7. John Oge. 7. Dermot. 
8. Sir Cahir, sl. 1608. 8. INialloaccherraie. 
9. Calny. 
10. ent 
iy. Chic: 
12. Doncuekd m. 1754. 


— 
Oo 


| 

. John, extatis 80, in 1835. 
| 

. Donnell. 


| 
. John, a boy in 18365. 


— 
on 


This is a curious specimen of traditional pedigree ; but it is quite clear that it was committed 
to memory from a written one. ‘Tradition scarcely ever remembers more than six genera- 
tions, but in this instance John O’Doherty, No. 13, had a personal acquaintance with the genera- 
tions in this line up to No. 10; Nos. 9, 8, and 7, he remembered from hearing his father and 
grandfather constantly speaking of them, and the remaining generations he remembered from 
hearing the pedigree frequently read from a manuscript. 


2422 APPENDIX. 


PEDIGREE OF O’NEILL. 


It has been pretty clearly ascertained that the race of Shane-an-diomais, or John the Proud 
ONeill, as well as that of Hugh Earl of Tyrone, has been for a long time extinct. Colonel 
Gordon O’Neill, Lord Lieutenant of the county of Tyrone in 1687-88, and so celebrated in 
Ireland during the civil war of the Revolution, was descended from Con Bacagh, first Earl of 
Tyrone in the female line, and by the father’s side he was descended from John O’Neill, the 
brother of the said Earl. He was living in 1704, when his pedigree was certified by James 
Tyrry, Athlone Herald and Custos Rotulorum under James II. and the Pretender. According 
to this herald, he was the son of Colonel Felix O’Neill, by Joanna Gordon: “ filia Georgii Gordon 
Dynastis primi marchionis de Huntly, et Henriette filia Ducis de Lenox, Dynastis d’Aubigny et 
Catharine de Belzac de familia d’Entragnes in Gallia.” His father, Colonel Felix, was the son of 
Terentius or Turlough Oge, who was the son of Henry (by the daughter of Con Bacagh, first Earl), 
who was son of Henry, son of John, who was son of Con More, the father of Con Bacagh. The family 
of this Gordon is also extinct, as is also very probably the branch transplanted to the barony of 
Gallen, in the county of Mayo, already treated of—See p. 2403, et sequent. But various poor 
families living in the mountains of Tyrone claim descent from the same stock, as was determined 
some years since by an impostor who forged a document purporting to be the Will of a Count 
O’Neill, who died abroad without issue, leaving a large sum of money to be divided in certain 
proportions among his relatives in Ireland, according to their nearness or remoteness to him in 
paternal or maternal consanguinity. Of this document the fabricator sold many copies in the 
mountains of Tyrone and Derry, and it created more avidity for determining the descents of the 
various surviving families of the O’Neills than had existed since the flight of the Earls. All the 
traditions were most anxiously revived, and stories were wrung from the memories of old men 
and women who had long forgotten to boast of their royal ancestors. Generations were counted 
with great skill, and the pedigrees of almost all the legitimate branches of the great fallen family 
were attested by affidavits before the local magistrates. Such was the power of money, the shadow 
of a shade of an expectation of which created so much interest in family history on this occasion ! 
The delusion was carried on until the impostor had supplied all the houses and nearly all the 
cabins belonging to persons of the name O’Neill in Tyrone with copies of this document, when he 
suddenly disappeared, leaving the O’Neills in a state of excitement and delusion, from which the 
magistrates and priests could with difficulty remove them. The Editor was told this in 1834, 
by several of the O’Neills themselves, who acknowledged that none of the families then living 
attempted to name their ancestors beyond the sixth generation. 

The Editor has been most anxiously inquiring for the last fourteen years to ascertain whether 
any of the race of Con Bacagh O’Neill, first Earl of Tyrone, still exist in Ireland, and he has 
satisfied himself that there are at least three septs of his descendants now in Ireland, whose descents 
will appear from the following pedigree : 

I. Con Bacacu O’Nei~tt. He was created Earl of Tyrone in 1542. He had a natural son, 
Matthew, or Ferdorcha, Baron of Dungannon, and the father of the illustrious Hugh, Earl of 


APPENDIX. 2423 


Tyrone, who was created Baron of Dungannon, and whose descendants are numerous in Tyrone 
under the name of Mac Baron. He had also by his married wife, 1. Shane the Proud O’Neill, 
Prince of Tyrone, whose race is extinct; 2. Felim Caech, whose descendants are still extant. 

II. Ferm Carcu O’Neitxt. He married Honora, daughter of John O’ Neill of Edenduffearrick, 
and had by her: 

III. TurLtovucH BreASALACH, or BRASSILAGH, i. e. TERENCE OF CLANBRASIL, O’NEILL. His 
territory is shewn on an old map of Ulster as in Clanbrasil, adjoining Mac Can’s, on the south side 
of Lough Neagh. He married Annabla Ni-Reilly, by whom he had at least ten sons, named in 
the following order in an old pedigree in the possession of Lord O’Neill: 1. Hugh; 2. Neale ; 
3. Cormack; 4. Con; 5. Art; 6. Phelim; 7. Edmond Gar; 8. Turlough Oge; 9. Brian Ceann- 
fhionain; and 10. Ever-an-locha. These sons are mentioned in a different order by Duald Mac 
Firbis, who makes Felim the first and Edmond the seventh son. Fynes Moryson does not give 
the names of Turlough Breasalach’s sons; he merely states, that “*Turlogh Brasilogh, son of 
Phelime Hugh [¢aoic], eldest son of Con Bacco, first Earl of Tyrone,” had “six sons at least then 
living and able to serve the Queen.”—(Edit. of 1735, vol. i. p. 16), Again, in a note of Tyrone’s 
forces, delivered in July, 1599, to the Lord Deputy, by Shane Mac Donnell Groome O’Donnelly, 
Tyrone’s Marshal, it is stated that Turlough Brasil’s sons had a force of 200 foote in the army of 
the arch-rebel. According to the vivid tradition in the county of Armagh, some of the race of 
this Turlough Breasalach, who were related to the Mac Cans of Clanbrasil, settled in the parish of 
Killeavy, in the barony of Orior, and county of Armagh; and this tradition is proved to be correct 
by entries in the Cal. Cancel. Hib., vol. ii. p. 146, 6, which shew that three of his sons, namely, 
Phelim, Cormacke, and Tirlogh Oge, received small grants of land in the barony of Orior. Of 
these Phelim Mac Tirlagh Brasselagh received a grant of Clontigoragh, in the parish of Killeavy. 
Many of the descendants of this Felim are still in the parish of Killeavy, and the pedigree of one 
branch of them is well known, and is as follows, as communicated to the Editor in writing by 
John O’Neill of Clonlum, who drew it from the most authentic sources of tradition and monu- 
ments : 

IV. Fetmy mac TurLovucs Brasitoucu O’Neitt. He had a son, 

V. SHANE MAC Fetiuy O’NEILL, father of 

VI. SHane OcE Mac Suane. He served in O’Hanlon’s regiment in 1690, and was always 
called Captain Shane. He married Catherine Ni-Boyle, by whom he had sixteen sons, of whom 
four were slain at the battle of the Boyne, and two settled at Athy, in the county of Kildare, 
where there are now, or were till lately, some of their descendants extant ; another settled at 
Loughbrickland, in the county of Down, where his descendants are still extant, good Presbyte- 
rians ; another settled at Cockhill, near Loughgall, in the county of Armagh, and still remain. 
The youngest son, Owen, remained in Killeavy. 

VII. Owen mac SuHAne OceE O’Nettt. He was thirteen years old at the Revolution. He 
removed from Clonlum, in the parish of Killeavy, to Ravensdale, in the county of Louth, under 
the patronage of his relative, Captain Redmond More O’Hanlon, and he remained there for some 
years, but afterwards returned to Clonlum, where he died in 1777, aged 102 years, and was buried 
in the old church of Killeavy. He married Isabel Ni-Cormick, by whom he had issue three sons: 


2424 APPENDIX. 


1. Henry, of whom presently; 2. John; and 3. Cormac, both of whom died young; and two 
daughters: Kathleen, who married Randal Mac Donnell; and Catherine, who married Edmond 
Treanor. 

VIII. Henry mac Owen O’NeILL of Clonlum. He married Rose Maguiggin, by whom he had 
issue: Peter, No. IX.; and John, who died young; and two daughters, Mary and Bridget. He 
died in April, 1798, aged ninety-eight years. 

IX. Perer O’Neitt of Clonlum. He married Alicia Ni-Hanlon, a descendant in the fifth 
generation from Brian O’Hanlon of Tandragee, commonly called “‘ Colonel Brian,” and had by her 
four sons, viz.: Owen O’Neill, a cabinet-maker, living in Dublin in 1844, and who had then two 
legitimate sons, John, aged fourteen, and Henry, aged ten years; 2. John O'Neill of Clonlum, 
a clever, well-educated man, and the best Irish scholar in Ulster in 1835, when the Editor first 
saw him at Clonlum, and took down the line of his descent ; he removed to England in 1843, 
and, in 1844, called frequently on the Editor, who supposes that he is now in New York; 3. Felix 
O’ Neill, who died in 1835, leaving one son, Peter, fourteen years old in 1844, and living at Meigh, 
in the parish of Killeavy ; 4. Henry; and five daughters: 1. Judith; 2. Alicia; 3. Anne; 
4. Rose; 5. Sarah. Peter O’Neill died in September, 1830, aged eighty-two years, and was 
interred in the church of Killeavy. His wife, Alicia, whom the Editor saw in 1835, died in 
January, 1838, aged eighty-two years. Thus far the race of Felim mac Turlough Brassilagh, as 
far as the Editor has been able to trace them. Let us now return to Edmond Gar, the seventh 
son of the same Turlough. 

IV. Epmonp GARR MAc TurLouGH BrassitacH O’NertL. He married Anne Mac Awley, by 
whom he had two sons: Captain Edmond, No. V., and Henry-na-Coille, i. e. Henry of the Wood. 

V. Caprain EpmMonp O’Nertu. He married Eleonora, youngest daughter of Felim Duff O’ Neill, 
and had by her six sons, viz.: 1. Brian, No. VI.; 2. John; 3. Hugh; 4. Charles; 5. Daniel ; 
6. Edmond. 

VI. Brian O’Neiut. He married Catherine Mulvany, daughter of Alan-a-Salismore, by 
whom he had issue four sons, viz.: 1. Brian, No. VIL; 2. Patrick; 3. John; 4. James; and one 
daughter, Mary. . 

VII. Brian O’Nettit. He married Mary, daughter of Cornelius Cary of Caryvill, and had by 
her three sons, viz.: 1. Edmond, No. VIII.; 2. Neale John, solicitor; 3. Patrick Charles; and 
five daughters: 1. Catherine; 2. Mary; 3. Bridget; 4. Susan; 5. Jane. 

VIII. Epmonp O’Nettu. His pedigree is given in Peppard’s History of Ireland, as Edmond 
O’ Neill of Greencastle, in the county of Donegal, descended from Felim Caech, son of Con Bacagh; 
but two generations are omitted in that work, namely, Brian, No. VIL, and Turlough Brassilagh, 
No. IJ. He married Alicia, daughter of Surgeon Balfour of Derry, and has by her three sons, 
namely: 1. Charles Henry O’Neill; 2. John B. R. O’Neill; 3. Neale Bruce O'Neill. 

The foregoing descent has been obtained for the Editor by his friend the Rev. William Reeves 
of Ballymena, in the county of Antrim, who believes it to be correct. If it be so, and there seems 
no reason to doubt its authenticity, then we have to the fore, as the Rev. Mr. Reeves observes, 
“a fine, healthy, well-descended, and abundantly prolific family, to bear the honours of the senior 


branch of the race of Eoghan.” 


APPENDIX. 


bo 
nh 
bo 
1) | 


THE O’NEILLS OF CLANNABOY. 


It has been stated by the Editor, under the year 1574, p. 1679, supra, that, after the death 
of the present Lord O’Neill, Hugh O’Neill of Ballymoney, in the county of Down, farmer, will 
be the senior representative of Brian Mac Felim, Chief of Clannaboy, who was murdered by the 
Earl of Essex, in 1574; but the Editor’s friend, the Rev. William Reeves, of Ballymena, has dis- 
covered since that sheet was printed off, that there is another branch of this family still extant, 
which is nearer to Lord O’Neill than Hugh of Ballymoney, namely, Charles O’Neill, Esq., of 
Bracart, near the town of Antrim. This Charles, who, though he is as undoubted a scion of the 
noble house of Clannaboy as is Lord O’Neill himself, has no family pride whatever, and wrote on 
the 29th August, 1847, to his friend, Alexander O’Rourke, Esq., of Ballymena, that those who 
were inquiring after his pedigree were sadly out of employment, or getting light in the head! 
However, he has replied to queries proposed to him, from which it appears that he married, in 
1817, Ellen, the daughter of William Porter, Esq., of Raheenmore, in the county of Wexford, by 
whom he had twelve children, of whom three sons are still living, namely, Charles, John, and 
Felix. His relationship to Lord O’Neill and Hugh O’Neill of Ballymoney, will appear from the 


following genealogical table : 


1. John O’Neill of Edenduffcarrick, d. 1619. 








| 
. Captain Felim Duv, d. 1677. . Arthur. 


fy 
2 2 2. John Oge. 
| 
3. Brian, d. 1669. 3. Daniel. 3. Henry. 
| | I 
4. French John, d. 1739. 4. Luke. 4, John. 
' | I | 
5. Charles, d. 1769. 5. Charles of Bracart. 5. Daniel. 
| | | 
6. John Viscount O'Neill, d. 1798. 6. Charles. 6. John. 
I | 
7. John Bruce Lord Visct. O’Neill, living. 7. Arthur. 
He is old and unmarried, and after 8 Teta 
his death the family estates pass from i ess 
the O’Neills for ever. 9. Hugh O’Neill of 
Ballymoney. 


The next heir to the property, but not to the title, of Lord O’Neill, is the Rev. William Chi- 
chester, Prebendary of St. Michael’s, Dublin. He is the eldest son of the Rev. Edward Chichester, 
who was the son of the Rev. William Chichester, who was the son of the Rev. Arthur Chichester, 
by Mary O’Neill, daughter of Henry, eldest son of John O’Neill, commonly called French John; 
No. 4, supra. Nathaniel Alexander, Esq., M.P., for the county of Antrim, is more closely related to 
the present Lord O’Neill, being descended from Anne O’Neill, daughter of Charles O’Neill; No. 5, 
supra. Henry O’Neill, the ancestor of the Rev. William Chichester, left no male issue. 

There were various other branches of this great family powerful in Ulster till the Plantation, 
as the Clann-Donnell Don of the Bann, the O’Neills of Coill-Iochtrach, or Killeiter, in the south 
of the county of Londonderry; the O’Neills of Coill-Ultach, anglice Killultagh, in the county of 
Down; the race of Henry Caech, &c.; but they have all lapsed into poverty, and their pedigrees 
are unknown, and perhaps for ‘ever irrecoverable. 

l4r 


2426 APPENDIX. 


THE O’DONNELLYS OF BALLYDONNELLY. 


Ir has been stated in note ™, under the year 1177, p. 33, supra, that Gilla-Macliag O’Donnelly, 
chief of Feara-Droma, who was slain at Downpatrick that year, by Sir John De Courcy, was seated 
in the present county of Tyrone. This assertion, which the Editor grounded on the assumption 
that the Feara-Droma were always seated at Carn Maca Buachalla, or Baile-Ua-nDonnghaile’, 
which is described in an ancient Irish historical tale, entitled Caithreim Chongail Clairingnigh, the 
Triumphs of Congal Clairingneach, as situated in the very centre of Ulster. This story, however, 
appears to have been remodelled in the thirteenth or fourteenth century, as is clear from Baile- 
Ui-nDonnghaile being given as the modern name of Carn Maca Buachalla ; but nothing has been 
yet discovered to fix the exact period at which the family of O’ Donnelly first settled at this place. 
The pedigree of Gilla-Macliag O’Donnelly, above referred to, is given in various authorities as 
chief of Feara-Droma-Lighean, i. e. the men of Druim-Lighean, now Drumleen, a short distance 
to the north of Lifford, in the district of Tir-Enda, barony of Raphoe, and county of Donegal. 
‘They were otherwise called the Ui-Ethach Droma-Lighean, or race of Eochaidh of Drumleen, and 
were under the patronage of St. Cairneach, of Cluain-Laodh.—See Colgan’s Acta Sanctorum, p. 782. 
On the increasing of the population and power of the Kinel-Connell, the Feara-Droma and other 
tribes of the Kinel-Owen, originally seated to the west of the Rivers Foyle and Mourne, were 
driven across these rivers ; and they acquired new territories for themselves. There is extant in 
a paper manuscript, the property of the late O’Conor Don, a curious poem on the history of 
Druim-Lighean; but though it recounts various historical events relating to the locality, it affords 
no clue to determine the period at which the race of Eochaidh were driven out of Kinel-Enda. 

The pedigree of Gilla-Macliag O’Donnelly, who was slain at Downpatrick, by De Courcy, in 
1177, is variously given in several Irish manuscripts. In the Book of Ballymote, fol. 43, 6, b, and 
fol. 45, b, col. 1 ; in the Book of Lecan, fol. 63, a, a, and fol. 65, b, b, col. 1 ; and in Duald Mac 
Firbis’s Genealogical Manuscript (Lord Roden’s copy), p. 133, it is deduced from Domhnall 
Ilchealgach, monarch of Ireland, who died in 566 ; but the number of generations given from this 
Domhnall, down to Gilla-Macliag who was slain in 1177, is only nine, which is about nine too 
short, and shews clearly that the transcribers of these manuscripts have engrafted Domhnall, the 
ancestor of Gilla-Macliag, on a wrong stem. Fortunately, however, the true line of Gilla-Macliag 
O’Donnelly is preserved in the Genealogical Manuscript of Cucogry, or Peregrine O’Clery, one of 
the Four Masters, now in the Library of the Royal Irish Academy. In this manuscript, which is 
beautifully written on paper, in Cucogry’s own hand, it is given as follows: ‘“ Gilla-Macliag, son 
of Echtighern, son of Donnghal, son of Ceallachan, son of Dobhailen, son of Donnghal, son of 
Seachnasach, son of Ceallach, son of Eochaidh, son of Domhnall, son of Aedh Finnliath” [monarch 
of Ireland, A. D. 879]. 


> Baile- Ua-nDonnghaile : i.e. town of the O’Donnellys, | James I., Ballydonnelly contained twenty-four ballyboes. 
now Castlecaulfield, in the parish of Donaghmore, barony On an old map of Ulster, preserved in the State Papers’ 
of Dungannon, and county of Tyrone. According to aninqui- Office, London, is shewn Fort and Logh O’Donnellie, in the 
sition taken at Dungannon, in the seventh year of the reign of _ proper position of this townland. 


APPENDIX. 


2427 


Now, by comparing this with the royal line of the family of O’Neill, it will appear that Aedh 
or Hugh Finnliath is the true stemma of this pedigree : 


14. 


15. 


16. 


ie 
18. 


19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 


| 
. Muireadhach. 


IODA Pp wD = 


| 
. Maelduin. 
| 
. Fergal, monarch, d. 722. 


_ 
Sy Sey Xe 5) 


| 
. Niall Frasach, monarch, d. 770. 


. Niall of the Nine Hostages, Monarch of Ireland, slain A. D. 406. 
| 
. Eoghan, a quo Cinel-Eoghain, or Kinel-Owen, d. 465. 


? Muircheattach More Mac Erca, monarch, d. 533. 
‘ Dombnall Ilchealgach, monarch, d. 566. 

: Reodh Uairidhnach, monarch, d. 612. 

Y Maclitinieh, (@hie#or Kine Owen clv625. 


| 
11. Aedh, or Hugh Oiridnigh, monarch, d. 819. 


| 
12. Niall Cailne, monarch, d. 879. 


l 
13. Aedh, or Hugh Finnliath, monarch, d. 879. 
| 





( 
Niall Glunduy, a quo O’Neill, monarch, 14. 
sl. 919. 
| 
Muircheartach Mac Neill, na-gCochall 15. 
gCroiceann, King of Aileach, sl. 943. 
l 
Domhnall O’Neill, of Armagh, King of 16. 
Aileach, d. 980. 
| 
Muircheartach Midheach, sl. 975. le 


| 
Flahertach-an-trostain O’ Neill, King of 
Aileach, d. 1036. 


Aedh Athlaman O'Neill, d. 1033. 
Domhnall 0’Neill. 

Miahertabh: O’ Neill. 

Contchobhar na-fiodiigha O'Neill: 
Teine Glinne O’ Neill. 


| 
Muircheartach O’Neill, of Moylinny, 
sl. 1160. 


ae 
Domhnall, King of Aileach. 
| 


Eochaidh, a@ quo Ui-Eathach Droma- 
Lighean. 


| 
Ceallach. 
| 


| 
. Seachnasach. 


| 
- Donnghal, a guo O’Donnelly. 


. Dobhailen, or Develin. 


f GesHachan O’Donnelly. 


Donnghal O’ Donnelly. 


| 
. Echtighern O’Donnelly. 
I! 
. Gilla-~Macliag O’ Donnelly, chief of Feara 


Droma, slain at Down by Sir John 
De Courcy, A. D. 1177. 


According to Keating’s History of Ireland, the head of this family was hereditary Marshal of 
O’Neill’s forces.—_See Genealogies, Tribes, §c., of Hy-Fiachrach, p. 432 ; but, strange to say, little 
of their history has been yet recovered, from Gilla-Macliag O’Donnelly, who was slain by Sir John 
De Courcy in 1177, down to the year 1531, when the Four Masters state that O’Donnelly’s town 
was assaulted by Niall Oge (the son of Art, who was son of Con) O’Neill, who broke down O’Don- 
nelly’s castle, and made a prisoner of the son of O’Neill [the celebrated John Donnghaileach, i.e. 
the Donnellyan, otherwise called an oiomany, i.e. of the pride or ambition], who was then in 


14Fr2 


2428 APPENDIX. 


fosterage with O’Donnelly, and carried him off, together with the horses and other property of 
the place. In 1552, John Donnghaileach ONeill and his foster-brethren made an assault on Fer- 
doragh, Baron of Dungannon, as he encamped at night, on his way to join the English at Belfast. 
In 1567, John Donnghaileach ONeill proceeded, with a guard of fifty horsemen, to hire some 
gallowglasses who, at O’Neill’s invitation, had come over, under the conduct of Alexander Mac 
Donnell of Scotland, and encamped at Cushendun, in the east of Ulster; but Mac Donnell, calling 
to mind his cause of enmity towards him (for ONeill had slain his father, and driven himself and 
his followers out of Ulster), suddenly fell upon him and his party, as they were carousing in a 
tent, and murdered himself and some distinguished chieftains of his followers, among whom was 
Dubhaltach, or Dudley O’Donnelly, his foster-brother, who was ‘the most faithful and dear to 
him in the world.” 

Fynes Moryson, in his History of Ireland, first edition, p- 32, states, in his enumeration of the 
forces of the chieftains of Ulster, who combined to oppose the Earl of Essex in 1599, ‘that the 
Donolaghes [O’Donnellys] had in their country one hundred foote and sixtie horse.” The same 
writer states, p. 116, that, in 1601, 27th July, the Lord Deputy, Mountjoy, drew out from the 
Blackwater three Regiments to fight the rebels, and that, the latter not making fight, he marched 
a mile or two more southward, ‘‘ where,” says Moryson, ‘“‘ we cut down great abundance of corne 
with our swords (according to our fashion); and here Shane Mac Donnell Groome” [ O’Donnelly ], 
‘« Tyrone’s Marshal, whose Corne this was, upon humble submission, was received to her Majestie’s 
mercie, and came to his Lordship in person the same night at our sitting downe in our last camp, 
This Marshal delivered to the Lord Deputy ‘a perfect note of such Cap- 
taines and Companies as are under the command of the Traitor Tyrone, within Tyrone,” among 
which he mentions two of the O’Donnellys, namely, ‘‘ Donnell Grome Mac Edmond, who had 100 
men, and Patrick Mac Phelim, who had 100 more.” 


whither we returned.” 


Donnell Groome Mac Donnell, the brother of this Shane, the Marshal, accompanied Tyrone to 
Kinsale, where he fought with such desperation, that he, ‘‘a captain of one hundred,” and all his 
men, were slain. This appears from a note of Tyrone’s loss at Kinsale, 20th Dec. 1601, printed by 
Moryson (orig. edit., p. 179). But his elder brother, Shane®, Tyrone’s Marshal, was protected by 
the English; for it appears from Patent Roll, eighth year of James I., that ‘‘Shane Mac Donel Grome 
O’ Donnelly received a grant of Gortoharim” [now Gortnagarn, in Pomeroy parish], ‘in the ter- 
ritory of Terraghter, in the barony of Dungannon.” An inquisition? taken at Dungannon, on the 
29th of August, 1631, finds, that Shane Mac Donell Grome O’ Donnelly was seised of the Balliboe 
of Gortelary, in the county of Tyrone, and, being so seised, died about eight years before” [circa 
1623]; that Patrick O’Donnelly was his son and heir, and of full age; and that the premises are 


© Shane, i.e. John.—The Rey. James Coigly, who was 
maternally descended from this family, states in his pamph- 
let, written in 1798, that Queen Elizabeth proposed to make 
this John O’Donnelly an Earl; and it is quite certain, from 
Doewra’s Narration, that Elizabeth’s officers and spies had 
circulated many strange reports, and made many promises, 
which were never intended to be performed, in the hope that 


some of O'Neill's followers might be induced, by the ex- 


pectation of reward and aggrandisement, to lay violent hands 
upon their chieftain. 

4 By a former inquisition, taken at Dungannon, on the 
16th September, 1614, it appears that James O’Donnelly, 
late abbot of the late abbey of Saints Peter and Paul 
at Armagh, was seised of a great number of tenements 
and possessions in right of the abbey, which are enume- 
rated. 


APPENDIX. 2429 


held of the King in free and common soccage. This Patrick O’Donnelly was evidently the head 
of the sept, and the person so distinguished during the insurrection of 1641, for whose head four 
hundred pounds were offered by the Lords Justices and Council, by proclamation “ given at his 
Majesty’s Castle of Dublin, 8th February, 1641-2.” 
1641, a manuscript in the possession of Lord O’Neill, this Patrick Moder took possession of Lord 
Caulfield’s castle at Baile-I-Donnghaile, or Ballydonnelly, in October, 1641. In 1642, Sir Felim 
O’Neill, general of the Irish forces in Ulster, placed four captains over the Bann, namely: Niall 


According to a Journal of the Rebellion of 


Oge mac Neill mac Turlough [mac Phelim] mac Con Bacagh; Patrick Moder O’Donnelly; Felim 
an Choga O’Neill; and Turlough Gruama O’Quin. In the same year, the court or mansion-house 
of Ballydonnelly was burned by Randal Mac Donnell, by the General’s [Sir Felim’s] orders. 

In 1643, June 27, Saturday, the English and Scotch went to Ballydonnelly, and Con Mac Art 
Mac Donnell (na Mallacht) delivered up to them the Island of Ballydonnelly. In autumn, 1644, 
Patrick Moder O’Donnelly returned to Ballydonnelly. In 1687 and 1688, Terence O’Donnelly 
was appointed High Sheriff of the county of Tyrone® by Lord Tirconnell ; and, in 1687, when 
Colonel Gordon O’Neill was Lord Lieutenant of Tyrone, this Terence O’Donnelly, who is called 
Captain, and Shane O’Donnelly, were Deputy Lieutenants’. May 7th, 1689, Arthur O’ Neill, Esq., 
of Ballygawley, and Patrick O’Donnelly, Esq., of Dungannon, were the members of Parliament 
for the borough of Dungannon; and, same year, Christopher Nugent, Esq., of Dublin, and Daniel 
Doctor Patrick O’Donnelly was 
R. C. Bishop of Dromore since the Revolution, and Doctor Terence O’Donnelly was R. C. Bishop 


O’Donnelly, Esq., were Members for the borough of Strabane. 


of Derry®. 

After the Revolution, this sept, who were remarkable for their loyal adherence to the cause of 
James II.", forfeited the remnant of their ancient estates, but still they never lost sight of their 
former station. 

In 1689 was born Hugh O’Donnelly, who, according to the pedigree of the family, was son of 
Captain Terence, and the grandson of Patrick Moder O’Donnelly above mentioned. His descen- 
dants have escaped the great reverse of fortune which has been the unhappy fate of many of the 
O’Neills, and other families of the royal line of Niall of the Nine Hostages, after the confiscation 
of their estates. In 1719 he married Alice, the daughter of Doctor De Butts, (of a Huguenot 
family, which came to Ireland after the revocation of the Edict of N antz), and she induced him to 
conform to the Protestant religion. He had issue a son, 

ArtHuR DonneELLy, Esq., of Blackwatertown, in the county of Armagh'. He was born in 
1722, and died in 1785. 
and, secondly, in 1769, Margaret, relict of Captain Haughton, and daughter of John Mahon, Esq., 


He married, about 1758, first, Miss Williams, who died without issue ; 


© See King’s View of the State of the Protestants, Lond. 
1692; and Joy’s Letter to Lord Lyndhurst, on the Appoint- 
ment of Sheriffs in Ireland, p. 80, Lond. 1838. 

'Harris’s Life of King William ITTI., Appendix, p. 307. 

§ See Ordnance Memoir of Londonderry. 

5 The Rey. James Coigly statesin his pamphlet that ‘‘his 
own great-grandfather, O’ Donnelly, together with five of his 


brothers, were slain at the head of the tribe, bravely defending 


the bridge at the battle of the Boyne.” 

iSo late as the 20th of May, 1758, Viscount Charle- 
mont renewed a lease for three lives,—as was the custom 
among the great English grantees and their successors, to the 
descendants of the ancient proprietors,—to this Arthur Don- 
nelly (registered in Dublin, April 2nd, 1762), of the townland 
of Dredalt, in the manor of Castle Caulfield, formerly Bally- 
donnelly, part of the lands forfeited by the O’ Donnellys. 


2430 — APPENDIX. 


of the county of Roscommon, and had by her an only son, John, born in 1770 (of whom presently), 
and a daughter, Margaret, who married William Johnstone, Esq., of Armagh, by whom she had 
one daughter, Margaret, who married: 1. Colonel Charles Douglas Waller, of the Royal Artil- 
lery, of West Wycombe, in the county of Kent; and 2, William Lodge Kidd, Esq., of Armagh ; 
and has issue by both marriages. 

Joun DonneELLy, Esq., the only son of Arthur, married, in July, 1793, Rebecca, daughter of 
the Rev. John Young, M. A., of Eden, in the county of Armagh, by his wife, Anne M‘Clintock 
(see, in Burke’s Landed Gentry, M‘Clintock of Drumcar, in the county of Louth), and sister of 
Sir William Young, Bart., of Bailieborough Castle, in the county of Cavan. (See also Burke’s 
Baronetage, &c.) John, who died in 1835, had issue nine children, of whom but four are now 
living, viz.: 1. Thomas, a Major and Assistant Adjutant-General in the Honourable E. I. C.’s 
service, Bombay ; 2. William, LL. D., Registrar-General in Ireland; 3. Alexander Frederick, of 
the H. E.I.C.’s Bengal civil service; 4. Susan Maria, married to ‘Thomas Brooke, Esq., D. L., of 
Manor Brooke and Lough Eske House, in the county of Donegal. 

All the men of this family that the Editor ever saw are remarkable for their manly form and 
symmetry of person ; and even the peasants who bear the name exhibit frequently a stature and an 
expression of countenance which indicate high descent. 





PEDIGREE, OF (0, DONOVAN: 


“Oo pliocéc Eosain méoip Mhuimnig, 
o’n Mcaig nuqmodbnic n-eocaip-sil, 
50 Cliodna b-pionn-ban b-pleadaig, 
iomoa a ngablain ngemealarg. 


Oib-pm Zappuig ip gloine, 

Siol g-Cantaig claip Mupgpoige, 
Cn cin so hCilloin uile, 

’p o10b Cainbmig ip Copncluige. 


Ofob Ui Oonnchada an oaz-cig, 

Ip laoié n-ooppoa O n-Oonnabain, 

Fip ip Lionman Lion o-ciondal, 

Ip piogpaio pil Stileabain.”—Maoilin Oge Mac Brody. 


As the Annals of the Four Masters are so meagre in their notices of this, and almost all the 
families of Munster, except the O’Briens and Mac Carthys, the Editor deems it his duty to lay 
here before the reader the descent of the senior line of Mogha Nuadhat, King of the southern half 
of Ireland, towards the close of the second century. ‘This he has been induced to compile, not 
because he happens to bear the name of that family himself, but because it has been neglected by 
all our genealogists, in consequence of the family having been removed from their original territory 


APPENDIX. 2431 


at an early period, and of having been, in latter ages, driven into the mountains of Carbery, in the 
county of Cork, and there thrown into the shade by the more powerful and more illustrious family 
of the Mac Carthys. The pedigrees of O’Brien and Mac Carthy, who have been for ages the heads of 
this race of Mogh Nuadhat, have been already published by various genealogists, and that of Mac 
Carthy has been particularly illustrated by Mons. Lainé, who was genealogist to Charles X. of France. 
The Editor regrets to say that he has failed, after great exertions, to trace the pedigree of any branch 
of the O’Sullivans, now living in Ireland, to the original stock. The reader must, therefore, rest satis- 
fied with two specimens of the Munster genealogies, drawn from the most authentic documents of 
ancient and modern Irish history and genealogy, namely, those of O'Donovan and Mac Carthy of 
Dunmanway. The original documents, by which the latter portion of the pedigree of O’ Donovan 
is proved, have been furnished by the O’Donovan (Morgan William), of Montpellier, near Cork ; 
by Edward Powell, Esq., who succeeded to half the estate of the late General O’Donovan of Bawn- 
Jahan, in the county of Cork; by the late Major Perceval of Barntown, near the town of Wexford; 
and by Rickard Donovan, Esq., Clerk of the Crown for the county of Cork. 

I. EoGHan TamHLeacn, i.e. Eoghan the Splendid, otherwise called Mogh Nuadhat. He is 
the great ancestor of the most distinguished families of Munster, and is mentioned in all the 
authentic Irish Annals as the most powerful man in Ireland, next after Con of the Hundred Battles, 
with whom he contended for the monarchy of all Ireland. Con, however, at length forced him to 
quit Ireland ; and we are told that he sought an asylum in Spain, where he lived for nine years in 
exile, during which time he was employed in the king’s army. In the fourth year of his exile the 
king gave him his daughter, Beara, in marriage. At length he entered into a confederacy with 
the king, by whose co-operation he was able to land a numerous army of Spaniards in Ireland. He 
put in at a harbour in the south of Ireland, to which he gave the name of Beara (now Bearhaven), 
in honour of his wife, and, immediately on his landing, was joined by his relatives and a numerous 
body of followers. He defeated Con in ten successive engagements, and compelled him to resign 
all authority over the southern half of Ireland, over which he (Mogh Nuadhat) was to be king, 
independent of Con.—See the Annals of Tighernach, at the year 166 ; and O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, 
Part III. chap. lx. 

The boundary which separated these two divisions (which were called Leath-Chuinn, 1. e. Con’s 
half, and Leath-Mhogha, i. e. Moch’s half) was called Hiscir-Riada, and extended from Dublin to 
Clonard, thence to Clonmacnoise, and Clonburren, and thence across the province of Connaught, to 
Meadhraighe, a peninsula extending into the bay of Galway. 

This division of Ireland into two parts was observed only one year, when, if we believe the 
author of the Battle of Magh-Léana, Mogh Nuadhat grew discontented when he observed that the 
part of Dublin which by this division was ceded to Con was more advantageous in the profits 
arising from ship duties, fisheries, and other commercial emoluments ; in consequence of which he 
demanded half the revenue. Con refused to accede to this demand, upon which their hostilities 
being renewed, they agreed to decide the controversy by a pitched battle, to be fought at Magh- 
Leana, now Moylena parish, alias Kilbride, near Tullamore, in the King’s county. Here the armies 
of both encamped, on the north side of the Eiscir-Riada, not far from Durrow ; and Con, finding 


himself inferior in forces, had recourse to stratagem : he surprised the enemy’s camp early in the 


bo 


2432 APPENDIX. 


morning, and obtained a victory. Gaul, the son of Morna, of the race of Sanbh (Firbolgic king of 
Connaught), a distinguished champion, slew Mogh Nuadhat, who, not expecting any attack from 
the enemy, lay asleep in his tent. There are still to be seen at Moylena two tumuli, in one of which 
the body of Mogh Nuadhat was interred, and in the other that of Frech, the Spaniard, his brother- 
in-law. After this battle Con was proclaimed monarch of all Ireland ; and he reigned twenty 
years in an uninterrupted peace and tranquillity. 

Eoghan Taidhleach, or Mogh Nuadhat, had by Beara, his Spanish wife, two sons: 1. Olioll 
Olum, the ancestor of all the subsequent kings of Munster; and 2. Lughaidh Lagha, a champion 
much celebrated in Irish stories for his extraordinary strength, valour, and prowess. 

Il. OmroLtt Orum. He became King of Leath-Mhogha, or the southern half of Ireland, after 
having conquered Lughaidh Maccon, the ancestor of O’Driscoll, in the battle of Ceann-Feabhradh 
Sleibhe Caoin, in the year 237. He married Sadhbh, or Sabia, daughter of Con of the Hundred 
Battles, and had by her seven sons, who all fell in the battle of Magh-Mucruimhe, near Athenry, in 
the present county of Galway, except Cormac Cas and Cian. Of these only three left issue, namely, 
Eoghan, Cormac Cas, and Cian, the ancestor of O’Carroll of Ely O’Carroll, of O’Meagher of Ikerrin, 
and several other families. It appears from a historical tract, preserved in the Library of Trinity 
College, Dublin, H. 3.17, p. 849, that Oilioll Olum was jealous with his wife, Sabia; that he turned 
her away after she had a son and a daughter; and that she was obliged to live for some time in the 
mountain of Sliabh Comhalt, now Keeper Hill, in the county of Tipperary; that her brother, the 
Monarch Art, son of Con, put Oilioll on his trial for neglecting his wife and denying his children; 
and that the Ollavs, or chief Brehons, or Judges of Ireland, decided that the. children were legiti- 
mate, and that Oilioll Olum should pay for their fosterage, and provide for them. 

Previous to his time, the ancestors of the O’Driscolls, of the Ithian race, and the Ernaans, of 
the race of Heremon, had been kings of Munster, according to the fortune of each in the war, in 
which they were almost constantly embroiled with each other. But Oilioll Olum fixed the sceptre _ 
in his own family, and divided Munster into two parts, between his second son, Cormac Cas, and 
the heir of his eldest son, Eoghan, and enjoined that their descendants should succeed to the 
government of the province in alternate succession; and this injunction was complied with until 
the time of Brian Borumha, who set it aside for ever, after dethroning the heir, not only of Eoghan, 
but of Con of the Hundred Battles. 

III. Eocuan.—He was the eldest son of Oilioll Olum, and brother of Cormac Cas, ancestor of 
the O’Briens of Thomond. He was killed in the battle of Magh Mucruimhe, near Athenry, in 
the now county of Galway, fought A. D. 250, between Art, the son of Con of the Hundred Battles, 
monarch of Ireland, and Lughaidh Maccon, the ancestor of the family of the O’Driscolls, who had 
been expelled Ireland A. D. 237, but returned in 240 with some British auxiliaries. It is stated 
in the authentic Irish annals that Eoghan, the son of Oilioll Olum, was killed in this battle by 
Bene, a Briton. 

This Eoghan married Moncha, the daughter of Dil, a druid of noble extraction, and had issue 
by her: 

IV. Fracnoa MumtteatHan. He was declared King of Munster, in accordance with the will 
of his grandfather, on the death of his uncle, Cormac Cas, which occurred A. D. 260. His 


APPENDIX. 9433 


territory was invaded by Cormac Mac Art, the grandson of Con of the Hundred Battles; but 
Fiacha met him in a pitched battle at Drom- -Damhghaire, now Knocklong, in the present county 
of Limerick, where Cormac was defeated and obliged to make restitution for the injuries caused 
by this invasion. This Fiacha lived at Knockgraffon, near the Suir, in the county of Tipperary, 
where his moat and extensive entrenchments are still to be seen. 

He had two sons, of whom the elder was called Oilioll Flannmore, and the younger, Oilioll 
Flannbeg. Oilioll Flannmore, having had no heir, adopted his brother, Oilioll Flannbeg, as his 
son, who, in his turn, became King of Leath-Mhogha, after the death of Mogh Corb, son of Cormac 
Cas, who was son of Oilioll Olum. 

V. O1mioLt FLannspec. He was King of Munster for thirty years, and was slain in the battle 
of Corann by the men of Connaught, aided by Fothadh Conann, son of Maccon, the ancestor of 
the O’Driscolls. He had four sons, namely: 1. Eochaidh, King of Munster, whose race is ex- 
tinct ; 2. Daire Cearba, the ancestor of O'Donovan ; 3. Lughaidh, ancestor of Mac Carthy and 
his correlatives ; 4. Eoghan, from whom descended six saints, namely: 1. St. Cormac, whose life 
is given in the Book of Lecan, and published in a Latin translation by Colgan at 26th March ; 
2. St. Becan of Cill-Becain at the foot of Sliabh gCrot in Muscraighe-Chuirc ; 3. St. Culan of 
Glenkeen, in the territory of Ui-Luigheach [Ileagh], in the present county of Tipperary, whose 
bell, called Bearnan-Culain, is still preserved; 4. St. Evin of Ros-glas, now Monasterevin, in the 
county of Kildare; 5. St. Dermot of Kilmacnowen, near the hill of Knocknarea, in the county of 
Sligo; and 6. Boetan of Cill-Boetain, in the territory of Dalaradia, in the east of Uister.—See 
O’Flaherty’s Ogygia, p. 381, where O’Flaherty writes: ‘ Olillo Flannbeg regi Momoniz super- 
erant Achaius, rex Momonie, Darius Kearb, ex quo O’Donawan, Lugadius et Eugenius.” 

It should be here remarked, that Mr. Lainé falsifies this quotation from O’Flaherty in his pe- 
digree of the Count Mac Carthy. 

VI. Darre Cearsa. He was King of Leath-Mhogha, and distinguished himself at the head of 
the forces of Munster in repelling the assaults of certain pirates who infested the coasts of Mun- 
ster. He had seven sons, of whom the eldest was Fidhach, the father of the celebrated Crimhthann 
Mor mac Fidhaigh, the senior of the Milesian race, who became Monarch of Ireland despite of the 
rival race of Con of the Hundred Battles, and who established colonies of Munstermen at Glaston- 
bury, and in different parts of Wales, where, according to Cormac’s Glossary, there are several 
places called after his people, who no doubt, built the forts called Ceiter Guidelod, or forts of the 
Gaels or Irish, by the Welsh. It is also stated that this warlike monarch made some expeditions 
into Scotland in the year 369, where he assisted the Picts in opposing the Romans, under the 
Governor Theodosius. He is also said to have made some descents upon the coasts of Gaul, whence 
he returned with immense booty. This warlike monarch, by far the most distinguished that the 
Munster race can boast of in pagan times, was poisoned by his own sister, Mongfinn, the wife of 
Eochaidh Moyvaine, who had been Monarch of Ireland preceding Crimhthann. She effected this 
while Crimhthann was on a visit with her at Inis-Dornglas, an island in the River Moy in Con- 
naught, in the hope that her eldest son, Brian, might be immediately seated on the throne of Ire- 
land; and in order the more effectually to deceive her brother as to the contents of the proffered 
cup, she drank of it first herself, and died of the poison soon after. Crimhthann, on his way home 

14 G : 


2434 APPENDIX. 


to Munster, died at a place in the south of the present county of Clare, which, from that memo- 
rable event, received the appellation of Sliab o1g15 an fg, i.e. the Mountain of the Death of the 
King. It has been remarked by ancient and modern Irish writers, that this execrable act of 
Mongfinn had not the desired effect, for that neither her son, Brian, nor any of her posterity, ever 
attained to the monarchy of Ireland, except Turlough O’Conor, and his son, Roderic, who were 
luckless monarchs to Ireland! 

The race of this great monarch, Crimthann More, became extinct; but the race of Daire 
Cearba was continued by his second son, Fiacha Fidhgeinte, the ancestor of O’Donovan, and his 
third son, Eochaidh Liathanach, the ancestor of the tribe of Ui-Liathain, in the south-east of the 
present county of Cork, where their chief, Mac Tyrus, was very powerful at the English Invasion. 
His fourth son, Deaghaidh, or Dagezus, was ancestor of the Ui-Deaghaidh, in the territory of 
Eoghanacht-Chaisil, of whom was the virgin, St. Sinchea ; and from Dera, his fifth son, descended 
the celebrated St. Rodanus of Lorha, in Lower Ormond, who cursed the royal palace of Tara, in 
the sixth century. 

VII. Fracua Fipuceintre, the second son of Daire Cearba, After the death of Crimhthann 
More mac Fidhaigh, in A. D. 379, the race of Fiacha Fidhgeinte became the senior line of the 
Milesian race, and contended for the crown of Munster. Fiacha himself, however, never became 
King of Munster, for he was killed by his rival, Aengus Tireach, great-grandson of Cormac Cas, 
in a battle fought at Clidhna, near Glandore harbour, as appears from a poem by Cormac Mac 
Cuilleanain, quoted in the Book of Munster. While Crimhthann More mac Fidhaigh, the nephew 
of this Fiacha, was Monarch of Ireland, he made Conall Eachluath, the grandson of Aengus Tireach, 
King of Munster; and after the poisoning of Crimhthann, Enna Airgtheach, the son of Conall 
Eachluath, became King of Leath Mhogha; and none of the family of Crimhthann ever after 
attained to the sovereignty of all Munster. 

The Leabhar Muimhneach or Munster Book, as preserved in the Book of Lecan, states that this 
Fiacha received the cognomen of pid-gemnze, because he constructed a wooden horse at the fair of 
Aenach Cholmain in Magh-Life. 

“« Fid-geint nuncupatus est quia fecit equum ligneum in Ciremio Colmain in Campo Liphi.” 

From him descended the Ui-Fidhgeinte or Nepotes Fidhgenti, of whom was the celebrated 
St. Molua of Cluain-fearta Molua, at the foot of Sheve Bloom, in Upper Ossory, in whose life 
their situation is described as follows: 

“Et venit [S. Molua] ad Mumeniam, et lustravit patriam suam .i. Nepotes Fidgenti, que gens 
est in medio Mumenie, a medio planicie Mumenie usque ad medium montis Luachra in occidente 
ad australem plagam fluminis Synne.”—Vi. S. Molue. Ex codice Killkenniensi, in Marsh’s 
Library, Dublin, V. 3. 1. 4, F. 135. 

This Fiacha had three sons, viz.: Brian, Sedna, a guo Ui-Sedna, and Laeghaire, a quo the 
nepotes Laeghaire. 

VII. Brian. He was King of South Munster when Niall of the Nine Hostages was Monarch 
of Ireland. He had seven sons, viz.: 1. Cairbre Aebhdha, the ancestor of O’Donovan and Mac 
Eniry; 2. Goll; 3. Lughaidh; 4. Daire, from whose grandson, Conall, descended the tribe of 
Ui-Conaill, giving name to the Conilloes, in the county of Limerick, of whom was O’Coileain, 


APPENDIX. 2435 


O’Kinealy, O’Billrin, and other families, but not the O’Connells, as asserted by Dr. O’Brien, in 
his Irish Dictionary, for the O’Connells of Kerry are of the same race as O’Falvy, i. e. of the race 
of Conary II., Monarch of Ireland; and the O’Connells of Cork, as appears from the historical poem 
of Cathan O’Duinin, are of the same race as the O’Donohoes of EKoghanacht Locha Lein in Kerry ; 
5. Fergus; 6. Ross; and 7. Cormac. 

TX. Carrpre ArBupHA. He had five sons, viz.: 1. Erc, a quo O’Donovan ; 2. Eccen, a quo 
the Fir-Thamhnaighe, the Ui-Brogain, and the Ui-Garbhain ; 3. Trian; 4. Sedna, a@ guo Mac 
Eniry, chief of Corca-Muichead, now the parish of Corcamohid, alias Castletown Mac Eniry, in 
the south of the county of Limerick ; and 5. Cormac, a quo Mac Caechluinge. 

This Cairbre Aebhdha gave name to Ui-Cairbre Aebhdha, a territory comprising the barony 
of Coshma, and the district around Kilmallock, in the county of Limerick. He had several sons, 
of whom the eldest was, 

X. Erc, who had two sons, Lonan and Kinfaela; the former was chief of the Ui-Fidhgeinte, 
and contemporary with St. Patrick, whom he entertained (according to the Tripartite Life, pub- 
lished by Colgan), in the year 439, at his palace, situated on the summit of the hill of Kea, near 
the mountain of Carn-Feradhaigh. But it appears that Lonan afterwards quarrelled with Patrick, 
and refused to become his convert, for which reason the saint cursed him, and predicted that his 
race would become extinct, and that his principality would be transferred to the race of his brother. 

XI. Kiyraeta. Nothing is known of this chieftain, except that he was the first of his race 
who embraced the Christian religion, about the year 439, and that the following generations 
descended from him : 

XII. Oriott CEANNFADA. 

XIII. Larre. 

XIV. AENGUS. 

XV. AEDH. 

XVI. CRUNNMAEL. 

XVII. Eocuan, Chief of Ui-Figeinte, who was killed, according to Tighernach, in the year 
667, in a battle fought against his neighbours, the people of Ara-Cliach, who inhabited the terri- 
tory on the other side of the River Maigue. 

XVIII. Arpu Row. After the death of Eoghan, his relative, Conall, of the sept of the Ui- 
Conaill-Gabhra, became chief of all the Ui-Figeinte, and, on his death, which occurred in the year 
701 (Ann. Tiger.), his brother, Aedh Dubh, became chief of the Nepotes Figeinte, but on his 
death, which happened in the year 715, the chieftainship reverted to 

XIX. Duvpavoran, who died, Rex Nepotum Figeinte, in the year 750 (Ann. Tiger.) After 
his death the chieftainship devolved to Flann, son of Erc, who was the head of a sept of the Ui- 
Conaill-Gabhra, but, on his death in 755, the chieftainship reverted to 

XX. Kinrarna, who ruled the Nepotes Figeinte for eleven years, and died a natural death in 
767. After the death of Kinfaela, Scanlan, the son of Flann, of the sept of Ui-Conaill-Gabhra, seized 
on the chieftainship and ruled the Ui-Figeinte for fourteen years. He died in the year 781, and 
was succeeded by his son or nephew, Murchadh, the grandson of Flann, who died in 802, At this 
period the race of Conall Gabhra got the upper hand of the race of Cairbre Aebhdha, for it appears 

146 2 


2436 APPENDIX. 


from the Irish annals that Murchadh was succeeded by Bruadar, who died in 809, and Bruadar 
by Dunadhach, the son of Scannlan, who died in 834, after having gained a considerable victory 
over the Danes, who had made an irruption into his territory. But on the death of Dunadhach, 
the chieftainship reverted to the race of Cairbre Aebhdha, and Niall, the son of Kinnfaela, is the 
next chief of the Ui-Figeinte recorded by the Irish annalists. He died in 844. 

XXI. Catuat, Chief of Ui-Cairbre Aebhdha. 

XXII. Uarnies, Chief of Ui-Cairbre Aebhdha. 3 

XXIII. Caruat, Chief of the Ui-Figeinte, slain by the celebrated Callaghan Cashel, King of 
Munster. He had two sons, Uainidh, rex Coirpre, who died in 964, according to the old Annals of 
Innisfallen, and 

XXIV. Donovan, the progenitor after whom the family name O’Donovan has been called. 
This Donovan made his name celebrated throughout Ireland for his opposition to the more pow- 
erful family of Dal-Cais of Thomond, which nearly caused the total destruction of his own sept. 
In the year 976, as we are informed by the Annalist Tighernach, Mahon, the son of Kennedy, 
King of Munster, was put to death by Maelmuaidh, the son of Bran, King of Ui-Eathach, to whom 
he had been treacherously delivered up by Donovan, the son of Cathal, King of Ui-Figeinte. The 
Dublin copy of the Annals of Innisfallen add, that Mahon was. killed at Bearna-dhearg [now the 
Red Gap or Red Chair, a chasm in the mountain of Sliabh Reagh, on the borders of Ui-Figeinte 
and Fermoy], and that the coarb of St. Finnbhar, or Bishop of Cork, denounced all those who 
were concerned in conspiring his death. 

The removal of Mahon, head of the Dal-Cais, was, however, of no avail to the race of Eoghan, for 
it only cleared the way for his more illustrious brother, Brian, afterwards called Brian Borumha, 
who, immediately after the death of Mahon, made his way to the throne of Munster, in despite of all 
the opposition and treachery of his adversaries of South Munster. Nor did he leave the death of 
Mahon long unrevenged, for, in the year 977, he marched his forces into the plains of Ui-Figeinte, 
where Donovan and his father-in-law, Amlaff, or Auliffe, King of the Danes of Munster, had 
their forces in readiness to meet him, and a battle ensued, in which Brian vanquished his enemies 
with great slaughter, and left Donovan and Amlaff dead upon the field.—(Annals of the Four Mas- 
ters, and Annals of Innisfallen). This Donovan also formed an alliance with the Danes of Waterford, 
and one of the sons of Imhar, or Ivor, King of the Danes of Waterford, was called Donovan 
after him. This Danish Donovan, who was evidently the grandson of Donovan, King of the Ne- 
potes Figeinte, slew Dermot, son of Donnell, Lord of Hy-Kinsellagh, in 995, and slew also in the 
same year Gillapatrick, Chief of Ossory, but was himself slain soon after by Cuduiligh, the son of 
Kineth, one of the men of Offaly, in revenge of the death of the Lord of Hy-Kinsellagh. At 
this period surnames became for the first time hereditary in Ireland, for we find that many of the 
chieftain families in Ireland took surnames from ancestors who were living at this period.—See a 
short article on this subject published by the Editor in the Jrish Penny Journal, 10th April, 1841. 

XXV. CatHat mac Donovan. Brian Borumha did not satisfy his revenge by the slaughter of 
Donovan and his people of Ui-Figeinte, together with their allies, the Danes of Munster. In the year 
978 he marched a second time against the rival race of Eoghan or Eoghanachts, and came to an en- 
gagement with them at Bealach-Leachta, in Muskerry, near Macroom, in the now county of Cork, 


APPENDIX. 9437 


where he vanquished them and their Danish allies with dreadful havoc. After this defeat the race 
of Eoghan were glad to give up their rivalship for the government of Munster, and to make peace 
with Brian on his own conditions. Accordingly we find these two great races of the blood of Oilioll 
Olum at peace with each other for a period of thirty-six years, that is, from the year 978 till 1014. 
Among the chieftains of the line of Eoghan who submitted to Brian on this occasion, was Cathal, 
the son of his inveterate enemy, Donovan, who, if we may rely on the Dublin copy of the Annals of 
Innisfallen, fought at Clontarf, on the side of Brian, against his relatives the Danes ; but it is more 
than probable that many of the Munster Danes (one of whom, according to Duald Mac Firbis’s 
account of the Danish families in Ireland, was married to Brian Borumha’s own daughter) fought 
also on the Irish side. He was placed in the second division of Brian’s forces, of which Kian, the 
son of Maelmuaidh, ancestor of the O’Mahonys, had the chief command, and this division contended 
with the forces of Leinster. It does not appear whether or not Cathal was killed in this battle. 
He was married to a Danish wife, as is quite manifest from the name of his son, 

XXVI. AmuiaorH, AuLIFFE or AMLAFF O’Donovan. He flourished A. D. 1041, and was 
evidently the O’Donovan who slew Donnchadh Ua Eachach, as mentioned in the Bodleian copy of 
the Annals of Innisfallen, under that year. He left a son— 

XXVII. Murcuapa O’Donovan, of whom nothing is known, except that he left a son— 

XXVIII. Angstis O’Donovan, a name which indicates a Danish connexion. In his time 
Desmond was thrown into a state of confusion in consequence of the feuds between the O’Briens 
and Mac Carthys, during which the O’Donovans were driven from the plains of Ui-Figeinte, and 
forced to fly beyond the Mangartan mountain.—See note ™, under the year 1178, p. 45, supra. 
Whether they were ever after able to return has not been yet determined. Collins asserts, in his 
pedigree of the late General O’Donovan, of Bawnlahan, that O’Donovan resided at Croom, till he 
was driven thence by Maurice Fitzgerald, second Baron of Offaly, who was Lord Justice of Ireland 
in the year 1229 ; but this has not been proved. Murchadh had a son— 

XXIX. Racunary, Ranutpw, RANDAL, or REGINALD O’ Donovan, another name which bespeaks 
a Danish alliance. In the year 1201 the chief of the O’Donovans, Amhlaoibh, Aulaf, or Auliff, 
was seated in the now county of Cork, where he was slain that year by the O’Briens and De Burgos, 
but how he stood related to this Raghnall has not been proved.—See note °, under the year 1200, 
p- 126; and note ¥, under the year 1418, pp. 832, 833, supra. Raghnall had a son— 

XXX. MAELRUANAIDH, or Mutrony O’ Donovan, who had 

XXXI. Crom O’Donovan. Collins asserts that he was in possession of the great Castle of Crom 
or Croom, on the River Maigue, in the present county of Limerick, and this was the tradition in 
the country in 1686, when the manuscript called Carbrie Notitia was written ; but the Editor has 
not found this fact recorded in any contemporaneous document. Cujus rei periculum veri ego ad 
me non recipio. Penes famam, veteremque traditionem esto fides. According to the Dublin copy 
of the Annals of Innisfallen, he was killed in, or immediately before, the year 1254, at Inis-an- 
bheil, now Pheale, near Inishkeen, in the county of Cork, by O’Mahony’s people. This Crom is 
the ancestor of all the septs of the O’Donovan family in the baronies of Carbery, in the county of 
Cork, and of several others in Leinster. He gave name to Gleann a’ Chroim, in the parish of Fan- 
lobus, which afterwards became the property of a branch of the Mac Carthys, who had their prin- 


2438 APPENDIX. 


cipal seat at Dunmanway (and of whom Daniel Mac Carthy, Esq., of Florence, is a descendant). 
According to Duald Mac Firbis, this Crom had three sons: 1. Cathal, the ancestor of the sept 
called Clann-Cathail ; 2. Aneslis, from whom sprung Sliocht Aneslis-mic-a’ Chroim, and Lochlainn, 
from whom came the Clann-Lochlainn, who possessed thirty-six ploughlands lying between the 


River Roury and Glandore harbour, and of whom we shall speak presently. 


SLIOCHT-AINESLIS or CLANN-ENESLIS O’DONOVAN. 


ANESLIs, the second son of Crom, had issue four sons, namely, Donough More, Rickard, Walter, 
and Raghnall or Randal, who became the founders of four distinct septs, who all bore the generic 
tribe-name of Sliocht Aneslic-mic a’ Chroim, which is anglicised in the public records, ‘‘ Slught 
Eneslis mac Icroyme.” The head of this sept possessed a small district of seven ploughlands in 
the parish of Kilmacabea, which district bore their tribe-name of Slught Eneslis Mac Icroym, or 
Clan-Eneslis Mac Icrim. It appears from various Inquisitions, and other public documents, that 
this sept of the O’Donovans held also other lands ontside their own little territory. An Inguisi- 
tion taken at Cork on the 6th of October, 1607, finds ‘‘ that Bernyhuila [now Butler’s Gift], in 
the parish of Dromaleague, containing twoe ploughlands, and Muyny and Dyrryclohaghyghtragh, 
conteining twoe ploughlands, are holden of the Mannor of Castell-O Donyvane, by Slight Ineslis 
O Donyvane.” 

From another Inquisition taken at Cork on the 21st of September, 1625, it appears that there 
was another family of this sept seated at Kilcolman, in the barony of Courcies, for it states that 
‘“* Donnell mac Cnoghor Buy Mac Eneslis O’Donovane, who died on the 5th of January, 1602, was 
seised of the town and lands of Killcollman, which his son and heir, Cnoghor Buy Mac Eneslis 
O’Donovane, mortgaged, on the 2nd of May, 1620, to John Lord Courcie, with power of Redemption. 
That said Cnoghor died on the 8th of May, leaving a son, Donnell, then three years old.” It also 
appears, from a deposition preserved in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin, vol. vi. for Cork, 
p- 54, that ‘* Daniel O’Donovane, alias Donnell Boy Mac Cnogher, of Derribrock, in Courcies, was 
in actual rebellion” [in 1641], “ and went out to Spain.” It appears, by the Act of Settlement, 
that ‘‘ Captain Daniel Boy O’Donovane, of Killcollman, in the county of Cork, was among the 
persons who had faithfully served his Majesty beyond seas.” It appears, from another Inquisition 
taken at Cork, on the 20th of August, 1632, that another branch of this sept, Dermott mac Teige 
mac Eneslis, was possessed of the lands of Lisnabrineny-Ierragh, in the parish of Kilmeen [in the 
barony of East Carbery]. The Editor has not been able to identify any living member of this sept, 
and shall therefore return to the senior branch, 


THE CLANN-CAHILL O’DONOVAN. 


XXXII. Caruar or Canitt O’ Donovan, the first son of Crom. This Cathal gave name to the 
territory of Clancahill, in the county of Cork, which is defined in an Inquisition taken at Cork on 
the 6th of October, 1607, as containing three score and seven ploughlands, and “ extending from 
the sea on the south to the Ryver of Myalagh, and bounded on the north with the landes of Clan- 
donill Roe, the landes of Glan Icrime, and with the lands of Clanloghlin on the east, and the landes 


APPENDIX. 2439 


of Clandermodie and Clanteige Rwoe on the west.’? This Inquisition also states that it contains 
two manors, viz.: “the Mannor of Castell O’Donyvane, conteining twentie and one ploughlands, 
and the Mannor of Rahyne.” 

This Cathal never had any possessions in the original territory of Ui-Figeinte, or Ui-Cairbre 
Aebhdha, in the present county of Limerick, but he seems to have acquired a considerable tract of 
mountain territory in Corca-Luighe, the original principality of the O’Driscolls, to which newly- 
acquired district he transferred the tribe-name of his family, viz.: Cairbre, which, by a strange 
whim of custom, was afterwards applied to a vast territory, now forming four baronies, in the 
county of Cork. This extension of the name looks strange enough, as it was transferred since the 
year 1200, and as the race who transferred it did not remain the dominant family in the district. 
The fact seems to have been that, when Mac Carthy Reagh got possession of a part of this terri- 
tory, in the latter end of the thirteenth century, the Ui-Cairbre were the most important tribe 
within it, and that he and his descendants applied the name to the O’Donovan territory, and to all 
the minor cantreds attached by him from time to time. 

This Cathal was of age in 1254, when he and Fineen Reanna Roin Mac Carthy slew Dermot 
O’ Mahony, in revenge of his father, Crom O’Donovan. He had two sons, both of whom became chiefs 
of the newly acquired territory, namely, Teige, No. XXXIII., of whom presently, the ancestor of the 
subsequent chiefs of the O’Donovans, and Imhar or Ivor, who was otherwise called Gilla-riabhach 
or Gillareagh, the ancestor of a sept of the O’Donovans, formerly seated at Castle Ivor, in the 
parish of Myross. According to a pedigree of the O’Donovans, compiled by John Collins, of Myross, 
the last Irish scholar, historiographer, and poet of Carbery, this Ivor built Castle Ivor in the year 
1251, but where he found this date is a great puzzle to the Editor, who has not been able to find 
any authority for it; and yet he is inclined to believe that it is correct, for it appears from the old 
Annals of Innisfallen, preserved in the Bodleian Library, that the son of this man was slain in 1282, 
by Gilla-Mochuda or Gillicuddy, the son of Dunlang O’Sullivan. The passage, which is in a very 
old hand, runs as follows : 

“A.D. 1282. Mac Gulla miebps 1 Oonnuban ou manbad ou Hilla Mocuda mac Ountyng 
1 Suluuan.” 

“A.D. 1282. The son of Giulla-riebhach O’Donovan was killed by Gilla-Mochuda, son of 
Dunlang O’Sullivan.” 

This passage is authority to shew that the date, 1251, given by Collins (wherever he found 
it), may be correct. Collins says that Castle Ivor remained in the possession of the descendants 
of Ivor (an $illa mebac) till about the middle of the sixteenth century, when they were dispos- 
sessed by Donnell-na-gCroiceann, who was the Hector of this race. He adds, in a strain of poetical 
history, that this Ivor was a celebrated trader, and that he is now regarded as a magician in the 
wild traditions of the peasantry of the district, who believe that he is enchanted in a lake called 
Lough Cluhir, situated near Castle Ivor, in the townland of Listarkin, and that his magical ship 
is seen once every seventh year, with all her courses set, and colours flying, majestically floating 
on the surface of that lake. ‘I have seen,” adds this poetical genealogist, ‘‘ one person, in par- 
ticular, testify, by oath, that he had seen this extraordinary phenomenon in the year 1778.” He 
should have added that this ship was said to have appeared immediately after the death of Daniel 


2440 APPENDIX. 


O’ Donovan, of Bawnlahan, Esq., the representative of Donnell-na-gCroiceann, the extirpator of the 
race of Ivor. 

XXXIII. Tapue or Tetce O'Donovan, son of Cathal, son of Crom. N othing is recorded of 
this Teige, except that he begat three sons: 1. Murchadh, or Murrough, who was chief of his 
name about the year 1340; 2. Raghnall, or Randal (who had three sons, Donnell, Melaghlin, and 
Dermot); and 3. Conor (who was father of Aedh, the father of Dermot, who was father of 
Donough). The descendants of his younger sons, are still, no doubt, extant in Carbery, but their 
history is for ever consigned to oblivion. 

XXXIV. Murcuapu, Murrovues, or Morean O’Dovovan. He had two sons: 1. Rickard, 
who was Chief of Clancahill about the year 1370, the last generation given by Peregrine O’Clery, 
p- 216, in his pedigree of O’Donovan ; and 2.— 

XXXV. ConcuopHar, Conor, or CorNELIUS O’Donovan. He had a son, Raghnall, or Randal, 
who was Chief of Clancahill about the year 1410; and, if we believe Collins (who quotes 
no authorities, having deemed himself an infallible one), he had another son, Murtough, who had 
a son, Aengus, or Aineas O’Donovan, of Clasharusheen, in the parishes of Kilmeen and Castle- 
ventry, whose territory, called Gleann-a-mhuillinn [i.e. the glen of the mill], comprised eight 
ploughlands. Collins adds that the head of this sept of the O’Donovans was distinguished by the 
name of Mac Auneas, and that the spacious ruins of his residence were to be seen at Clasharusheen 
in his own time. The Editor has not been able to find any authority, Irish or Anglo-Irish, for 
the existence of this sept of the O’Donovans ; but the tradition in the country still states that an 
O’Donovan had a large house near the north-east boundary of the townland of Clasharusheen, 
where he was wont to murder his guests, whose bodies he buried in an adjoining field, called 
Paire-na-cille, i.e. field of the church or burial-place. 

XXXVI. RaGunatt, Ranpat, or Regrnatp O’Donovan. According to Duald Mac Firbis he had 
a son, Dermot, the ancestor of all the subsequent chiefs of the O’Donovans; and Collins gives him a 
second son, Tioboid, the ancestor of a sept of the O’Donovans called Sliocht-Tioboid, who possessed 
a tract of land near the town of Skibbereen, where they built the Castle of Gortnaclogh, the ruins 
of which still remain, and are shewn on the Ordnance Map, on a detached portion of the parish of 
Creagh. 

XXXVII. Dermot O’Donovan, the sixth in descent from Crom. It should be here remarked, 
that the different copies of the pedigree of O’Donovan differ in two generations before this Dermot. 
Two, preserved in the Library of the Royal Irish Academy; one, in the Library of Trinity Col- 
lege, Dublin, H. 1.7; and one in the Cork manuscript, called the Seanchaidhe Muimhneach, have 
two Dermots ; but Mac Firbis has only one; and the Editor has adopted his authority, though it 
is probable that there may have been two, and that the last of them is the Dermot O’ Donovan 
mentioned in the Chancery record of 1592, as the great-grandfather of Donnell, the then O’ Donovan. 
From this Dermot forward we have the clearest documentary evidence of the descent of the senior 
branch of this family. He had two sons: 1. Donnell, who succeeded his relative, Dermot Mac 
Conar, in the chieftainship of Clancahill, and enjoyed the same during his life, but of whose issue 
we have no further account; and 2. Teige (the ancestor of the subsequent chiefs) who succeeded 
his brother, and enjoyed the lordship of Clancahill during his life. 


APPENDIX. 244] 


XXXVIIL. Te1cEe O'Donovan, Chief of Clancahill. Collins states that this Teige was privately 
married to Helena, daughter of Denis O’ Donovan [Mac Eneslis] of Moyny, in the parish of Droma- 
league, and that this Denis murdered Teige, while his only son, Donnell, was an infant ; but this 
cannot be true, for we have the evidence of a Chancery record, dated 12th February, 1592-3, that 
Donnell O’Donovan succeeded his father, Teige mac Dermot, in the chieftainship of Clancahill, 
without any interruption, which could not have been the case if Donnell were a child at the time 
of his father’s death. Collins has a long story about a Dermot a’ Bhairc, or Jeremiah of the Barque 
(who was probably the son of Donnell, predecessor of Teige), having been inaugurated by Mac 
Carthy Reagh at Roscarbery, when Donnell mac Teige came up with his party to prevent his elec- 
tion, and slew him in the presence of Mac Carthy, even while he (the said Diarmaid a’ Bhairc) 
held the straight white wand, the badge of his dignity, in his hand! This is probably true, 
but the Editor has not yet discovered any cotemporaneous record of it. 

XXXIX. Donnett I. O’Donovan, commonly called Domhnall na g-Croiceann, i. e. Donnell 
of the Hides. He was inaugurated Chief of Clancahill, by Mac Carthy Reagh, about the year 
1560. He was fostered by O’Leary at his castle of Carrignacurra (now called Castle Masters), 
situated in the parish of Inchageelagh, or Iveleary; and it would appear that it was by O’Leary’s 
assistance that he was enabled to set aside his rival, Diarmaid-a’-Bhairc. He was married to 
Ellen, the daughter of O’Leary, at the church of Drumale, after having had by her Dermot 
O’ Donovan, and other sons, who were declared bastards by the Lord Chancellor, Adam Loftus, 
in 1592. He had also Donnell and Teige, born after the solemnization of his marriage, ‘‘ accord- 
ing to the rites of holy Church” [i.e. of Rome]. His eldest son, Dermot O’Donovan, was slain 
in the year 1581, at Lathach-na n-Damh, by the illustrious warrior, Donnell O’Sullevan, who 
afterwards became the O’Sullevan Beare, as we learn from the Annals of the Four Masters (see 
note Y, under that year, p. 1762, supra), and from O’Sullevan Beare’s Hist. Cathol. Iber. Compend. 
He built Castle Donovan, according to Collins; but others think that parts of this castle are 
much older than his time. He died in the year 1584, and was succeeded by his eldest legitimate son, 

XL. Donnetu II. O’Donovan. He succeeded his father in 1584; and, in 1586, he burned to 
the ground the bishop’s house at Ross, which had been a short time before built by William Lyon, 
Bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross.—See Harris’s Ware, vol. i. p. 565, and the manuscript entitled 
Carbrie Notitia, written in 1686. In February, 1592-3, his brother, Teige, attempted to depose 
him on the score of illegitimacy, but failed. An abstract of the pleading is on record in the Court 
of Chancery, in Dublin, and extracts from it have been given by the Editor in the Genealogies, 
Tribes, and Customs of Hy-Fiachrach, printed for the Irish Archeological Society, in 1844. From 
this document it appears, among other curious facts relating to this family, that illegitimate sons, 
particularly Muliers, by the Civil Law, might be elected as chiefs of it. According to John Collins, 
he was the builder of the Castle of Raheen, which was found to be the head of a manor in 1607. 
On the 6th of October, 1607, the following Inquisition, preserved in the Rolls Office, Dublin, was 
taken before William Lyon, Bishop of Cork, to ascertain the extent of his territory, which was 
found to contain two manors, namely, the manor of Castle Donovan and the manor of Raheen. 
When these manors were first erected it is now difficult to determine. The Inquisition is as 
follows, as far as it can be deciphered, but the latter portion is quite illegible : 

144 


2449 APPENDIX. 

‘¢ Inquisition taken at the Cittie of Corke, in the Countie of Corke, the vi" day of October, 1607, 
Before the Reverend Father in God, William, Lord Bysshopp of Corcke, and others, by the oathes 
The Jurors doe finde, That the Poble or Cantred of Clancahill, is parcell 
of the countrey of Carribry, in the countie of Corke, and doth containe three scoare and seaven 
ploughlands, extending from the sea, on the south, to the Ryver of Myalaghi, And bounded on the 
North with the landes of Clandonill Rwoe, the landes of Glan-J-crime*, and the landes of Clan- 
loghlin on the East, and the landes of Clandermodie and Clanteige Rwoe on the West. The which 
landes of Clancahill is a barren unfertile soyle, full of Bogges, rockes, and Woodd. The said Jurors 
doe also finde that Donyll O’Donyvane is the lawfull heyre, by descent from his Father and aun- 
cestors, to the said country of Clancahill. The said Jurors doe alsoe finde that the said Donyll 
O’Donyvane is seized of the Mannors, Castells, townes, &c., of Castell O’Donyvane, which doth 
conteine seaven quarters of land, or twentie and one ploughlands, called by the severall names here- 
after following, viz': the quarter of Swagh, conteining three ploughlands; the quarter of Kor-kell, 
conteining three ploughlandes; the quarter of Kilkisleagh, conteining three ploughlandes; the 
quarter of Killovynoge” [ Killovinoge, in the parish of Drinagh ], ‘‘ conteining three ploughlandes; 
the quarter of Curraghylickey, conteining three ploughlandes, &c. &c. The said Jurors doe alsoe 
finde that Donyll O’Donyvane is seised of the quarter of Dirregrey and Lahertishane, conteining 


of good men, &c. 


three ploughlandes, parcell of the foresaid Mannor. Alsoe, that the towne of Dromdallig, con- 


teining one ploughland, is parcell of the Mannor aforesaid, &c. That Donyll O’Donyvane is seised 
of the townes Kilscohinaghty” [Kilscahanagh, in Drumaleague par.] ‘‘and Dyrryclohaghuogh- 
tragh” [ Derryclogh, Upper, in Drinagh par.], “‘ conteining twoe ploughlandes, parcell of the fore- 
said Mannor. The said Jurors doe alsoe finde that the quarter of Gortinskryny” [now Gortna- 
skreeny, in Dromaleague par. |, “‘conteining three ploughlandes, being the landes of Slight Ranell 
O’Donyvane, are by them holden of the Mannor of Castel O’Donyvane. That the quarter of 
Logherott, conteining three ploughlandes, is holden of the Mannor of Castell O’Donyvane, by 
Slight Dermody Rwoe! O’Donyvane, &c. That the Quarter of Aghagard, conteining three plough- 
landes, is holden of the said Manor by Slight Teig m* Nicholl O’Donyvane, &c. That the quarter 
of Munan” [now Minane, in Drinagh parish] ‘and Lahanaght, conteining three ploughlandes, 
holden of the said Mannor by the Slight of Clanconelig” [Clann-Connelly ], “ &e. That the quarter 
of Garren” [now Garrane] “and Ballyvroig, conteining three ploughlandes, is holden of the said 


Mannor by Slight Clan Conelagh, &c. That Kinglyny, conteining one ploughlande, is holden of 


J Myalagh River.—Now the Mealagh. 
in Cnoe na n-abann (Collis fluminum), or Owen Hill, 
situated in the west of the townland of Cullinagh, parish of 


This river rises k Glan I crime, i.e. Oleann @ Chpoim, i. e. Crom’s 
Glen. This glen was called after Crom O’Donovan, who was 


slain by the O’Mahonys in 1254. According to the present 


Fantobaip, now Fanlobus, in the barony of west division 
of West Carbery. 
the boundary between the parishes of Dromaleague and Fan- 


It flows in a northerly direction, forming 


lobus; then, changing its course westerly, forms the boun- 
dary between Dromaleague and Kilmocomoge, and falls into 
Bantry Bay, a short distance to the north of the town of Ban- 
try. The Rivers Ilah and Bandon have their sources in the 
same hill. 


tradition in the country it includes all that portion of the 
This 
territory belonged for many centuries to the Mac Carthys 


parish of Fanlobus lying south of the Bandon river. 


of Dunmanway. 

| Slight-Dermody Roe, Slioéc Oi1anmada Rua, 
i. e. the Race of Dermot Roe, or Jeremiah the Red. There is 
a townland in the parish of Drinagh, called Toughmacder- 
mody, now the property of John Townshend, Esq., Dublin. 


APPENDIX. 2443 


the Mannor of Castell O’Donyvane by the sept of Clanconelly, &c. That Bernyhuila” [Bearna- 
hulla or Butler’s Gift], “‘ conteming twoe ploughlands, is holden of the aforesaid Mannor, by 
Slight Inesles O’Donyvane, &c. That Muyny and Dyrryclohaghyghtragh” [now Derryclough 
Lower, in Drinagh parish], ‘“‘conteining two ploughlandes, is holden of the foresaid Mannor by 
Slight Inesles O’Donyvane, &c. That the ploughlande of Meal-I-Currane, lying within the said 
country of Clancahill, is mortgaged to Sir John Fitz-Edmond, Knight, &. That the ploughland 
of Coulblach” [Coolbla, in Myross parish] ‘tis in mortgadge with Donyll O’Donyvane, from 
Donyll Oge ny Keartin, &c, That Stackane & Aghenesky, conteining twoe ploughlandes, is 
parcell of the Mannor of Rahyne” [now Raheen Castle, in Myross parish], “‘ &c. That the Ryne” 
[now Reen, in Myross parish], ‘“‘conteining twoe ploughlandes, is parcell of the said Mannor of 
Rahyne, &c. That the Castell and half ploughland of Castell Ivire” [now Castle-Ire, in Myross 
parish ], ‘‘ and the half ploughland of Cast * * * * is parcell of the said Mannor of Rahyne. That 
Ballycahaine” [in Castlehaven parish] ‘‘ and Ballyvickadane” [Ballymacadam], ‘“ conteining one 
ploughland, is alsoe parcell of the said Mannor of Rahyne, &. That Gortbrack, conteining one 
ploughland, is parcell of the Mannor of Rahyne, &. ‘That Kylloge and Shanvallyvicka, contein- 
ing one ploughland, is in the possession of Donyll O’Donyvane, by vertue of a Mortgage, &c.” [The 
remainder of this Inquisition is quite illegible. ] 

In the thirteenth year of the reign of James I, when it became the policy of the English 
Government to abolish the original Irish allodial tenures, and substitute those of England, he 
surrendered all his lands to the King, and received a re-grant of the same soon after, as will appear 
from the following extracts from Patent Roll, 13 Jac. I. Part 2, Article xi. Member 24: 

“XJ. 24. Surrender by Donell O’Donovan of Castle O’Donovan, in Cork C®. gent. of all his 
estates in Carbrie bar., in Cork C°., with the intention that the King shall re-convey the same to 
him by letters patent.—28th June, 13th reign. 

“XII. 26. Deed, whereby Sir James Semple, of Beltries, in Scotland, Knt., appoints Donell 
O’Donovane, in Cork C°. gent., to accept a grant or grants from the King, of part of the lands 
expressed in Article XIV. for a sum of £447 13s. Sterling.—28th January, 12th reign. 

“ XIII. 28. Deed, whereby Sir James Semple appoints Donell O’Donovane, gent., to accept a 
grant from the King of the remaining part of the lands expressed in Article XIV. for a sum of 
£45 5s. 6d.—28th January, 12th reign. 

“ XTV. 29. Grant from the King to Donell O’Donovan of Castle O’Donovan, gent., Cork Co., 
in Carbrie Bar. The Castle of Sooagh, Sowagh, or Suagh, otherwise Castle O’Donovan*™, and the 


town and lands of Sowagh, otherwise Suagh*, 3 plowlands in Clancahill; Carrowkeill*, 3 plow- 


m Castle O’ Donovan, Caiplean ui Ohonnabdin, 
now Castle Donovan, situated in the townland of Sowagh, 
alias Castledonovan, in the central portion of the parish of 
Dromaleague, barony of east division of West Carbery. The 
townland is now the property of St. John Clarke, Esq., Skib- 
bereen, and others, let to four resident tenants, of whom Daniel 
Donovan is one, on leases of three lives, at lump rents. The 
The walls of Castle 
Donovan are still standing, but exhibiting fearful rents, either 


soil is light, and fuel now very scarce. 


from the effects of lightning or gunpowder. It was probably 
one of the two castles belonging to O’Donovan which were 
blown up with powder by the Cromwellians. This castle 
stands upon a rock, and is forty-two feet long, twenty-six 
feet broad, and about sixty feet high. The lower story is 
arched; and it is accessible to the top by means of a spiral 
staircase of stone. Not far distant from this castle is the 
townland of Seehane’s, called O’Donovan’s seat, which gave 
name to the townland. 


1442 


2444 APPENDIX. 


lands, extending in the parcels of Glannaclohie", Duylis®, and Gurtinhirr?, in Clancahill ; Car- 
rownekilly-Caslagh, otherwise Carrownakmolly-Caslagh*, 3 plowlands, extending in the parcels of 
Garraneknockane and Dromosta3, in Clancahill ; Dromdaleige’ and Sronakartin’*, 2 plowlands; 
Dirigrieh'*, 3 plowlands; Killavenoge’* and Twohm*. dermadie*, otherwise Tuohm*® Dermody”, 
3 plowlands; Caslawrie, otherwise Caslurie**, $ plowland; Curraghilickie’*, 3 plowlands; Killsto- 
hanaght?* and Duricloghaghoughtragh**, 2 plowlands; Kingleny, otherwise Kinglenny®, 1 plow- 
land; the castle, town, and lands of Rahine*f, 2 plowlands, all in Clancahill; Cowlebla*f, 1 plow- 
land in Clanloghlin; Castle-Iver®t, Stuckin‘ t, and Agheneskine* t, 25 plowlands in Clanloghlin ; 
Kealog’ f, and Shanvallivikeagh'f, in Fornaghtk, 1 plowland, lying in Clandermott ; rent for this 
plowland, 2s. 4d. Irish. Gortbrackf, Ballikahan'f, and Ballym®Adame™f, 2 plowlands in Clancahill; 
the two islands called the High and Low Islands®, in Clancahill ; a chief rent of £4 6s. Eng. out 
of Loghcrott®; out of Moyny?-Duricloghagheightragh1, 2 plowlands, £2; out of Bearnahuileyt 
£2; out of Gortnescriny’, £4; out of Aghagardt, £1 lls. 1jd.; out of Lahanaght", £2 17s. 94d.; 
out of Munane”, £1 8s. 103d.; out of Carren*, £2 17s. 9$d.; out of Garrigillihie’, £4 13s. 4d., and 
a bushel and a half of oats; out of the 6 plowlands of Slughtea’, viz., Ballincalla*, Cahirgeall’, 


. Glannaclohie.—Now Oleann na cloice, anglice 
Glannaclohy, a townland in the parish of Dromaleague, 
barony of east division of West Carbery, county of Cork. 

° Duylis.—Now Deelish, in the same parish. 

» Gurtinnhir.—Now Gurteenhir, in the same parish. 
There was a hamlet of thirteen houses here, about the year 
1520, when Teige Mac Dermot was chief of the O’ Donovans. 

4 Dromosta.—Now Dromusta, in the same parish. O’Do- 
novan had a wooden house here. 

' Dromdaleige, .1, Onpom oa hag, Hill of the Two 
Stones; now Dromaleague. 

* Sronakartin.—Now Sronacarton, in the same parish. 

' Dirigrieh.—Now Derrynagree, in the same parish. 

" Killavinoge.—Now Killovinoge, in the parish of Dri- 
nagh, and same barony. 

“ Tuoh-mac-Dermody : a district, still so called, in the 
parish of Drinagh. 

* Caslurie.—Now Cashloura, in the same parish. 

Y Curraghilichie.—N ow Curraghalicky, in the same parish. 

” Killscohannaght.—Now Kilscohinagh, in the parish of 
Drumaleague. 

* Duricloghaghoughtragh. — Now Ooipe clocac 
uacznac, anglice Derryclough Upper, in Drinagh parish. 

> Kinglenny.—In the same. 

© Rahine.—Now Raheen, in the parish of Myross. 

4 Cowlebla.—Written Culebla in Down Survey, where it 
is shewn as in the parish of Myross. 

© Castle-Iver, Caiplean lomaip.—Now Castle-Ire, 
near Lough Cluhir, in the parish of Myross. A small portion 
of the ruins of this castle still remains. 


f Stuckin.—Now Stookeen, in the same parish. 

3 Agheneshine.—Obsolete. 

h Kealog.—Now Kealoge, in the parish of Castlehaven. 

i Shanvallyvikeagh.—Obsolete. 

k Fornaght.—In the parish of Castlehaven. 

' Ballikahan.—Now Ballycahane, in the same parish. 

m Bally-mac- Adame.—Now Ballymacadam, in the same 
parish. 

” High and Low Islands.—In the parish of Myross. 

° Logherott, Coc Cnot.—Now Lough-Crot, in the pa- 
rish of Dromaleague. . 

P Moyny.—In the same parish. Now, the property of 
Samuel Lewis, Esq. 

4 Duricloghagheightragh.—Now Derryclough, Lower, in 
the parish of Drinagh. 

° Bearnahuiley.— Now Barnahuilla, alias Butler’s Gift, 
in the parish of Dromaleague. 

° Gortnaseriny.—Now Gortnascreeny, in the parish of 
Caheragh. 

' Aghagard.—Obsolete. 

" Lahanaght.—In the parish of Drinagh. 

W Munane.—Now Minane, in the same parish. 

* Carren.—Now Garrane, in the same parish. 

Y Garrigillihie.—Now Carrigillihy, in the parish of My- 
ross. 

* Slughtea, i. e. Slioct Cleda, i. e. Race of Hugh, a 
district in the parish of Myross. 

* Ballinealla, Haile an cata, in the same parish. 

° Cahirgeall, Cazain seal, i. e. White Stone Fort, 
now Cahergal, in the same parish. 


APPENDIX. 2445 


Beallavaddy, Kilnelarhagh, Cwoscronin®, Fonigloghe, Meadull, and Ballinetony, £2 18 1044d., and 
3 bushels of oats; out of Ballincaslaine, 4 plowlands, £6, and 2 bushels of oats; out of Drissaneé, 
3 plowlands, £3 4s.; out of each of the 27 plowlands of Slught-Teige O’Mahowne, Is. 10d., in all 
£3 17s. 6Gd.; out of each of the 6 plowlands of Caharagh, Bellaghedoone®, Killenleaf, Aghaveele®, 
Knockgorrome®, and Glantawicke, 4s. 5¢d.; out of Rine’, 2 plowlands, £1 3s.; out of Balliroes, 
£1 8s. 103d.; the town and lands of Drissane, 3 plowlands, in Clancahill; Mirous'+, 2 plowlands; 
Meaulicarrane™f, 1 plowland; Aghagardf, 3 plowlands; Gortnascriny*, 3} plowlands; Loghcrott*, 
3 plowlands; Lahannaght, 2 plowlands; Moynane*, | plowland; Duricloghagheightragh*, 1 plow- 
land; Carren*, 2 plowlands; Balliroe*,1 plowland; Carrigillihief, 3 plowlands; Ballincallat, 2 plow- 
lands; Cahirgealet, Bellvaddief, Killnalarhaght, Cuoscroninef, Faniglohie}, Meadull}, and Ballina- 
tony, 4 plowlands; the island of Briddie, called the Sconice-island" ; Ballincaslainef, 4 plowlands; 
Ballinagornagh® f and Keamnabrickie’ f, | plowland; Dromenedie, 13 plowland; Classnacalliet and 
Tonebrackef, 8 gnives; in the said Clasnacallie, 1 gnive; Curnaconerta, 1 plowland; Scraggaghf, 
$ plowland in Bohannaght*; Bane-Ishell’ in Clomoungane, 8 gnives; Brahillis’, Voghterglinny, 
Dromnasoon, Conkinemore, and the four western gnives of Rossavany, containing 3 plowlands 


and 4 gnives; Westskieve, Cahirbegg, and Clogaghriough, 2 plowlands; Muyny*, | plowland ; 
Bearnahuiley*, 2 plowlands; Clounty‘, Mealgoone", Drometecloghie, and Killicoosane¥, in Clan- 
loghlin, 3 plowlands; Ballagh-Idoone, 14 plowland, in the 6 plowlands of Caharagh in Clanteige- 
Roe; Killineleigh, 4 plowland in the said 6 plowlands of Caharagh; in Kilbirie, } plowland; and 
in Kilbowrowe, 4 plowland ; all the customs, royalties, dues, and privileges, heretofore or now 
granted, due, and payable to the said Donell and his ancestors, in the ports, bays, or creeks of 
Castlehaven, Squince, Conkeogh*, and the western part of Glandore”; saving to Donell M* Cartie, 
the King’s ward, all chief rents, customs, and privileges, due or payable to any of his ancestors. 
The lands thus marked *, are created the manor of Castle-Donovan, with 500 Acres in Demesne; 
This and all the 


© Cwoscronin. —Now Crosscroneen. anglice Keamnabricka, a townland in parish of Rosscarbery. 


ploughlands of Slughtea are in the parish of Myross. 

4 Drissane.—In the parish of Castlehaven. 

© Bellaghedoone.—Now Ballaghadoon, in the parish of 
Caheragh. 

® Killenlea.—Now Killeenleagh, in the same parish. 

% Aghavecle.—Now Aghaval, in the same parish, 

h Knockgorrome.—Now Knockgorm, i. e. Cnoc 50pm, 
Blue Hill, in the same parish. 

1 Rine.—Now Rinn, anglice Reen, in the parish of My- 
ross. 

k Balliroe.—Now Ballyroe, in the parish of Kilmacabea. 

! Mirous.—Now Myross, in the parish of the same name. 

™ Meaulicarrane.—Now Meall Ui Chonnam, aa- 
glice Meallicarrane, in the parish of Myross. 

0 The Sconice Island.—Now Sconce Island, in the parish 
of Myross. 

° Ballinargornagh.—tIn the parish of Roscarbery 

P Keamnabrickie.-Now more correctly, Cé:mna bnice, 


4 Bohannaght.—Now Bohenagh, in the same parish. 

° Bane-Ishell, HGn ipeal, i.e. Low Field, now Bawnee- 
shal, in the parish of Castlehaven. 

$ Brahillis.—Now Brahalish, in the parish of Durus. 

' Clounty.—Now Cloonties, in the parish of Kilfaghnabeg. 

" Mealgoone.—Now Meall a gabann, i. e. the 
Smith’s Hillock, anglicised Maulagow, or Meallagowan, 2 
townland in the parish of Kilfaghnabeg. 

W Killicoosane.—Now Killacousane, in the same parish. 

* Conkeogh, i.e. Cuan caé¢.—Now Blind Harbour, 
in the parish of Myross. 

y Glandore, called in Irish Cuan Oop. Now Glandore 
Harbour, near Skibbereen, in the county of Cork. In an 
elegy, by Teige Olltach O’Cainte, on the death of Conor 
O’Connelly, who was harper to O’Donovan (Donnell, the 
husband of the daughter of Sir Owen Mac Donnell Mac Car- 
thy), the O’Donovans are called Cupaio 6 Chuan 
Oop, the Heroes of Cuan- Dor. 


2446 APPENDIX. 


power to create tenures ; to hold courts leet and baron?; to hold a Tuesday market at Dromda- 
leige, and one fair there on every 14th September, and the day after, unless when the said day 
falls on Saturday, then the fair to commence on the following Monday; with courts of pie-powder 
and the usual tolls; rent 13s. 4d. Irish. The lands thus marked +, are created the manor of 
Rahine*, with the like Demesne and privileges; to hold a Friday market at Rahine, and a yearly 
fair on Ascension day, and the day after, at Banelaghen”; with courts of pie-powder, and the usual 
tolls. To hold for ever, as of the Castle of Dublin, in common soccage.—29th June, 13th reign.” 

In 1629 he made a nuncupative testament, the only one that remains on record, though he 
lived ten years afterwards. It is preserved in the Prerogative Court, Dublin, and runs as 
follows : 

“Memorandum: that Mr. Daniell O’Donovane, of Rahine, in the County of Corke, gent. being 
of perfect mind and memory, although sicke and weake in bodie, made this last will and testament 
the fourteenth daie of August, Anno Domini 1629, att Rahin aforesaid, in manner following, viz' : 
First of all I bequeath my soule to God Allmightie, and my bodie to be buried in the Abby of 
Tymolege. Item; I bequeathe my lands, rents, and inheritance, unto my sonne and heire Daniell 
O’Donovane. Item; I bequeathe to my maried wife, Juan Cartie, alias Donovane, the third parte 
of all my moveable goods, and all my sheepe, hogges, and swyne, without division. Item; I be- 
queathe to Juan Ny Teige O’Donovane, the daughter of my sonne Teige O’Donovane, Tenn pounds. 
Item ; I bequeathe to Ellen Carthie, the daughter of Florence M° Carthie, of Beannduffe, Tenn 
pounds. Item ; I bequeathe to Juan Ny Morough Donovane, the daughter of my sonne, Morough 
Donovane, Tenn pounds. Item; I bequeathe to Morough M° Richerde, the sonne of Richerde 
Donovane, Tenn pounds. Item; I bequeathe all the rest of my moveable goods unto Ellen Do- 
novane, the daughter of Daniell O’Donovane, my sonne and heire. Item; I bequeathe to my sonne 
Keadagh O’Donovane, One Hundred Pounds Sterling, in manner following, viz.: my sonne and 
heire Daniell O’Donovane, to paye Three score and sixteene pounds hereof, and Juan Carthie, 
alias Donovane, to paye ‘wentie fower pounds hereof. Item; I made and appointed Daniell 
O’Donovane, my sonne and heire, to be my sole Executor, and left all the remainder of my goods 
unto him. The aforesaid last will and nuncupative Testament was made and delivered before us 
whose names ensue: Florence M* Carthy, Teige M* Carty, Charles m® Donough Carthy, Eugenius 
Callan.” 

He married, first, Helena, the daughter of William Barry, of Lislee, in the barony of Barryroe, 
the son of James Fitz Richard Barry, Viscount Buttevant, and by her he had Daniel O’ Donovan, 
his son and heir, and perhaps others. According to an old manuscript Pedigree of O’ Donovan, 
preserved at Lambeth, he had eleven sons, nine of whom were children when that pedigree was 
penned. Of these eleven sons three totally disappear from recorded history, and the Editor has 
been long of opinion, that his own ancestor, Edmond, who fled from Bawnlahan to the county of 


z Courts leet and baron.—From a traditional recollection > Banelaghen, OGn leatan, i.e. Broad Field, now 
of this, the peasantry of the mountains of Carbery believe | Bawnlahan. O’Donovan had a house here, and it was from 
that O’Donovan was a baron; but he never enjoyed any this place the Editor’s ancestor fled to the county of Kilkenny 
English title. some years before 1643, for he was killed that year at Bal- 

4 Rahine.—Now Raheen. O’Donovan had a castle there. _linvegga, about four miles north of New Ross, Co. Wexford. 


APPENDIX. 2447 


Kilkenny before 1643, was one of them.—See note “, under the year 1600, p. 2155, supra, where 
the Editor’s descent from this Edmond is given. That his eldest son and successor was not the son 
of Joane Mac Carthy appears from an ode addressed to this Daniel, in 1639, by Muldowny O’Mor- 
rison, and an elegy composed on his death by Conor O’Daly in 1660, in both which he is called 
son of Helena. He married secondly, about the year 1584, Joane or Johanna, the daughter of 
Sir Owen, who was the son of Donnell Mac Carthy, by Eleanor, daughter of Gerald Fitzgerald, 
eighth Earl of Kildare, and he had by her, 2. Teige, the ancestor of O’ Donovan, of Montpellier, 
near Cork ; 3. Capt. Murrough O’Donovan, who was slain in His Majesty’s service, at Rathmines, 
near Dublin, as appears by the King’s letter; 4. Donough or Denis, the ancestor of James 
O’Donovan, of Cooldurragha, in the parish of Myross ; 5. Dermot or Jeremias, who was wounded 
at Prague, in 1648, see p. 2155, supra; 6. Captain Richard, slain in foreign parts in His Majesty’s 
service, who was the ancestor of the late Lieutenant Philip O’Donovan, of Donovan’s-street, in the 
city of Cork ; 7. Keadagh, ancestor of Richard Donovan, Esq., of Lisheens House, near Ballin- 
collig, and of Timothy O’Donovan, Esq., of Ardahill. He had also three daughters, the eldest of 
whom, Honora, was married to Teige an-Duna Mac Carthy, of Dunmanway, the second to Mac 
Carthy of Mourne, and the third to O’Mahony Finn, of Ivahagh. 

It appears from an old letter preserved at Bawnlahan, that this Donnell was living, a very old 
ian, in 1636, and it is quite certain, from the date of the livery of seisin to his son, that he lived 
till 1639. ® 


O'DONOVAN OF CASTLE DONOVAN AND BAWNLAHAN. 


XLI. Donnett III. O’ Donovan, the tenth in direct descent from Crom, succeeded his father on 
the 13th of Feb.1639-40, when he obtained livery of seisin from His Majesty.—(Rot. Pat. Char. I. 
15°. 7°. p. f. R. 49.) He was never inaugurated, the livery of seisin from the King having been, 
in his time, substituted for the delivery of the white wand by Mac Carthy Reagh. Notwith- 
standing this, however, a southern poet, Muldowny O’Morrison, knowing or caring nothing 
about the change in the mode of succession, addressed an ode to him on his accession to the 
chieftainship of Clancahill, in which ode it is hinted that he had rivals to contend with, but whom 
he threw into the shade by his bravery, hospitality, and bounty. In this ode, in which he is 
styled ‘‘son of Helena,” the treasury of the men of science, who had hoarded nothing except 
the noble characteristics of his ancestors, it is stated that, to maintain the hereditary dignity 
of his chieftainship, he avoided accumulating riches, and increased the lustre derived from his 
ancestors by his hospitality and bounty, in which he expended all his revenue; that he took 
in hand the trade of war, in which he has been triumphantly successful. He is called the mighty 
tower in the battle, the true basis which’ supports his people; the defender of the distressed 
against danger, the idol of his followers, and the terror of stranger foes. The poet concludes by 
sixteen lines of eulogium on his wife, Sheela, the daughter of Rory O’Shaughnessy, of the race of 
Guaire Aidhne, King of Connaught, on whom she reflected the lustre she had derived from him. 

This Sheela, or Gylles, who died in 1680, as appears by an Irish elegy on her death, was the 
daughter of Sir Roger O’Shaughnessy of Gort, in the county of Galway, Chief of Kinelea; and 
O’Donovan had by her: 1. Daniel, afterwards a Colonel of foot in the service of James I. and 


2448 APPENDIX. 


M. P. for Baltimore; 2. Cnoghour, or Conor, living in 1655; 3. Murrough, living in 1655 ; 
4, Richard, living in 1655. In 1640, Jan. 22, he obtained a pass permit from the Earl of Barry- 
more: ‘‘ Whereas his sacred Majestie by his Royall pleasure, under his hand and signet, signified 
that it was his pleasure that Daniell O’Donovane, Esq., should passe with his owne and his ser- 
vant’s swordes too and froo within this His Majestie’s kingdome of Irelande; and whereas the said 
Daniell O’Donovane hath occasion, himself, &c., to repaire into the Countie of Gallwaye, in the 
province of Connaght, about his affaires. These are, therefore, to require you to permitt the said 
Daniell O’Donovan, with, &c., to passe into the said Countie, and to returne without trouble, &c. 
15th year of his Majestie’s Raigne—Barrymore.” He was a strict loyalist in the year 1641, and 
joined Lord Castlehaven, who lived within two miles of his castle of Raheen, and assisted that 
nobleman in the taking the towns of Mallow and Doneraile, and the castles of Milton, Connagh, 
and Rostelion. But Cromwell, landing in Dublin on the 14th of August, 1649, checked the career 
of the loyalists. It appears from a certificate by the Earl of Clancarty, and also from the King’s 
letter in favour of Daniel, his son, afterwards Colonel O’Donovan, that Cromwell’s forces wasted 
O’Donovan’s territory with fire and sword, and blew up two of his castles with gunpowder, and 
compelled O’Donovan himself to surrender. Clancarty’s certificate runs as follows : 

“‘ Certificate, that Daniel O’ Donovan raised, at his own charge, two companies of foote, and by 
the Lord Marquis of Ormond’s Commission, Morrogh O’Donovan, brother to the said O’ Donovan, 
was Captain on [of] one in Col. Henessy’s regiment, under the command of his Excellencie at the 
siedge of Dublin, where he was killed, and that Rickard O’Donovan, brother also to the said 
O’Donovan, was Captain of the other company in Col. O’Driscoll’s regiment, and retired with his 
company in Col. O’Driscoll’s regiment beyond seas, where he was killed in his Majestie’s service. 
And that, in 1650, the said O’ Donovane, through much fidelitie and of his own accord, quitted all 
his demaines, and chearfully did appear under my command in his Majesty’s service ; whereupon 
the Usurped Power fell then immediately on all the castles, houses, and lands of the said O’ Dono- 
van, burning, killing, and destroying all they could come by, and have blown upp with powder 
two of his said castles, &c., which, at the instance of Daniel O’Donovan, son and heire unto the 
said O’Donovan, I certify, as witness my hand, 24 Martii, 1660. 

“¢ CLANCARTIE.” 

His Majesty’s letter, and also a letter from Helena, Countess of Clanrickarde, to the Marquis 
of Ormond, in favour of Colonel O’ Donovan, state the same facts. 

Among the family papers at Bawnlahan, there is a petition of ‘‘ Daniell O’Donovane, to the 
worshipfull Vincent Toobin, Esq., touching Col. Phayer’s engagement to O’Donovan, when he 
surrendered his castles to the Commonwealth, to rayse thereout some satisfaction for your peti- 
tioner.” This Colonel Robert Phayer was governor of Cork for the Parliament in 1656, as 
appears from a letter of protection from him given for Daniel O’Donovan to Colonel Ingoldsby, 
Governor of Limerick, 25th April, 1656, when O’Donovan proposed to go across the Shannon 
[to O’Shaughnessy]. This Colonel Phayer was appointed by Cromwell in 1649, and continued 
till the Restoration in 1660, when he was sent prisoner to Dublin. 

In 1650, July 11th, this O’ Donovan entered into a covenant with Donough Mac Daniel Carthy 
and Florence O’Driscoll, reciting : 


APPENDIX. 2449 


‘‘ For as much as it is thought convenient and necessarie that friends and neighbours in those 
more than troublesome times should ioyne and unit their helping hands together, to withstand 
and resist all insolencies and annoyances that should invade either by their enemyes, back friends 
or any other: wee, therefore, the undernamed, doe, by these presents, covenant and faithfully pro- 
mise, and thereupon ingage our honesties, to the utmost of our power, to be ayding and assisting 
one to another in maintaining, uphoulding, and defending our lives, estates, and goods whatsoever, 
against all person and persons that would intend or act any violence, oppression, or any other 
unlawfull preiudice unto any or either of us, or that would incroach upon any of the respective 
Cantridges of Clann-Cahill, or Clanndermod, and Collimore, or any other of our rights or intrests 
whatsoever: further, it is faithfully promised and agreed upon betwixt us the undernamed, that 
if any or either of us would conceave or apprehend any cause of iealousie or suspition of imper- 
formance of this covenant, that it shall not be a breach hereof, but rather to be reconciled by the 
maior vote of the undernamed not concerned in that cause of iealousie, if any be; this tending to 
a faire correspondencie betweene us in the three cantridges before mentioned: and for the due 
performance hereof wee have heereunto subscribed our hands the 11th of July, 1650. Moreover, 
it is agreed upon and faithfully promised by and betweenee us that noe person or persons shall or 
may have commaund over our men in Armes, or to be in Armes, without our approbation, or the 
approbation of the maior parte of us, if we may from our superiours obtaine it; moreover, that 
any officer or officers voted & named by us may not exact, preiudice, or charge any or either of us, 
nor proceed in any thing wherein wee may be concerned, without the consent of us or the maior 
parte of us: and for the better performance heereof wee have taken our oathes upon the holy 
Evangelists, as witness our hands, the 11th of July, 1650. 

** DANIELL O’ DONOVAN. 
DonnocGH M° DANIELL CARTHY. 
F. O’Driscou.” 


He died in August, 1660 ; and we have the following testimony to his character, signed by 
his neighbours, the Protestant gentlemen of Carbery, who were present at hisdeath. The original 
is at Bawnlahan, in the possession of M* Powell : 

‘‘ Wee, the undernamed persons, were personally present when the late O’Donovane, of happy 
memory, upon his death-bed, in August last, 1660, making his last will and Testament, left his cordial, 
serious blessing upon Donough, Lord of Muskry, and his Honnerable Issue for ever, and prayed his 
Honnour to continue his former friendship, amitie, and favour to his owne Issue ; and that his Hon- 
nour knew that he grounded and founded all his ponderous affaires always upon his Lordship, who 
was Honnourably pleased to keepe and maintayne that his confidence in his Lordship unto and untill 
that present day. And alsoe commanded his sonne and heire, upon his blessing, to intimate soe 
much unto his Lordship, and to be advised and governed in all his weightie affaires by his Honnour, 
and enioyned him to be faithfull and obedient unto him and his noble Issue for ever; and to ioyne 
with him in all that would tend to their good and profitt, as time and occasion should require. 
And further he sayd that upon heareing of his Highness the Lord Marquis of Ormond’s Landing at 
Corke, with a Commission from his Majestie for pardoning and forgiveing all and every the 
natives of this kingdome that would accept of his Majestie’s peace then to be proclaimed by his 

141 


2450 APPENDIX. 


Highness, he rode instantly to Corke, and upon his entering into his Highnes’ lodging ther, his 
quarter-maister generall (who was formerly acquainted with O’Donovane), said, with a loud voice, 
la ergin oap emg O’Oonauane puap, and upon that his highness desired O’Donovane to tell him 
how those Rimes first begun, which he tould him, as he heard from part of his ancestors, and there 
in the Lord of Inchiquin’s presence, O’ Donovane voluntarily accepted and ioyfully applauded his 
said Majestie’s peace; and humbly prayed his Majestie’s pardon and forgiueness, if he had any way 
offended him, as he did not any way that he knew; and in continuation of his Loyal submission 
he rode with his Highnes, in the company of the Lord of Inchiquin, as far as Gleanmoire, three 
miles from Cork, and there parting with him humbly prayed his Highnes to be alwayes myndfull 
of him. All which wee certifie to have heard from O’Donovane the time above sayd, as wittnes 


our hands the first day of December, 1660. 
‘* OWEN FIELD, 


WILLIAM GOGHEN,” &c. 


There is another certificate to the same effect signed by thirty-nine of the English Protestants 
of Carbery. 

There was an elegy composed on his death by Conor Cam O’Daly of Munter-Bhaire, of which 
there is a copy in the possession of the Editor. In this elegy O’Daly calls this chieftain the son 
of Helena (as being the son of Helena Barry), laments the loss of this active warrior of wisdom 
and courage at that most critical period, when the Irish were so distrustful of each other. He 
remarks that his wife and children were raving with grief around his tomb; that distinguished 
men of the English and Irish race were overwhelmed with sorrow at his death, and that some of 
his neighbours after his death became enemies to his sept and territory; but he remarks with 
emphasis that before they lost their protecting chieftain, neither friend nor foe had obtained sway 
over them, and that no plunderer had circumvented them. That now the Clann-Chathail, the 
blood of the noble Fiacha Figente, the humane progeny of Donovan, were like a flock without a 
shepherd, having lost in him their defender against their enemies, their strong bulwark, their 
directing wisdom, their soul, their head of council, the supporter of their fame, and their active 
swordsman in the hard conflict ; a man of mildness, uprightness, and humanity; a man of meek 
but vigorous and subtle mind, of unusual insight into the future, who had wisdom without guile 
in his covenants, and who possessed strength, but never wished to exercise it, though he always 
exhibited firmness of mind and force of character when just restraint was necessary; a man of 
modesty, temperance, and humility, deporting himself with deference towards the poor as well 
as the rich; a man of a majestic mind, of piety, generosity, and truth. At the end he gives the 
year of his death as follows : 

‘“« Three scdre years exactly, 
One thousand years besides six hundred, 
Was the age of the son of God 
When O’ Donovan departed.” 


His wife, Sheela, died in the year 1680, as appears from an elegy on her death, beginning, 
“Balan buna bap cSile.” She was the daughter of Sir Roger O’Shaughnessy, by Elizabeth 
Lynch, and was, at least, twenty years younger than her husband. 


APPENDIX. 2451 


XLII. Danie: IV. On the death of his father in 1660, being left without any estates, he 
petitioned His Majesty, Charles II., immediately after his restoration, to restore him to his father’s 
property. His petition runs as follows : 


‘ 


“To the King’s most Excellent Majestie. 

‘* The humble petition of Daniell O’Donovane, Esq. In most humble manner beseecheth your 
Majestie to cast your gracious eye uppon the annexed, wherein your Majestie may reade of the 
Petitioner’s late deceased father’s sufferings and civill deportment sithence y® first breaking out 
of the Rebellion in Ireland in the year 1641, untill this present, which your Petitioner can make 
apeare by proofe beyonde exceptions. And yett your Pettioner is at present dispossessed of all his 
Lands, tenements, and hereditaments in Irelande. 

‘May it, therefore, please your Majestie, and as the Pettioner never acted directly or indi- 
rectly against your Majestie’s service, his late deceased father’s reall integrity in the furtherance 
of your Majesties service appearing, there being no delinquency to be laide to theire charge, to 
give order that your Pettioner may (without any further trouble) be forthwith putt in possession 
of all and singular the estate and estates, whereof his late deceased father and he were dispossessed 
by the late Usurped Power, and therein confirmed and settled by your Majesties gracious order, 


and your Pettitioner shall pray, &c.” 
“* Whitehall, March 3, 1661. 


“His Majestie is graciously pleased to referr this Petition to the Right honourable Lord 
Viscount Moor, the Lord Viscount Loftus, and the Lord Kingston, or any two of them, to consider 
thereof, and certifie his Majestie what they consider fitt to be done therein. 

*¢ Witt1aAM Morrice.” 

It appears from a Pass Permit given to O’Donovan on this occasion that he went to England : 

“* Charles R.—Charles by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, 
Defender of the faith, and soe forth. To all loveing subjects whome it may concerne, Greeting. 
These are to will and require you to suffer and permitt Daniel O’Donovan, Esq., and his servants 
and their necessaries, to Imbarke in any of our Ports, and passe into our Kingdome of Ireland; 
and there to remaine and travell with theire swords freely and quietly aboute theire lawfull occa- 
sions, and to return into England upon occasions, without any lett, hindrance, or molestation 
whatsoever.” 

This was followed by a letter from the King to the Irish Government, recommending 
O’Donovan’s claim to their serious attention. The result was, that he was restored to a small 
portion of the Manor of Raheen, but to no part of the Manor of Castle Donovan, which the King 
by Patent, in the eighteenth year of his reign, granted unto Lieutenant Nathaniel Evanson, at a 
rent of £22 4s. 1ld. 

O’Donovan also obtained a certificate from the English inhabitants of the barony of Carbery, 
and its vicinity, testifying to the character of himself and his father, which is worded as 
follows : 

“Wee, English Inhabitants, living in the Barrony of Carberrie and the part adjacent, in the 
Countie of Corke, doe from our knowledge humbly certifie all those whome it may concerne, that 
Mr. Daniell O’Donovane, alias O’ Donovane, chief of that name and family, hath from his childhood 

1412 


2452 APPENDIX. 


lived inoffensive towarde us and all his neighbours, and loyall and faithfull to his Majestie ; And 
that his father, Daniel O’Donovane, lately deceased, both in the beginning and continuance of the 
late unhappy warr in Ireland, did by many signall testimonies declare and shewe his constant 
good affection to the English, in his willingnes on all occasions to serve them in their distress and 
want ; and that his loyall and good affection to the late King, of Blessed memorie, hath been 
manifestly seen to us and others ; which deportment of his wrought so effectually, that there werr 
present hundreds of English and chiefest Neighbourhood attending his corps to the grave, more 
than ever was seen by any of us to any other of his Nation, which was not long after the tyme of 
his Majestie’s happy restauration of his Crowne and Dignitie, to which wee doe subscribe this 
20th day of May, 1662. 


‘¢ Amos BENNETT, Joun Goopwyn, 
JAMES DEVREX, Epwarp Bryan, 
Boye Hut, JoHN HEALY, 
Tuomas HuncGERFoRD, ABELL MARSHALL, 
THOMAS JARVYS, EDWARD CLERKE.”’ 


O’Donovan also obtained a letter from the Countess of Clanrickard to the Duke of Ormond, 
recommending him to his Grace’s special notice and protection : 


[ November, 1665. | 

‘*To his Grace James Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, These are. 

“May it please your Grace,—The Bearer, Daniel O’Donovan, sonne and heire to Daniel 
O’Donovan, late of Castle Donovan, in the County of Corke, Deceased, hath been left without any 
provision for him in the Act of Settlement, which I believe hath beene occasioned by the Death 
of my Deare Lord and husband, and my sonne, for I [ often heard them | speake of the said Daniel 
Donovan, the father [of the bearer], to be a person who at all times, and upon all occasions, was 
ready to serve his Majestie, as appeares by your Grace’s and my husband’s certificates, which the 
bearer hath to shew, and which I humbly pray your Grace to peruse, together with his Majestie’s 
Gratious letters, which he alsoe hath, wherein there is mention made of his father’s raising men 
under your Grace’s command, Two companies of foote, whereof both his brothers were Captaines, 
and one of them, with his company, totally slaine with your Grace at the siege of Dublin, at Rath- 
moines, and the other slaine in his Majestie’s service beyond seas. Now I humbly referr the 
condition of the poore Gentleman to your Grace’s consideration, he having noe other friends to 
mediate for him, since the death of my dearest friends.” 

This is indorsed in another hand, ‘‘ Lady Clanrickarde’s letter to y* Duke of Ormond, in 
| favour | of O’ Donovan.” 

The King’s letter and the decree of the Court of Claims are as follows. They are extracted 
from Adventurers’ Certificates, Roll xviii., preserved in the Chief Remembrancer’s Office, Dublin. 
There is another copy of the King’s letter at Bawnlahan House, in the possession of Edward 
Powell, Esq. 

‘* Daniell O’Donovane, Esq., sonn and heire of Daniell O’Donovane, of Castle O’Donovane, in 
the county of Corke, deceased, did exhibit his Petition and Schedule before us, His Majesty’s 


APPENDIX. 9453 


Commissioners, upon the 3rd March, 18th year Chas. II., thereby setting forth, that by virtue of 
his Majesty’s gracious Letter, which followeth in these words : 

‘Charles R.—We having taken into consideration the report of the Earle of Drogheda and the 
Lord Kingeston, grounded on our order of referance of the thirtieth of March last past, graunted 
on the Petition of Daniell O’Donovane, Esq., wherein it appeareth by the Certificate of our right 
trusty and right intirely beloved James Duke of Ormond, steward of our household, and other 
certificates in the said report mencioned, That Daniell O’Donovane, of Castle O’Donovane, in the 
county of Corke, in our kingdome of Ireland, submitted unto the Peace concluded in our said 
kingdome, in the yeare one thousand six hundred and forty-eight, and constantly adhered there- 
unto, contributing his best endeavours to advance it, and suppresse all oppositions that might be 
thereunto given, signally testifying upon all occasions his loyalty and fidelity to our service ; and 
that he raised, at his own cost and charge, by Commission from the said Duke of Ormond, then 
our Lieutenant of Ireland, two foote companies, whereof one was commanded, as Captaine, by Mor- 
rogh O’Donnovane, his Brother, in the regiment of Collonell Hennesy, under the Command of our 
said Lieut. of Ireland, at the seidge of Dublin, where the said Captaine Morogh O’Donovane was 
killed in our service. And that Richard O’Donovane retired himselfe and Company into forraigne 
partes, and there was also killed in our service, when hee had first, as Captaine of the other foote 
Company in Collonel O’Driscoll’s Regiment, contributed his best endeavours for the furtherance 
of our sérvice, till the late Usurped Power became prevalent in our said kingdome of Ireland; and 
that Daniell O’Donovane persevering still constant in his loyalty to us, the said Usurped Power 
seized upon all his Estate, burning, killing, and destroying all that came in their way, and blew 
up, with powder, two of his the said Daniell’s Castles. All which induced the referrees aforesaid 
to be of opinion that Daniell O’Donovane, sonn to the said Daniell, lately deceased, is by our 
Declaration for the settlement of that Kingdome, restorable to the estate whereof his said father 
was dispossessed as abovesaid. We have, therefore, thought fitt, and it is our will and pleasure, 
that the said Daniell be forthwith established in the quiett and peaceable possession of all the 
Castles, houses, Lands, tenements, leases, mortgages, & hereditaments whatsoever, whereof the said 
Daniell O’Donovane, his father, was dispossessed by the late usurped government ; and the rather 
for that wee find by Certificates of sundry persons of quallity, his English neighbours, that hee 
ever was affeccionate to the English; and alwayes industrious and carefull to preserve their interest 
and goods from the rapine and pilladge of the rude multitude. And if any part of the premisses 
be possessed by reprizable adventurers, or souldiers, that they be reprized without delay, and the 
Petitioner forthwith restored to that parte of his Estate alsoe (his father nor himselfe ever accepting 
any Lands in Connaught, or the County of Clare, in [as much as] that they still expected to be 
restored to their owne by our happy restauration), and if any Rent or Rents, or other sume or 
sumes of mony doe remayne in charge on the premisses in our Court of Exchequer, in our said 
Kingdome, which were putt in charge since the moneth of October, 1641, the Barons of our said 
Court and every of them, and every other officer there whom it may concerne, are forthwith to 
cause the same to be put out of charge. And our further will and pleasure is, that our Lords 
Justices of our said Kingdome, our Commissioners, and all other our Governour and Governours 
for the tyme being, our sheriffes and other officers, whom it shall or may concerne, doe cause this 


2454 APPENDIX. 


our order to be put in due and speedy execution, for which this shall be to them and every of 
them a sufficient warrant. Given at our Court at Whitehall, the eighteenth day of Aprill, 1661, 


in the thirteenth yeare of our reigne. 
‘“‘ By His Majesty’s Command, 


“* Wit. Morrice. 
‘To our trusty and right welbeloved Councellor Sir Maurice 


Eustace, Knight, Chancellor of our Kingdome of Ireland; 
and to our right trusty and right welbeloved Cousins and 
Councellours, Roger Earle of Orrery and Charles Earle 
of Mountrath, Justices of our said Kingdome ; and to 
the Commissioners appointed to execute our Declaration 
for the settlement of that our Kingdome; & to the Chief 
Governour or Governours thereof for the time being ; 
and to all other our Officers and Ministers whom it may 


Concerne.”’ 


‘“¢ And by one Clause or Proviso in the said Explanatory Act expressed, hee is lawfully and 
rightfully intituled unto several lands, tenements, and hereditaments in the said Petition and 
Schedule mentioned. 

‘“‘It appeared unto this Court that Daniel O’ Donovane, deceased, father to the Claymant, was 
in the actuall seizin and possession thereof upon the 22nd October, 1641; and that the Claymant 
was in the actuall seizen & possession thereof upon the 22nd August, 1663. It is Decreed that he 
and his heires and assigns shall & may have, hold, & enjoy the following lands, tenements, and 
hereditaments, that is to say: Curraghalicky, three plowlands, containing 640 acres of profitable 
lands, plantation measure, and 176 acres of unprofitable lands; in Derryclaghagh, two plowlands, 
322a. lr. 28p. prof., and 1224. unprof. In Cashlurragh and Killavinoge, 569a. 2k. 16. prof.; 
Coolbla, one plowland, 192a. 3r. 8p. prof.; and Banlaghan, one plowland, 1464. 3n. 8p. profit.; all 
lying and being in the Barony of Carbery, and County of Corke; the totall of plantation acres 
being 18714. 2r. and 20 perches, which make 30314. 2r. 35P. English statute measure. 

‘“* The same to be held and enjoyed by the said Daniel O’Donovane, his heires and assigns, for 
Ever, in free and Common Soccage, as of His Majesty’s Castle of Dublin; rendering and paying 
for the same, yearly, £28 8s. 54d. Sterling, at the receipt of His Majesty’s Exchequer in Dublin; 
and this our judgment and Decree we do hereby Certifie, to the end that effectuall letters patents 
may be forthwith granted unto the said Daniell O’Donovane, his heirs and assigns, for Ever, this 


21st day of December, 1666. 
‘* Epw. SMYTHE, W. CHURCHILL, 


Epw. DERING, Epw. Cooke.” 


In 1684 he was put on his trial for high treason, as appears from a certified copy of a record 
in the possession of O’Donovan of Montpellier, which states: ‘“‘ That Daniell O’ Donovan, Esq. 
(being committed by Sir Emanuel Moore, Esq., one of his Majestie’s, &c., for high Treason, on the 
information of one John Donovan), was at the said Assizes indicted for that he the said Daniell 
O’Donovan, the 1st December, in the, &e., at Ardagh, in the county of Corke, did traitorously, 


APPENDIX. 2455 


together with other traitours unknowne, conspire, imagine, &c., the death of our Sovraigne Lord 
the King, &c., in his lodgings in Whitehall, and also to levie warre against the King, &c., and to 
depose and deprive his Majestie of his regall power, &c., by procuring, bringing in, &c., a forraigne 
power, to witt, the French King and his army, and to that end, &e. To which indictment said 
Daniel O’Donovan pleaded “not guilty,” and for his tryall put himselfe on his country, which abso- 
lutely acquitted him, and found him not guilty thereof ; whereupon the said Daniel O'Donovan 
was then discharged, without any rule of the good behaviour. All which I certifie, &c. 
** JONAN SANKEY.” 


Soon after this period we find him a colonel of a regiment of foot, consisting of thirteen com- 
panies, in the service of James II. On the 25th July, 1689, he received the following order from 
James II.: 

“James Rex [autograph ],—Our will and pleasure is, that you keep up all the supernumerary 
companies of the Regiment under your command that are over and above thirteen, till we send 
you our further orders to dispose thereof. And you are to send us an account of their number, 
that subsistence may be ordered for them. Given at our Court at Dublin Castle, the 25th day of 


July, 1689, and in the 5th yeare of our Reigne. 


‘« By his Majesty’s Command, 
‘¢ MELFORT. 
‘““'To our Trusty and wellbeloved Coll. Daniell 


O’ Donovan, commanding a Regiment in our 

service.” 

How far the subsistence here promised was given will appear from the following petition, sent 
by Colonel O’Donovan soon after to His Majesty. No date appears, but it was probably in 1689. 

Petition to the King, that ‘ Petitioner, Daniel O’Donovan’s father, raised two companies of 
foote, commanded by Petitioner’s uncles, who were both slaine in his late Majestie’s service. That 
by his late Majestie’s letter, Petitioner was to be restored to an ancient Estate of about £2000 
per annum; but by the partiality of the late Government was deprived of it, &c. That Petitioner 
suffered long imprisonment by the oppression of the late Earl of Orrerie, and was tried for his 
life, before Lord Chief Justice Keateing and Sir Richard Reynalls, uppon account of the late pre- 
tended Plot, &e. That Petitioner, by Commission, raised about Christmas last a Regiment of foot, 
and ever since kept them without any subsistence from your Majestie, whereby Petitioner is ex- 
posed to censure, &c. That Petitioner will slight all perills, &c., to serve your Majestie; and 
that Petitioner’s habitation and estate are exposed to the sea, and pirates frequently annoying the 
Inhabitants, so that it is requisite to have still men in arms thereabouts.” 

Among the Bawnlahan papers, many of which are now in the possession of O’Donovan at 
Montpellier, are numerous letters, military orders of Lord Dover, General Wauchop, La Motte, 
and others, accounts of men, arms, and moneys, captures of places, and notes for exchange of 
prisoners during the civil war, addressed to the Honourable, and, sometimes, Right Honourable 
Colonel Daniel O’Donovan, at various places in Munster. These documents are very curious, and 
should be all published. Among them is a “ Precept of Pierce Nagle, High Sheriff of the county 
of Corke, to the Provost of the Borough of Baltimore, to elect two Burgesses of that Borough to 


2456 APPENDIX. 


the Parliament to be holden on the 7th of May next, at Dublin, dated 9th April, 1896; and 
also a draft of the return of Members of Parliament for the Borough of Baltimore, in April, 1689, 
between Pierce Nagle, High Sheriff of the county of Corke, and Cornelius O’Donovan, Morough 
O’Donovan, Cornelius O’Donovan of Kilmacabea, Daniel O’ Donovan of Kilgliny, Daniel Regane, 
Daniel O’ Donovan of Gortnaskehy, Timothy Regane, Daniel O’ Donovan of Fornaght, Thady Regane 
of Ballyvarloghly, Cornelius O’Donovane of Ballyncala, and Keadagh O’Donovan, all Burgesses 
of the towne and Borough of Baltimore, duly choosing Daniel O’Donovan, alias O’ Donovan, Esq., 
and Richard O’Donovan, Esq., Doctor of Both Laws, to be members, &c. In this document the 
name, ‘‘ Richard O’ Donovan, Doctor of Both Laws,” is cancelled throughout, and that of “‘ Jeremie 
O’Donovan, Esq.’ written above it. (This was Jeremy Donovan of Dublin, Chief of the Clan- 
Loughlin.) 

In October, 1690, Col. O’Donovan was Deputy Governor of Charles Fort, which was summoned 
to surrender by Lord Marlborough; but the Governor, Sir Edwart Scott, answered, that it would 
be time enough a month hence to talk of surrendering ; upon which the trenches were opened 
the 5th of October. The batteries were managed on the east side by the Danes in King William’s 
service, and on the north by the English. On the fifteenth a breach was made by the Danes; 
and the English being masters of the counterscarp, they sprung a mine with good success, and 
every thing was ready for an assault, when the Governor capitulated, and surrendered upon 
honourable conditions, which would not have been granted, but that the weather was exceeding 
bad, provisions scarce, and the army very sickly. Colonel O’Donovan delivered the keys of this 
fort into Lord Marlborough’s hands, who, having thus fortunately accomplished the design of his 
voyage, left his brother, Brigadier Churchill, governor of Charles Fort, and returned with his 
fleet to Portsmouth. The garrison in Charles Fort, which consisted of 1200 men, had liberty to 
march out with their arms and baggage, and were conducted to Limerick.—Story, p. 147. Smith’s 
Natural and Civil History of Cork, vol. ii. p. 206. 

It appears from a letter in the handwriting of Helena, Countess of Clanrickard, and addressed 
to her son, John, ninth Earl of Clanrickard, that Colonel O’Donovan was treated unfairly by 
James the Second’s party. It is at present in the possession of O’Donovan of Montpellier, and 
runs as follows: 

‘‘My pear Lorp,—This goes by a kind clergyman and an officer in Coll. Donovan’s Regiment, 
of the same name, and, I suppose, his neere relations. They make a complaint of hard measure 
done to Coll. O’Donovan; and truly such proceedings are unparrelelled. The King and all of and in 
his interest have a part in a wrong and injury soe gross and palpable. Your Lordship will concurre 
in this when you have heard what they have to say, and to it your Lordshipp is referred by 

‘“*My Lord, your very affectionate mother, 
‘‘and most humble Servant, 
‘* HELLENA CLANRICKARDE. 

‘* Coll. O’Donovan is a neere relation to my children by their father ; and, tho’ not so neere, 
yet related to me too.” 


This Helena Clanrickarde was the daughter of Donogh Mac Carthy, first Earl of Clancarty, 
by Ellen Butler, sister of James, first Duke of Ormonde. She was the second wife of William, 


APPENDIX. 2457 


seventh Earl of Clanrickarde, who was the nephew of Sir Roger O’Shaughnessy, the maternal 
grandfather of Col. O’Donovan.—See Burke’s Eztinct Peerage of Ireland, 1840; Lodge’s Peerage, 
by Archdall, vol. iv. p. 39; Burke’s Hibernia Dominicana ; and Genealogies, Tribes, and Customs 
of Hy-Fiachrach, printed for the Archxological Society of Dublin, p. 381. 

The above letter was written on the 24th of April, 1691. On the 18th of May following, we 
find a letter, in the handwriting of Colonel Hamilton, offering, on the part of the Government, to 
Colonel O’Donovan, that he shall be free for ever from all private actions, from any injury or 
trespass done by him, since the lst of August, 1688, to the date hereof. The following is a faithful 
copy of this letter, preserving the writer’s peculiar orthography and odd phraseology: 


‘“* Bandon, 18 May, 1691. 

‘¢Sir,—I have orders given me to signifie you that you shall be for ever free from all private 
actions, from any injury or trespass done by you, or by your command, since the Ist of August, 
1688, to the date hereof, which, in my opinion, is both honourable and very large conditions. 
What specified above, and what Capt. Hamilton shewd you under hand and seall, I be engadge 
shall be confirm’d, both by goverment and generall ; if not accept’d off, I wish verie heartlie that 
I had never mov’d itt. I march from this on Wensday, so you may perswad y* self not to find a 
second frind that can procure you larger conditions as what now I offer. All I have now to say, 
that since I have obtain’d what you can desair, I don’t doubt but you will be so just as to comply 


with my desair. Ime, Sr 
z Ria? ‘s Your most humble servt. 


‘“* Lett me have your possitive answar. ** GEO. HAMILTONE. 
‘** For Colonell O’Donovan, att Drummoor, These.” 


Colonel O’Donovan did not comply with this request ; on the i2th of October, 1691, he 
received an order from the Honourable Major-General Wanehope, to march with his regiment to 
the harbour of Cork, there to be embarked. This order is worded as follows : 


‘“‘ Notwithstanding any former orders, you are heareby, on sight heareof, required to march 
with the Regiment under your command to the harbor of Cork, there to be imbarked. Given 


under my hand, at Litter, this 12th of November, 1691. 
“ Jo. WANEHOPE, 
‘© To Coll. O’Donnevan these, att Gortneshemer.” 


It does not appear that he went off to foreign parts on this occasion; for it is evident from 
a pass-permit, in the handwriting of Bryan Townesend, that he went to Cork on the 4th of 
January, 1692, to deliver himself up as a prisoner : 


“‘ Permit Col. O’Donovan to travell to Timoleague, and from thence to Corke, in order to 
deliver himselfe a prisoner unto the High Sheriff without molestation, he behaveing himselfe as 
becometh, unless you have any order to the contrary from the said Sheriff. Dated this 4th day 
of January, 1692. 

‘* B. TOWNESEND. 

“You are also to permit Capt. Conolly and Captain Donovan to pass as above—B, T ” 

14k 


2458 APPENDIX. 


It appears from a letter in the handwriting of John Hill, touching an equity suit then in 
court pending, that Colonel O’Donovan was living in January, 1701. He married, first, Victoria, 
daughter of Captain Coppinger, and had by her one daughter, Victoria, who married Captain Cor- 
nelius O’Donovan, the ancestor of the present O’Donovan (Morgan William, of Montpellier). He 
married, secondly, in 1665, Elizabeth Tonson, the daughter of Major Tonson, and had by her three 
daughters, namely: 1. Sarah; 2. Honora; and 3. Catherine; and four sons: 1. Richard, his eldest 
son, and heir; 2. Daniel, who died young; 3. Barry, who died young; and 4. Cornelius, who 
married Honora, daughter of Mac Fineen Duff, and had issue Richard, who had a son, Cornelius, 
who died at Dingle, s. p. in 1841, the last of the descendants of Colonel Daniel O’Donovan in the 
male line. 

XLII. Carrar RicHarp, son oF COLONEL DaNnIEL O’Donovan. He married, in 1703, Ellinor 
Fitzgerald, daughter of the Knight of Kerry, by whom he had three children: 1. Daniel, his suc- 
cessor ; 2. Rickard, who died unmarried ; and some daughters, the eldest of whom was Elizabeth, 
who married Silvester O’Sullivan, head of the sept called Mac Fineenduff, of Derreenavurrig, near 
Kenmare, in Kerry, by whom she had numerous issue. Among the Bawnlahan papers are curious 
articles of agreement, dated 12th September, 1703, between the parties, in which, among other 
things, Richard O’ Donovan, alias O’ Donovan, ‘‘ promises to pay the said Silvester £200 sterling, as 
soon as he, the said Richard, shall recover his wife’s fortune or portion from the present Knight of 
Kerry” !! 

XLIV. Dantet V., son or Caprarin Ricnarp O’Donovan. He married, first, in the year 1721, 
in the eighteenth year of his age, Anne Kearney, daughter of James Kearney, Esq., of Garrettstown, 
in the barony of Courcies, but had no issue by her ; and secondly, in the year 1763, in the sixtieth 
year of his age, Jane Becher (daughter of John Becher, Esq., of Hollybrook), then fifteen years old, 
and had by her four children : 1. Richard, a General in the English service; 2. John, a captain in 
the English service, who was killed in the year 1796; 3. Ellen, or Helena, who married John 
Warren, Esq., of Codrum, and died without issue in 1840; and 4. Jane, who died unmarried in 
the year 1833. This Daniel conformed to the established religion of the State in 1729, and died 
in 1778. In his will, dated 22nd December, 1778, he leaves the reversion of his estates to Morgan 
Donovan, Esq., then living in the city of Cork, the grandfather of O’Donovan of Montpellier. He 
was buried in the church of Myross, where he was followed by his second wife, Jane Becher, in 
1812. The following is a copy of his will : 

‘In the name of God, amen, I, Daniel O’ Donovan, of Castle Jane,” [alias Bawnlahan] “ Esq., in 
the parish of Myrus, and county of Cork, being in perfect sence and memory, but feeble and weak, 
do make this my last will, revoking all wills to this date made. First, I order all my debits to be 
justly paid, and resign my soule to Allmighty God, and to have my Body privatly interd in my 
family burying-place at Myrus. I appoint my good friends, James Kearny, Esq., of Garrettstown ; 
Thomas Sarsfield, Esq., of Ducloen; Thos. Hungerford, Esq., of Foxhall; and Michl. Becher, Esq., 
to be Executors and Administrators of this my last will, to settle and avoid any disputes hereafter 
in my family. Jmprimis, I leave my Estate clear, as by my settlement will appear, to my eldest 
son, Richard O’ Donovan, and his heirs male lawfully begotten; and, in failure of Issue male in him, 
of my second son, John Donovan, and his heirs male lawfully begotten; in failure of Issue male or 


APPENDIX. 2459 


female in either, I leave the reversion of my Estate to Morgan Donovan, Esq., now living in the city 
of Cork, and to his heirs male lawfully begotten ; subject, in case of accidents, to the sum of ten 
thousand pounds Ster. to my Eldest Dauther, Elen O’Donovan, and the like sum to be paid to 
my second Dauther, Jane O’Donovan, being the sum of ten thousand pounds Ster., and to their 
heirs : if Either should dye, the surviving person to come in for the intire twenty thousand 
pounds. Secondly, I give and devise the sum of Two thousand pounds, being my wife’s fortune, 
with two thousand pounds more, which I had a power by my settlement, and one thousand pounds 
more, debits due to me from different persons, which in all amounts to five thousand pounds, to 
be dispos’d of in manor following: I order those five thousand pounds to be equally divided 
between my three younger Children, share equaly alike ; and if either should dye under the age 
of fifteen years, or unmaried, the surviving person or persons to come in for such part ; in case of 
failure in the younger children, the above five thousand pounds to come to my eldest son, Richard; 
viz. John O’Donovan, Elen O’Donovan, and Jane O’Donovan, are what I call my younger children. 
I give and devise to my dear and beloved wife One hundred Acres of her choice part of the lands 
at Castle Jane, with the dweling-house, out-houses, and offices, during the minority of my son, 
Richard, she keeping the same in proper order. I give unto my dear and beloved wife her post- 
Sheas,” [Chaise] ‘‘ Horses, and Harness, and what belongs to the Sheas as usual, knowing her to 
be a loveing mother and faithfull wife. I give and bequeth unto my Sister O’Sullivan’s children, 
male and female, five pounds sterling, to be given each of them. I leave all other debits, goods, 
chattles, and all manor of property, to my son, Richard, over and above what I have herein set 
forth. : 
‘‘ Given under my hand and seale this 22nd day of December, 1778, seventy-eight; Castle Jane. 


“Dan. O’ Donovan. 


‘‘ Before the perfection of this will, I give and bequeath to my second son, John O’Donovan, 
my part of the lease purchased from Thos. Baylie, called Clontaff, to him and his heirs and assigns ; 
with the lands of Cahnenausnah, when recovered by law. Witness my hand and seale, as above dated, 


** Dan. O’DoNoVAN. 
‘Signed & sealed in presence of us, 
‘* ALEXANDER DONOVAN, 


WiitamM Roserts, 
Davin Horan, 
JoHN Donovan.” 


Smith, in his History of Cork (1st edit., p. 271), in noticing Banlaghan, writes: “In this parish 
[of Moyross], is Banlaghan, the seat of O’ Donovan, chief of that ancient family, a worthy, courteous 
gentleman.” 

_ XLV. Ricuarp II., son or DanteL O’Donovan. He was born about 1764, and, in 1800, mar- 
ried Emma Anne Powell, a Welsh lady, by whom he had no issue. He levied fines and suffered a 
recovery of all his property, and thus cut off the remainder of O’Donovan of Montpellier in the es- 
tates. He was Colonel of the Enniskillen Dragoons, and afterwards a General in the English service, 
and the intimate acquaintance of the Prince Regent, and of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, 
whose life he saved in the retreat from Holland. He died in 1829, after having willed his pro- 

14K 2 


2460 APPENDIX. 


perty® to his wife, Emma Anne Powell, who died in 1832, after having willed the remnant of the 
estate of the senior branch of the O’Donovan family to her brother, Major Powell, whose sons now 
enjoy it.—WSte transit, Sc. 


O’DONOVAN OF MONTPELLIER. 


On the death of General O’Donovan, in 1829, the Rev. Morgan Donovan, of Montpellier, 
began to style himself “ the O’Donovan,” though the next heir to this dignity at the time was 
Captain Cornelius O’Donovan of Tralee, who was the son of Richard, son of Cornelius, the second 
son of Colonel O’Donovan, who left issue. This Captain Cornelius died at Dingle, in 1841, with- 
out issue; but, after his death, the next heir to the dignity of O'Donovan was Morgan William 
O’Donovan, of Montpellier, who descended from Teige O’Donovan of Raheen and Drishane, the 
second son of Donell O’Donovan, who was inaugurated in 1584, and died in 1638 or 1639. His 
pedigree is published in Burke’s History of the Commoners. The following is a copy of the probate 
of the will of his ancestor, Teige, which proves, beyond a question, that he was the brother of 
Daniel III., the husband of Gylles O’Shaughnessy. 

‘‘In Dei nomine, Amen. I, Teige O’Donovane of Drishane, in the Countie of Corke, Gent., 
beinge of perfect witt and memory, though weake in bodie, doe make this my last will and testa- 
ment as followeth: First, I bequeath my soule to God Almightie, and my bodie to be buried in 
the Cathedrall Church of Rosse Carbery. Item, I bequeath unto my sonne and heire, Daniell 
mac Teige, and his heires males, the nine Gnives, three quarters of a plo: of the south ploughland 
of Drishane, and the tenn Gnives, in mortgadge of fower score and tenn pounds and eleven shil- 
lings ster., in the quarter of Kilmacbie, called Caghir Cairbrie, halfe a ploughland; and Cahirne- 
bologie fower Gnives, and the halfe ploughland of Carighbane, which I hold in fee simple, in the 
quarter of Revolder and the halfe ploughland of Gortnacloghee and Dromenidy, which I hold in 
moortgadge from Owen mac Cormack for fifteene pounds tenn pence, ster.; also the two Gnives 
of the plo. of Lahanaght, which I hold in mortgadge from Conohor mac Awlife for fowerteene 
pounds, ster. Also the five Gnives of Loghcrote, the three Gnives of Crothe, and the two gnives 
of Knockboie, which I hold in fee simple, the gnive and quarter of a gnive in Knockboy aforesaid, 
which I hold in mortgadge of Donogh mac Teige, alias Bronagh, for eleaven pounds ten shillings 
and six pence, ster. Also the halfe ploughland of Dirigule, which I hold in mortgadge from 
Dermod oge and Donough mac Dermod for twenty pounds, vizt. tenn pounds, ster., each of them 
oweth, and thirteene pounds six shillings tenn pence, ster., which the said Donogh mac Dermod 
oweth me by specialties. And for want of such issue males of the said Daniell, lawfully begotten 
or to be begotten, the remainder of all the before recited premisses to my second sonne, Morrogh 
mac Teige, and the heires males of his bodie, lawfully begotten or to be begotten. And for want 
of such Issue males of the said Morrogh, the Remainders thereof unto my brothers equally devided 


¢ Willed his property.—The following are the names of  raghalicky ; 7. Curryglass; 8. The Pike; 9. Coomatholin. 
the lands remaining to General O’Donovan at the time of | This was a very small portion of Clancahill. These lands 
his death in 1829, and which were bequeathed by him to his | were bequeathed by the said Emma Anne Powell, relict of 
wife, Emma Anne Powell: 1. Bawnlahan; 2. Coolebin; the late General O'Donovan, to her brother, the late Major 
3. Islands ; 4. Clontaff; 5. Kilgleeny, or Kilglinny ; 6. Cur- — Powell, whose two sons have divided them equally. 


APPENDIX. 246] 


betweene them. Item, I bequeath and leave unto my wife, Joanne Donovane, alias Goggan, the 
ploughland of Drishane, whereupon my house standeth now, and the three Gnives of Dirireloge, 
in the quarter of Kilmacbie, which she holdeth by a Deed of jointure, as by the said more at large 
appeareth, and the Reversion of Remainder of the said lands unto my sonne, Daniell, and the heires 
males of his bodie, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten ; and for want of such Issue males, the 
Remainder thereof to the use or uses as afore specified. Also I bequeath unto my said wife 
the third part of all my Chattle, Horses, Cows, and household stuffe. Item, I bequeath unto 
my second sonne, Morragh mac Teige, the forty pounds tenn shillings, ster., due unto me by spe- 
cialties upon Dermod O Driscoll of Doulough ; forty pounds, ster., due unto me by specialties 
upon Cnoghor Oge O Driscoll of Ballynarde. Provided that if it fortune or happen that my 
said sonne, Morrogh, should die in his minority or nonadge, my will is that the remainder of 
this which I bequeath him shall revert and remain to his Brother, my eldest sonne and heire, 
Daniell. Item, I bequeath and leave unto my five daughters, vizt. to Joane ny Teige, Ellen ny 
Teige, Eilene ny Teige, and Shilie ny Teige, Twenty pounds, ster., due unto me by specialties 
upon Dermod mac Finine of Cnockebolleintagert; Twelve pound, ster., due unto me upon Finine 
O Driscoll upon specialties ; and thirteene pounds, ster., due unto me by specialties upon Teige 
mac Moriartagh mac Teige of Gort Shanecrone, to be equally divided betweene them in equal 
portions. And ifit shall happen or fortune that any of them shall die in their minority, that 
then her portion so dieinge shall be equally devided betweene the survivors. Item, I bequeath 
and leave unto my said five daughters the two parts of my Chattle, horses, and corne, as my Bro- 
thers, or two or three of them, in their discretion shall thinke fitt to devide them. Item, I 
bequeath and leaue towardes the dischargeinge of my Debts the six pounds, ster. due unto me by 
specialties upon mac Fillmie of Maleloghy; and also the tenn pounds, ster., due unto me 
by specialties upon mac Con mac Teige of Murrigh. Also, I leave and bequeath unto my sonne 
and heire, Daniel mac Teige, and heires males, wt supra, thirteene pounds and twelve shillings, 
ster., which are due unto me by severall specialties and notes upon Donogh mac Teige mac Fey- 
limy of Glaunagele; and also the fifteene shillings which are due unto me upon Thomas Kecratte, 
endinge upon Item, my said sonne and heir, Daniell, is to discharge and pay unto 
my Brother Richard’s sonne, Daniell mac Richard, Twenty pounds, ster., which he has upon me 
by specialties. Item, I bequeath and leave unto my sonne and heire, Daniell, the two parts of 
my household stuffe. And also doe name and appoint my Brother, Morrogh Donovane, sole Ex- 
ecutor of this my last will and testament. As Witnesse my hand and seale the Tenth day ot 


February, one thousand six hundred thirty-nine. 








“¢TEIGE DONOVANE. 


‘¢ Being present, 
** DONELL DONOVANE. 


*CuaroLus THouicG, Presbiter. 
DonoGH DoNOVANE.” 


“In Dei nomine.—Notwithstandinge my former Will, of the specialties followinge my will 
now is, to give forty pounds of the monies due unto me upon Donogh mac Teige mac Feylimie unto 
my daughter, Honora, And also I doe leave her the tenn pounds due unto me upon Donell mac 


2462 APPENDIX 

Dermodie mac Donogh of Ardagh mac Kannith. And the six pounds due unto me upon Daniell 
mac Donogh mac Teige mac Owen. And the five pounds due unto me upon Moriartah ma¢ 
All which I leave unto my foresaid Daughter, Honora ny Teige, and I doe leaue her 
to my Sister Honora’. And I doe leave with my Brothers (if God should call away my sonnes, 


which God forbid), dureinge their minorities, that they shall looke to my daughters in bestowinge 


Conohor. 


the specialties mentioned in my said former will upon them, accorDINGE as My BrotHEeR O’Dono- 
VANE® AND THE REST OF MY BROTHERS SHALL IN THEIR CONSCIENCE THINKE FITT. In Witnesse 


whereof I have hereunto putt my hand the Ealeventh day of February. 


* TEIGE DonovAne. 
‘“‘ Being present, 
“Canin 6 THOHIG. 
Morrocu Donovane. 
» ENEAsS CALLNANE.” 

** Tenore presentium Nos Thomas Ffrith®* Clericus in artibus Magister, Reverendis. in Christo 
patris ac Domini Domini Guilielmif permissione Divina Corcag. et Rossen. Episcopi Cancellarius et 
Vicarius in spiritualibus Generalis, in et pro tot. Dioc. Rossen. predict. rite et legitime constitutus, 
Notum facimus universis quod tertio Die mensis Martii, anno Domini 1639 Probatum fuit hoc tes- 
tamentum et coddicillum suprascriptum Thadzi O Donovane, qui dum vixit de parochia Creagh, 
Dioc. Rossen., generosi defuncti, coram magistro Ludovico Vigours Clerico et Surrogato Venerabilis 
viri Thome Ffrith predicti, neenon per Nos approbatum et insinuat ....in Curia Rossensi; com- 
missaque fuit et est administratio omnium et singulorum bonorum, iurium, creditorum, et cattal- 
lorum dicti defuncti, ac testamentum eius hoc qualitercunque concernen. Moriartie Donovane, 
fratri naturali dicti Defuncti Executori in hoc testamento nominato, Imprimisque de bene et fide- 
liter administrando eadem, ac de vero et perfecto inventorio omnium et singulorum bonorum, 
jurium, creditorum, et Cattallorum dicti defuncti conficiendo, et illud in Curia Rossensi predicta 
citra festo Philippi et Jacobi proxime futuro exhibendo et introducendo, necnon et de justo 
computo caleulo sive ratione in hac parte reddendo quandocunque ad hoc debité et congrue requi- 
situs fuerit, ad sancta Dei Evangelia juratus. In Cujus Rei testimonio Sigillum Officii Rossensis 
predicti presentibus apposuimus. Datum die mensis et Anno Domini supradicto. 

XLI. Terer O’Donovay, of Raheen and Drishane, whose will is above given, was the second 
son of the chief O’Donovan, and evidently his first son by Johanna Mac Carthy. He married 
Joane Goggan, and had by her two sons: 1. Daniel, who died without issue; and 2. Murrough or 
Morgan ; and five daughters, viz. Joane, Ellen, Eilene, Shilie, and Honora. 

4 My sister Honora.—She was married to the celebrated recovery of his lands in Dublin as his attorney. 


Teige-an-Duna Mac Carthy of Dunmanway. ee Thomas Ffrith.—He was Archdeacon of Ross from 


© My brother O’ Donovane, i. e. the chjef of the name, who 
at this time was Daniel IIT., the husband of Gylles O’Shaugh- 
Morogh, the testator’s executor, was the third son 
of O’Donovan (Daniel II.) He was killed at Rathmines, 
near Dublin, in 1649, leaving a son, Daniel, who was living 
at Carrowgarriff in 1662, when he empowered his cousin, 
Daniel, afterwards Colonel Daniel O’Donovan, to sue for the 


nessy. 


1639 to 1631.—See Cotton’s Fasti, p. 251. 

' Guilielmi.—This was the celebrated William Chapple, 
Bishop of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross, who had so distinguished 
himself before James I. at Cambridge by his argumentation, 
that the respondent, Dr. Roberts, unable to solve his argu- 
ments, fell into a swoon in the pulpit.—See Harris’s edition 
of Ware's Bishops, p. 568. 


APPENDIX. 2463 


XLII. Murroves or Morean O’Donovan. He married Jane Galway, and had issue seven sons, 
who are mentioned in a deed of settlement of 1684, in the following order: Conogher, Teige, 
William, Bartholomew, Richard, Donogh, and Morogh. On these certain lands, which are still 
in the family, are settled in strict entail, first vested in Richard O’ Donovan, Esq., Doctor of both 
Laws, of the city of Cork, and Donogh Mahowny, of Ardrivinigh, in West Carbery. From the 
eldest of these the present O’Donovan is descended; the second, Teige, was a Captain in the 
regiment of Colonel O’ Driscoll, and was slain at Castletownsend in 1690; William, the third son, 
had a son, William, who was living in 1742; but no account of the others is preserved. 

XLII. Conor or Cornetius O’Donovan. He was a Captain in the regiment of Colonel 
O*Donovan. In 1684 he married Victoria, only daughter of Colonel O’Donovan, and had by her 
two sons, Morgan and Teige. He obtained, in 1700, a general pardon from King William III. 
(Inrolled 12th Will. III. 2. p. f. r. 22), and died young, leaving his two sons as wards to Bryan 
Townsend of Castletownsend. His widow married a Mr. Turnbull of London, as appears by 
several of her father’s letters. 

XLIV. Morean Donovan, Esq., of Ballincalla. He was born in the year 1687, and, in 1691, 
claimed, by his guardian, Bryan Townsend, Esq., an estate in tail in Drishane, and various other 
lands in the barony of West Carbery, late estate of Cornelius O’Donovan, which claim was allowed, 
as appears from the printed list of claims before the Commissioners of the forfeitures of 1691. His 
guardian, Bryan Townsend, made him graduate at Oxford, where he conformed to the religion of 
the State, and became a staunch Williamite. In a lease made by him in 1714, for a term of 999 
years, he binds the tenant to pay five shillings a year for a bottle of claret, to drink the glorious 
and immortal memory of King William III. He purchased the estate of Montpellier, near Cork, 
in 1728; and was in the Commission of the Peace in the reign of George II. In 1733 he married 
Mary Ronayne (daughter of Thomas Ronayne, Esq., of Hodnettswood), who had been a Roman 
Catholic, but she conformed in the same year, after her marriage, as appears from the list of con- 
verts from Popery, wherein her name is entered, under that year, as ‘‘ Mary, wife of Morgan 
Donovan, Esq.” He died in 1759, and was succeeded by his eldest son, 

XLV. Morean Donovan, Esq. He married in May, 1766, Melian Towgood French, daughter 
of Savadge French, Esq., of the city of Cork. He died in 1802, and was succeeded by his eldest 
son, 

XLVI. The Rev. Morgan Donovan. He was born in 1769, and, in 1814, built Montpellier 
house, near Cork, on the estate which had been purchased by his grandfather in 1728. He mar- 
ried the daughter of William Jones, Esq., Recorder of Cork, and had by her: 1. Morgan Wilham, 
the present O’Donovan, born in 1796; 2. William Jones, born in 1799; and 3. Henry. On the 
death of General O’ Donovan of Bawnlahan, in 1829, he began to style himself the O’ Donovan; but 
there was a senior branch living till 1841, when Captain Cornelius, a legitimate descendant of 
Colonel O’Donovan, died at Dingle without issue. 

XLVIL Morean Wittiam O’Donovay, Esq., Barrister at Law, now the O’Donovan. He 
married, in July, 1844, Susan, daughter of the late William Armstrong Creed, formerly of the 
4th Foot. He still retains a considerable fragment of the O’Donovan territory, as will appear from 
the following list of the lands of which he is the head landlord. 


2464 


APPENDIX. 


Names of the Lands of the O’ Donovan, all in the East Division of the Barony of West Carbery, and 
County of Cork, August the 1st, 1842. 





| PATENT OF CAR. II. TO 


PARISHES. 








| PRESENT NAME. te ae nen ree, IN DEEDS OF 1619, ETc. 

| . 

= Biv Bee 

| Carrigfadda. Sratoua awrite ease AB AW etn Renee in 8 Abbeystrowry. 
Lisardgeehee, alias Lisardee. | Lissardgehy, alias Gor- | Lissardgeehie, 1630; Lissardghee, Ditto. 


Barnagollopy. 
Coomnageehee. 
Derry goole. 
Drishanebeg. 


Russagh, alias Rossagh. 
| Ardagh. 
Lick. 


| Bunlick. 
| Knockvallintaggart. 


Gortshanecrone. 


Ballinard. 


| Barna, part of Ballymorane, 
alias Ballyourane. 


nacoppul. 
Bluyd (East). 


Burriroe. 
Minlogh, part of Glanteige. 


Glanageele, part of ditto. 


Laherdanemore, alias Knock- 
nagowr, part of ditto. 

Lisheenroe, alias Lisseenroe, 
part of Glanteige. 

Lahanaght. 

Tuonafuora, alias Boherna- 
brada. 

| Knockbuoy, alias Knockeen- 
buoy, part of Loughrott. 

Upper Loughrott, alias Crott. 

| Carrigbane, part of Rivoul- 

| der. 





| Barna Mountain, alias Lug- | 


| Glangettle, alias Glangeill. 





tinvally. 


Ballygasby. 


Same. 
Same. 


Same. 
Lickiwith. 
Same. 


Gortancroan. 
Ballynard. 


Ballymorane. 


Blood. 


Barriroe. 
Menlagh. 


Knocknagowre. 


Lisseenmore. 





Same, alias Lahanagh. 
Bohernabreedagh. | 
Logherott. 


Garrybane, alias Carribane 
part of Reavoulder. 





1670 ; Lisardgoyhy, 1630 ; 
Gortnevarre, 1621-35; Gort- 
naballay, 1630. 


Clounemenaghee, 1643. 


Dirrigoole, 1670; Diregoole, 1630. 


Drishanebeg, 1628, 29, 33, 35 ; 
Dryshan, 1621-72; Drishane, 
1623 ; Dryshan Beg, 1624 ; 
Begg, 1625, 35, 38. 

Gortenrossigh, 1638. 

Killardagh & Gortinvally, 1632. 

Like and Munig, 1640; Licke 
and Munnig, 1640. 


Knockevollytagart, 1633; Gurt, 
1635. 

Gortsheane Crone, 1632. 

Ballynard, 1629, 35, 38, 64, 70; 
Ballinarde, 1670 ; Ballinnard, 
1677. 


Mealloghie, 1626-31; Maulelough, 
1670; Maulalough, 1670. 

Glaneigele, 1627; Glanteigkyl- 
line, 1632. 


Part of Fearnagilla, 1631. 


Knockboy, 1623. 
Loughcrotte, 1624. 
Croattes, 1624. 


Reavolder, 1 61 2: 





Creagh and Castlehaven. 
Abbeystrowry. 

Ditto. 
Creagh. 


Abbeystrowry. 
Tullogh, alias Baltimore. 
Ditto. 


Ditto. 
Ditto. 


Ditto. 
Ditto. 


Cahiragh. 
Ditto. 


Castlehaven, alias Glan- 
barahane. 
Ditto. 

Glanneberraghane, 1627. 


Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 


Drinagh. 
Drimaleague, alias Drum- 
daligue. 
Dromdalyege, 1624. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Killmacabea. 








According to the pedigree of the O’Donovans, compiled by John Collins of Myross, Teige, the 
son of the O’Donovan who married the daugher of Sir Owen Mac Carthy Reagh, had a grandson, 
Teige, or Timothy, a Captain, who was killed at Castletownsend, in 1690, together with the 
young Colonel O’Driscoll.—_ See Smith’s History of Cork, vol. ii. p. 207. According to the tradi- 
tion in Carbery, as communicated to the Editor by James O’Donovan of Cooldurragha, in a letter 


APPENDIX. 2465 


dated 10th August, 1842, this Captain Teige is now represented by John Donovan, of John-street, 
Waterford, a shoemaker, whose descent is traced as follows : 

XL. Donnett O’Donovay, chief, 1584-1639. 

XLI. Trige O’Donovan. 

XLII. Murroveu O'Donovan. 

XLII. Carraiwn Tre1ce O’Donovan, slain 1690. 

XLIV. Trmoruy O’Donovan. He married the daughter of Thomas Coppinger, of Affadown, 
the father of the Rev. John Coppinger, by whom he had, ‘ 

XLV. Trorpny O’Donovan, who settled in Waterford. 

XLVI. Joun Donovan of Waterford, who believes that he is the head of the O’Donovans, 
and went to Cork to take law proceedings for the recovery of General O’Donovan’s estate. This 
line of descent is probably correct, but no documentary evidence has been furnished to support it. 

Let us now return to the fourth son of the last inaugurated O’ Donovan, 


O’DONOVAN OF COOLDURRAGHA, PARISH OF MYROSS, CORK. 


XLIL. Donouen or Denis O’ Donovan, of Forenaght. There is extant a curious poem addressed to 
this Donough, on his lying dangerously ill, by his foster-father, Conor Cam O’Daly, who calls him 
‘‘ Donough, son of Donnell and Joane, a pillar in battle ;” his “oalza oil poglamcza, i.e. his dear 
and learned alumnus.” He lived at Forenaght, in the parish of Castlehaven, and married Mary, 
the daughter of Teige, son of Cormac Mac Carthy, commonly called Maigipzip na Mona, or Master 
of Mourne Preceptory, in Muskerry, and had by her one son, 

XLUI. Capra Dante O’Donovan. Collins says that he was “ one of the most accomplished 
gentlemen in the county of Cork, and a Captain under his cousin-german, Colonel O’Donovan, in the 
year 1689.” There is extant among the Bawnlahan papers a memorandum, in his own hand- 
writing, of his having taken Castletownsend by surprise, on the 9th of March, 1688-9. It runs 
as follows : 

‘“* Whereas Captain Daniell mac Donogh O’Donovan, of Colonel O’Donovan’s Regiment, haue- 
ing liued neere Castletowne, in the barony of Carrebry, in the county of Corcke, where Mr. Bryen 
Townsy gathered a garrison of the Rebles in that country; the said Captain imploy’d two spies 
to learne aboute the said Castletowne what the Garrison did, and bringing him intelligence, the 
second of this instant, that the Garrison there, sending aboundance of their goods, arms, and amo- 
nition, for Baltimore, by water, with whom a Number of y° Garrison went to convey them. Uppon 
which intelligence the said Captain took immediately twenty of the most resolute men of his com- 
panie, and conuayed them, by a stratagem, neere the castle of the said Castletown, soe that, un- 
awares, he came to command the Castle Doore, and Townsey being not there, but heereing that 
the said Captain was there, sent to him that he was willing to deliver up the Castle to Colonel 
O’ Donovan, if the said Captain had his orders, and the orders being there, possession was given of 
all the Castle to the said Captain Donovan, wherein he found of armes but what followeth: Twentie- 
nine fireing armes, three pistles, and a hundred small bulletts, seaven swords, three Bottles, with 
two hornes full of powder ; and it seems they threwed a ferquin of powder, and a great quantity 

14 L 


2466 APPENDIX. 


of musquet bulletts, into the sea, at my arriveing. This is a full and true account uppon the 
said Captain’s reputation, as heere he affirmes under his hand, the 9th March, 1688. 
“ Da: O’DonovaneE.” 

In a list of attainted persons, preserved in a manuscript in Trinity College, Dublin, his name 
occurs as ‘‘ Daniel mac Donogh Donovan. nuper de Ffornaght, in Com. Cork.” 

He married Mary, daughter of Edmond Fitzgerald, of Imokilly, commonly called Gamonn 
Chint O’s-Copna, and had issue, 

XLIV. Purr O’Donovay, of Listarkin, in the parish of Myross, who married Catherine, 
daughter of Thomas O’Hea, of Barryroe, and had issue, 

XLV. James O’ Donovan, of Ardra, in the parish of Myross, who married Catherine, daughter 
of Timothy Mac Carthy, of Muskerry, and had issue several sons, who died without issue ; and 

XLVI. Purr O’Donovan, of Cooldurragha, in the parish of Myross. Collins speaks of him 
as living in his own time, and calls him “ the great grandson of Captain Daniel mac Donough 
O’Donovan.” His words are: ‘“ His” [i.e. Captain Daniel’s] “ great grandson, Philip Donovan, 
of Cooldorgha, in the parish of Myross, is the present representative of this branch, a gentleman 
justly esteemed for courtesy and hospitality, who is married to Elizabeth, the daughter of Daniel 
mac Rickard mac Keady Donovan, by Eleanor, the daughter of Mac Fineen Duff, and Elizabeth, 
only sister to the late O’Donovan.” He died in May, 1821, and was interred with his ancestors, 
in Myross church, He left issue, 

XLV. James O’Donovan, of Cooldurragha. Timothy O’Donovan, Esq., of O’Donovan’s Cove, 
in a letter to the Editor, February Ist, 1841, expresses his belief that this James O’Donovan, 
‘who is now reduced to the station of a struggling farmer, but a person of excellent and respect- 
able character, is the eldest representative of the house of O’Donovan.” This assertion, 
however, was made without a knowledge of the fact that his ancestor, Donough, was the fourth 
son of the O’ Donovan, who made his last will in 1629, and died in 1639, or that the descendants 
of the second son were extant. The present O’Donovan, of Montpellier, and John Donovan, of 
Waterford, shoemaker, are decidedly of an older branch than this James, however it has happened 
that local tradition has cast the seniority upon him, and invested him with a titular chieftainship. 


O’DONOVAN, LATE OF DONOVAN-STREET, CITY OF CORK. 


XLI. Ricnarp O’Donovany, the sixth son of Daniel O’Donovan, who was inaugurated in 1584, 
and died in 1639, married Mary, who was the daughter of O’Sullivan Beare, and, by her mother, 
grand-daughter of Lord Muskerry, and great grand-daughter of the Earl of Clanrickard, and had 
by her: 1. Daniel, who is mentioned in his grandfather, Donnell’s, will of 1629, and in his uncle 
Teige’s will of 1639, but of whose descendants, if he left any, no account is preserved; 2. Mur- 
rough, living in 1629, who left a daughter, Joane; and 3, 

XLII. Ricuarp O’ Donovan, Esq., LL.D., who is said to have studied for twenty-two years in 
the University of Toulouse, where he obtained the degree of Doctor of both Laws. He afterwards 
went to London, where he acquired the degree of Doctor of the Canon Law. He returned to 
Ireland on the accession of James II., and was elected Member of Parliament for the Borough of 


APPENDIX. 2467 


Baltimore, but he resigned to Jeremy Donovan, of Rinogreany, chief of the Clann-Loughlin. He 
was appointed Judge of the Court of Admiralty in Ireland—Vide manuscript in Library of 
Trinity College, Dublin, E. 3. 25. This Richard died in the year 1694, as appears from an Irish 
elegy composed on his death, in which he is called Riocapo mac Riocaino : 


‘File pnap-liomta, pnomza, 
bne team caombneazac, cnearza, 
oligzedin veapbea veigmearea.” 
‘** A ready-polished approved poet, 
A justly-judging mild Brehon, 
A tried and estimable lawyer.” 


The year of his death is recorded in the following quatrain : 


“$é céo odag, slan cuinzar spoo, 
ceitpe cenz-bliaona Ip nocono, 
Cloip mic Oe, pead ap paoipre, 
Oo b’é an éaz an vapail-pe.” 


‘* Sixteen hundred,—a true computation,— 
Four years exact and ninety, 
Was the age of the Son of God, cause of our salvation, 
On the death of this noble.” 


This Dr. Richard O’Donovan married Catherine Ronayne, of Ronayne’s Court, near Cork (the 
aunt of Mary Ronayne, the wife of Morgan Donovan, Esq., the ancestor of the O’ Donovan of Mont- 
pellier), and had by her four sons, viz.: 1, Daniel, of whom presently ; 2. Morgan; 3. Richard ; 
4. William. Of the race of these three younger sons, the Editor has not been able to trace any 
account. 

XLII. Dantet O’Donovan of Dunnamark. He was appointed Portrieve of Baltimore, by 
James II., in 1687.—See Smith’s Natural and Civil History of Cork, vol.i. p. 272. He married 
Maria Holmes, daughter of the Rev. Thomas Holmes, son of Sir John Holmes, and had by her 
five sons: 1. Philip, of whom presently; 2. Morgan; 3. Richard; 4. Daniel; 5. William ; and 
three daughters: 1. Mary, who married Lieutenant Philip Somerville, R. N., by whom she had 
one son, Philip Somerville, late Captain of the Eugenia sloop of war, and of the Nemesis and Rotia 
frigates; 2. Elizabeth. 

XLIV. Puitip O’Donovan of Curranea, near Skibbereen. He married Sarah, daughter of 
Captain James Coppinger, lord of five manors, in the barony of West Carbery, in the county of 
Cork, and had by her two sons: 1. the late Lieutenant Philip O’Donovan, of Donovan-street, in 
the city of Cork ; 2. William; both of whom served in the navy, and sailed with their cousin, 
Captain Philip Somerville; and three daughters: 1. Mary, who married Hugh Mac Adam, Mer- 
chant; 2. Jane, who married Lieutenant John Salmon, R. N.; and 3. Catherine, who married 
Lieutenant William Somerville, the son of Captain Philip Somerville aforesaid. 

14 L 2 


2468 | APPENDIX. 


XLV. Lieut. Putrre Donovan died some twenty years ago, leaving one daughter. According 
to an old pedigree of this branch, written on parchment, which was sent to the Editor by Doctor 
Daniel Donovan of Skibbereen, they bore different arms from those of the Bawnlahan and Bally- 
more family. They are as follows: 

Arms.—Argent issuing from the sinister side of the shield, a cubit dexter arm naked, the 
hand proper grasping a sword in pale entwined with an evet between three golden balls. 

Crest.—A white falcon alighting. 

Motto.—Crom-a-B00, “taken from the famous castle of Crom, built by the O’Donovans, which 
afterwards fell to the Kildare family, who also use the same motto.” 

The Editor does not know where any member of this once very respectable family is now 
seated. 

XLI. Let us now go back to the youngest son of the last inaugurated O’Donovan, Keadagh 
More, ‘“‘a gentleman of great stature, bodily strength, and military abilities.”—Collins. His 
descendants are now known in the country by the name of Clann-Keady Donovan, the most 
respectable of whom are Richard Donovan, Esq., of Lisheens House, near Ballincollig, and Timothy 
O’ Donovan, of Ardahill house, near Bantry, whose descent is as follows : 


Keadagh More. 
! 





| 
XiE Daniel. Rickerd. 


| | 
XLII. Richard. Daniel, married Eleanor, daughter of Mac Fineen Duff by Elizabeth, 
XLIV. Pichar * euly daughter of Capt. Richard O’ Donovan of Bawnlahan. 
XLV. Richard, now at Keadagh, 


Lisheens. Tieeetat by, O’Donovan of Ardahill, married the anes of Daniel 


| ? o 
KV Richard acboy: eae: ea ee gan, by the sister of the late Daniel 


O'DONOVAN OF O’DONOVAN’S COVE. 


Another highly respectable branch of the Clann-Cahill O’Donovan is seated at O’Donovan’s 
Cove, in Muintir-Vary, or parish of Kilerohane, in West Carbery, the present head of whom is 
Timothy O’Donovan, Esq., J. P. They descend from Teige O'Donovan of Gerteeniher, in the 
parish of Dromaleague, a near kinsman to the Chief, Teige, No. XXXVIII., but the exact rela- 
tionship has not been yet proved. According to John Collins, the line of descent is as follows : 

1. TercE O’Donovan of Gorteeniher, father of 

2. DiarmMaiD O’Donovan, surnamed An Ercu, i. e. OF THE STEED, father of 

3. JEREMIAH O’ Donovan of Caheragh, father of 

4. Trtotuy O’Donovan of Ballaghadoon. He married a Mac Carthy, and had issue, 

5. RicwarpD O’Donovan of Kilmacabea, He married Elizabeth O’Donovan, sister of James 
O’Donovan of Reenogreny, and of Alexander O’Donovan of Squince, and had issue, 

6. Timotuy O’Donovan, Esq. In the year 1754, he was a student at the University of 
Toulouse, where, on the 15th July that year, he vanquished in single combat the most celebrated 


swordsman in France, as appears by a record attested by the proper authorities, in the possession 


APPENDIX. 2469 


of his grandson. He married Eleanor Mac Carthy, daughter of Florence Mac Carthy of Gortna- 
screena, in the county of Cork, by Jane O'Driscoll, daughter of the O'Driscoll of Creagh, and had 
issue two sons, Richard, his heir, and Daniel, a Lieutenant in the English service. 

7. RicuarD O’Donovan, Esq., of O’ Donovan’s Cove. He married Jane, daughter of Alexander 
O’Donovan of Squince, the representative of O’ Donovan of Reenogreny, and had issue: 1. Timothy 
O’Donovan, Esq:, J. P., the head of this family; 2. Daniel O’Donovan, Esq., M. D., J. P., of Skib- 
bereen; 3. Richard O’Donovan, Esq., of Fort Lodge. Collins speaks of this Richard, No. 7, as a 
gentleman of great hospitality and goodness, who had a fortune of about £2000 a year. 

8. Timotuy O’Donovan, Esq. He married Maria Rogers, daughter of Joseph Rogers, M. D., 
and Mary L’Avallyn, one of the co-heiresses of Philip L’Avallyn, Esq., of Hele Ig: in the 
county of Cork, and has issue, 

9. RicnarD O’Donovan, Junior. He married Anne Fitzgerald, daughter of Mr. Thomas Fitz- 
gerald of Cork, merchant, by Catherine Mac Carthy, daughter of Mac Carthy of Woodview, in the 
county of Cork, and niece to the late Daniel O’Connell, Esq., M. P. He has issue one son, Timothy. 

We will now return to Loughlin, the third son of Crom. 


THE CLANN-LOUGHLIN O’DONOVAN. 


XXXII. Locutarinn, who is the ancestor of the second most important sept of the O’Dono- 
vans, called Clann-Lochlainn, anglice Clanloughlin, originally possessed a small territory con- 
sisting of thirty-six ploughlands, situate between the River Roury and the harbour of Glandore. 
This sept, after the decay of the English power in Carbery, obtained possession of Cloch-an- 
Traghbhaile, anglice Cloghadtradbally, a castle which, according to the Dublin copy of the Annals 
of Innisfallen, had been erected at the head of Cuan-Dér, or Glandore Harbour, and now called 
Glandore Castle, by the chief of the Barretts of Munster in the year 1215. According to a pedi- 
gree of this sept, given by Duald Mac Firbis in his Genealogical manuscript (Lord Roden’s copy), 
p. 633, Lochlainn, third son of Crom, had a son, 

XXXIV. Donncwapu or Donovcu or Loca Crot, who had a son, 

XXXV. CATHAL, who had a son, 

XXXVI. Drarmaip, who had a son, 

XXXVII. Donncnapu. He is the last generation given by Mac Firbis. The Editor, in 
comparing his descent with that of the Clancahill, and with the pedigree of this sept deduced 
from the public records, is satisfied that this line was continued by the great grandson of this 
Donnchadh, namely, 

XL. DonneLL NA Carton O'Donovan of Cloghatradbally Castle, Chief of Clann-Loughlin, 
who died on the 10th of May, 1580, as appears from an Inquisition taken at Bandon-Bridge on the 
14th day of August, in the sixth year of the reign of Charles I. He was succeeded by his son, 

XLI. Donnett OGe na Carton O’Donovan. On the 28th of June, thirteenth of James L, 
he surrendered his possessions to the King, and received a regrant of the same, to hold for ever as 
of the Castle of Dublin, in free and common soccage. From this grant, which is here printed, it 
appears that the head of the Clann-Loughlin had, at this time, a territory nearly as extensive as that 
of the head of the O’Donovans, of whom the former was independent. 


2470 APPENDIX. 


“Patent Roll, James I., anno 13, part 2, Art. II. memb. 6. 

“TI. 6. Surrender by Donnell oge ny Cartin O’ Donovan, of Cloghetradbally, in Cork Co., gent. 
and Moriertagh Mac Donell oge ny Cartan O’Donovan, of Ardagh, in Cork Co., gentleman, of all 
their estates in Cork Co., as set out in article VI.—28 June, 13th of reign. 

‘TIT. 8. Deed whereby Sir James Semple, of Beltries, in Scotland, Knt., appoints Donell oge 
ny Cartin, of Cloghehytradebally, in Cork Co., and Moriertagh Mac Donell oge ny Cartin, of Ar- 
dagh, in Cork Co., gentlemen, to receive a grant from the King of part of the lands set out in 
article VI., for a sum of £112 English.—28th January, 12th of reign. 

“TV. 9. Deed between the parties named in the preceding article, to accept a grant of other 
lands set out in Article VI., for a sum of £120 English.—28th January, 12th reign. 

‘“V. 11. Another deed of the same import as the preceding, for a sum of £157 18s.—28th 
January, 12th reign. 

“VI. 12. Grant from the King to Donell oge ny Cartin O’Donovan, of Cloghehitradbally®, 
in Cork Co., gent., and Morhirtagh Mac Donell oge ny Cartin O’Donovan, of Ardagh", in the 
same Co., gent. 

““ Cork Co.—The castle of Cloghetradbally*, and the towns and lands of Aghetobredmore'*, 
Aghetobredbeggi*, and Rishane**, containing 3 plowlands in Clanloghlin; Carigloskie'*, $ plow- 
land, parcel of Ringreny™ qr.*; Carrowgarruff®, 34 plowlands; Ballirerie®*, Keamore?*, Kippagh- 
nebohie?*, Knockskeagh’, in Slew-Irin*, Bra’*, Bealahacolanet*, each 1 plowland ; a chief rent 
of 6d., Eng.; out of Stuckin" plowland; out of Ardagh, 6d.; out of Aghenestan, 6d.; out of Kil- 
leans, 24 plowlands; £1 2s. 6d. out of Glantawick, in Dromullihje’, 4 plowland, 5s. 7d.; out of 
Curr-Hurck, 5s. 7d.; out of Inshinanowen", ds. 7d.; out of Kilbegg*, + plowland, 2s. 9$d.; out 


of Ballinegornahnegeneny” and Creggane’, 1 plowland, 11s. 1d.; out of Mealmarin*, in Rinegreny, 


8 Cloghatradbally : recte Cloghatrabally, Clo¢é @etpas- 
baile, i.e. the Stone, or Stone Fortress of the Strand 
Town; now Glandore Castle, in the parish of Kilfaghnabeg, 
in the west division of the barony of East Carbery. 

h Ardagh.—A townland in the parish of Myross. 

i Aghetobredmore.— Now Clcad an cobain méin, 
anglice Aghatobermore, or Aghatubbredmore, in the parish 
of Kilfaghnabeg. 

j Aghetobredbegg.—Now Aghatubbredbeg, in the same 
parish. 

* Rishane.—Now Rushane, in the same parish. 

' Carigloskie.—Now Carriglusky, in the same parish. 

™ Ringreny: i.e. O’Greny’s Point, or Promontory ; now 
Rinagreena, or Reenogreny, a townland situated in the south 
of the same parish. It is the property of Thomas Deasy, 
Esq., of Clonakilty, let to Rickard Donovan, Esq. (Clerk of 
the Crown for the county of Cork), on lease of lives renewa- 
ble for ever. 

” Carrowgarruff : i. e. the Rough Quarter ; now Carhoo- 
garriff, a townland in the parish of Kilmacabea. 


° Ballirerie: i. e. Rogerstown; now Ballyriree, in th 
parish of Kilmacabea. 

P Keamore.—Now Keymore, in the same parish. 

4 Kippaghnabohie. —Now Cappanaboha, in the same 
parish. 

* Knockskeagh. — Now Knockscagh, Cnoc pgeac, 
Hill of the Thorns, in the same parish. 

8 Bra.—-Now Brade, in the parish of Myross. 

' Bealahacolane.—Now Ballycolane, in the same parish. 

« Stuckin.—Now Stookeen, in the same parish. 

’ Dromullihie-—Now Drumilihy, in the parish of Kilma- 
cabea. 

“ Inshinanowen.—Now Inchananoon, Inre nda n-uan, 
the Inch, or Holm of the Lambs, in the same parish. 

x Kilbegg.—Now Kilbeg, in the parish of Kilfaghnabeg. 

¥ Ballinegornaghneganeny.—Now Ballynagornagh, in the 
parish of Rosscarbery. 

« Creggane.—Now Creggan, in the same parish. 

4 Mealmarin.—Now Meall-Mareen, in the parish of Kil- 
faghnabeg. 


APPENDIX. 2471 


4 plowland, 5s. 7d.; out of 2 plowlands of Rinegreny, £1 2s, 2d.; out of each of the 7 plowlands 
of Tooghmealhie, 11s. ld.; out of each of the two plowlands of Furroe?, 11s. Id.; all the customs, 
royalties, dues, and privileges, due and payable to Daniel otherwise Donell oge ne Cartin O’Do- 
novan, and his ancestors, in the port of Glandore. Ardagh*, 1 plowland; The Killeans*, 24 
plowlands, of which the half of Cullankelly* is free from the country charges; Banefune‘*, Meal- 
negearah®*, and Ballineloghief *, 2 plowlands; Ballinegornaghneganeny *, and Creggan*, 1 plow- 
land; Mealmurin, otherwise Mealmarin* in Rinegreny, } plowland; Glanetawicke*, 4 plowland; 
the 3 south gnives® in Cur-Iturket; $ plowland in Dromullihy; the two south plowlands of Eade- 
necurra?, otherwise Eadencurrie, in Slughtcorky; Balltine Mac Craghoughtragh', 15 plowland in 
Evahagh; Cahiroleckinei, $ plowland in Evahagh ; one-third part of Cahirnibologie, containing 4 
gnives in the qr. of Kilmac-Ibe*, in Slught-Eneslies Mac Icrim' ; Cahirkaniva, $ plowland in Kil- 
lekebeh qr. in Slught-Enesles Mac Icrim; in Bohenagh™, 1 plowland and 3 gnives in Clan-Enesles 
Mac Icrim; Gortenahen, 3 gnives in the plowland of Brooley", in Slught-Eneslys Mac Icrim; in 
Classnecally, 1 gnive in the said Brooley; the E. half plowland of Beallainurgher®, and the W. half 
plowland in Bealamurgher, in Clancromin; the W. half plowland of Kilcursagh’, in Clancromyn; 
two gnives in the plowland of Balli Mac Owen’, in Clancromyn; Killdee’ otherwise Killee, Knock- 
anepubble, and Knockemeteiry, 43 plowlands in Clancromin; Clandirrin’ otherwise Clowndirrin, 
3 plowland; Gurtineduigh otherwise Gurtineduig', $ plowland; Corrigarehen otherwise Carige- 
caren, 3 plowland; Milnilehan, 4 plowland; and 2 gnives of Cahernabolaghy otherwise Caherna- 
bolgie, containing in all 1 plowland and 8 gnives in Slught-Enesles Mac Icroym; Killwilleran, 1 
plowland in Clancromin ; in Maushie, 1 plowland in Clancromin ; in E. Croghan", 3 gnives in 
Clancromin ; Drommore’, 3 plowlands in Clanteige-Roe; Colman” and Bargorme, 3 plowlands 


> Furroe.—Now Froe, in the parish of Rosscarbery. 

© Cullanekelly.—Now Cullane, in the parish of Kilma- 
cabea. 

4 Banefune, OGn Fionn, i. e. the Fair or White Field, 
now Bawnfune, in the same parish. 

© Mealnageerah, Weall na 5'ppe.—Now Meallna- 
girra, in the same parish. 

' Ballineloghie, Haile an loca.—Now Ballinlough, in 
the same parish. 

& The 3 South Gnives.—Now The Three Gneeves, in the 
same parish. 

h Eadenacurra.—Now Edencurra, in the parish of Bally- 
money. 

1 Baltine Mac Craghoughtragh.—A townland extending 
into the parishes of Skult and Kilmoe, in O’Mahony’s coun- 
try, in West Carbery. 

J Cahiroleckine.—Now Caher, in the parish of Kilmoe. 

k Kilmac-Ibe.—Now Kilmacabea. 

' Slught-Enesles Mae Icrim, Slioct Qinerplip mic 
a Chpoim, i.e. the race of Aneslis, son of Crom, a sept 
of the O’Donovans, descended from Aneslis, the second son 


of Crom, who was slain by the O’Mahonys in 1254. They 
gave name to a district in the parish of Kilmacabea. 
They were otherwise called Clann Cineplip mic 
a@Chpuim. 

™ Bohenagh.—A townland in the parish of Rosscarbery. 

. Brooley.—Now Brulea, in the parish of Kilfaghnabeg. 

° Beallamurgher, Héal aca an upcain.—Now Bally- 
nerough, in the parish of Kilnagross. Mae Nyn Cromin 
Mac Carthy had a great castle at this place. 

P Kileursagh.—Now Kilcourcey, not far from Mac Inyn 
Cromin’s castle of Belanugher. 

q Balli Mac Owen.—Now Ballymacowen, a townland in 
the parish of Kilnagross. 

© Kildee.—Now Kildee, a townland in a parish of the 
same name. 

8 Clandirrin.—Now Clonderreen, in the parish of Rath- 
clarin. 

t Gurtineduig.—A townland in the parish of Kilmacabea. 

" Croghan.—Now Croghane, in the parish of Kilnagross. 

Y Drummore.—Now Dromore, in the parish of Caheragh. 

* Colman.—Now Collamane, in the parish of Caheragh. 


ho 


472 APPENDIX. 

in Clanteige-Roe; Ballirisoade*, 2 plowlands and 2 gnives in Slught-Teige-O’Mahowne; Rath- 
roane’, 14 plowland ; Fahane’, 14 plowland, both in Slught Mac Teige O’Mahowne ; Kilcoursie, 
3 plowland; Caricanowy, $ plowland in Clancromin; Cahirkirky*, ] plowland in Carrowballer?; 
Killvellogie’, $ plowland in Clancromin; Skart* otherwise Skarth, 3 plowlands in Clanteige-Roe; 
Litterlicky®, 3 plowlands ; Aghavile otherwise Aghawile‘, Carrigillostrane, Glantawick otherwise 
Glantaucke, Currigoony, and Knockgorme, 4 plowlands in the 6 plowlands of Caharagh, all in 
Clanteige-Roe® ; Knockanemucke® and Coorenehorny, 1 plowland; Fagha, 1 plowland; Carigboy, 
Baudermoddowligh, and Rossyvanng, 1 plowland and 2 gnives in Coolenelonge, in Clanteigeyler; 
Banenyknockan, 1 plowland in Slught Teige O’Mahown ; Ardglasse, 1 plowland ; Dromelorie, 
Dromkeole', Derrigoline, Baneshenclogh*, and Sronegreeh', 3 plowlands; all in Slaught-Mac 
Teige O’Mahowne ; the castle and $ plowland of Dirrilemlarie™, in the qr. of Balliwooig*, and the 
4 plowland of Balliwooig, in the same, in Clancromin; Garrans, 4 plowland in the quarter of 
Dromeleggah; Tullagh, $ plowland, and in Maushe, 8 gnives; Ballinard, 14 plowland; Dirrivillin, 
1 plowland in the qr. of Balliwoige; five gnives in the plowland of Croghan; in Maushe, 4 gnives, 
all in Clancromine; the E. half plowland of Cnockycullin, and the 4 plowland of Mawlerawre®, 
in Dromleggah qr., in Clancromin; 4 gnives in the plowland of Litter?, in Clanvollen’; four gnives 
called Pallice', Ardfield parish, in Garranard, in Kiltallowe, Coill c-Sealbaig; Lisnebrenny- 
Ierhagh’, otherwise the West Lisnebrenny, Lisnabrinna, in Kilmeen, 1 plowland in Glanvollins'; 
saving all chief rents, services, royalties, customs, and privileges, due and payable to Donnell Mac 
Cartie, the King’s ward, or to any of his ancestors, and all his right to all or any of the premises. 
The lands thus marked * are created the manor of Cloghetradbally, with 500 Acres in demesne, 


x Ballirisode.—Now Ballyrisode, a townland in the pa- 
rish of Kilmore, in West Carbery. 

Y Rathbroane.—Now Rathruane, in the parish of Skull. 

7 Fahane.—A townland in the parish of Kilcrohane, in 
West Carbery. 

2 Cahirkirky.—A townland in the parish of Kilmeen. 

6 Carrowballor.—Now Carhoowouler, or Bouler’s Quarter, 
in the parish of Desertserges. 

© Killvillogie.—Now Kilbeloge, in the same parish. 

4 Skart.—Now probably Skartankilleen, in the parish of 
Skull, in O’Mahony’s country. 

© Littirlicky.—Now Litterlicky, in the parish of Kilma- 
comoge. 

! Aghavile.—Now Aghaval, in the parish of Caheragh. 

& Clanteige Roe, Clann Tas Ruan, i.e. the clan 
or sept of Teige Roe, or Thaddeus Rufus.—A sept of the 
O’Mahonys, who gave their name to a district in the parish 
of Caheragh, in West Carbery. 

" Knockanemucke.—Now Knocknamuck, in the parish of 
Kilmacommoge. 

1 Drumkeole.—Now Drumkeol, in the parish of Kilma- 
commoge. 

k Baneshenclogh.Now Bawnshanaclogh, in the parish 


of Skull. 

! Sronegreeh.—Now Sronagreehy, in the parish of Kil- 
macommoge. 

™ Dirrilemlarie—Now Castle-Derry, adjoining Bally- 
voigue, in the parish of Ojpent Saengura, Desert- 
serges. The ruins of this castle are still to be seen in the 
northern angle of Castlederry townland, and near the boun- 
dary of Ballyvoigue, which originally comprised several 
sub-denominations. 

» Ballyvoige.—Now Ballyvoigue, in the parish of Desert- 
serges. 

° Mawlerawre, Meall pamap.—A townland in the 
parish of Kilmaloda. 

P Litter.—A townland in the parish of Kilmeen. 

4 Clanvollen.—Now Gleann-a’-mhuillinn, anglice Glena- 
willing, i.e. the glen or valley of the mill, a district com- 
prising the entire of the parish of Kilmeen. 

Y Pallice, Panlip.—aA townland in the parish of Ard- 
field. 

’ Lisnebrenny-TIerhagh.— Now Gior na Spurgne 
lapzapac, Lisnabrinna West, in the parish of Kilmeen. 

' Glanvollins : i. e. Glenawilling, a district in the parish 
of Kilmeen. 


APPENDIX. 2473 


power to create tenures, and to hold courts leet and baron. To hold for ever, as of the Castle of 
Dublin, in common soccage.—29th January, 13th reign.” 

This Donnell Oge-na-Carton O’Donovane died on the 24th of Ta anuary, 1629, and was suc- 
ceeded by his son, 

XLII. MortertacH mac DonneELL Oce na Carton O’Donovan, who was then of age and 
married. This appears from the following Inquisition, taken at Bandon Bridge on the 14th day 
of August, in the sixth year of the reign of Charles I.: 

‘‘ Inquisitio capta apud Bandonbridge in Comitatu predicto” [Cork] ‘‘decimo quarto die 
Augusti anno regni domini Caroli &c. sexto coram Phillippo Percivall Wilielmo Wiseman armigero 
Escetori domini regis Comitatui predicto (et aliis) per sacramenta proborum &c. qui dicunt quod 
Donell ny Carten O’Donovane nuper de Cloghytradballie in Comitatu predicto, generosus, seisitus 
fuit de feodo de Castro villa et terra de Cloghytradbally, in Comitatu predicto. Ac de Aghytobred- 
more, Aghytobredbegge, et Rishane, in Comitatu predicto, continentibus in toto tres Carrucatas 
terre annualis valoris triginta solidorum. Ac de Carriggyloskie, in Comitatu predicto, continente 
dimidium unius Carrucate terre annualis valoris quinque solidorum. Ac de Carrowgarruffe, in 
Comitatu predicto, continente tres Carrucatas terre et tres gneeves, annualis valoris triginta soli- 
dorum. Ac de Ballyrerie in Comitatu predicto continente unam Carrucatam terre annualis valoris 
viginti solidorum ac de Cappaghnyboghie in Comitatu predicto continente unam Carrucatam terre 
annualis valoris viginti solidorum. Ac de Knockskeaghe in Comitatu predicto continente unam 
carrucatam terre annualis valoris viginti solidorum. Ac de Mileenen Cloniteishe in Comitatu 
predicto continente unam Carrucatam annualis valoris viginti solidorum. Ac de Dromtycloghie 
et Malegowin in Comitatu predicto continente unam carrucatam terre annualis valoris viginti 
solidorum. Ac de Killcowsane et Gortyowen in Comitatu predicto continente unam carrucatam 
terre annualis valoris viginti solidorum. Ac de annuali redditu sex denariorum exeuntium ex 
villa et terra de Stuckine. Ac de annuali redditu sex denariorum sterlingorum exeuntium ex 
villa et terra de Ardaghe. Ac de annuali redditu viginti duorum solidorum et duorum denario- 
rum exeuntium ex villa et terra dé Cullans. Ac de annuali redditu quinque solidorum et septem 
denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra de Glanytullaghe in Dromeleighe. Ac de annuali redditu 
quinque solidorum et septem denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra de Curryturke. Ac de 
annuali redditu quinque solidorum et septem denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra de Inshy- 
nacouen. Ac de annuali redditu duorum solidorum & novem denariorum & unius obuli exeun- 
tium ex villa et terra de Kilbegge in Comitatu predicto. Ac de annuali redditu undecim soli- 
dorum & duorum denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra de Kilbegge in Comitatu predicto. Ac 
de annuali redditu undecim solidorum & duorum denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra de 
Ballynagornaghe & Creggane in Comitatu predicto. Ac de annuali redditu quinque solidorum et 
septem denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra de Mawlenuirrine in Comitatu predicto. Ac 
de annuali redditu viginti duorum solidorum et duorum denariorum exeuntium ex villa et terra 
de Rynangadanaghe in Comitatu predicto. Ac de annuali redditu undecim solidorum & unius 
denarii exeuntium ex qualibet Carrucata terra de septem Carrucatis terre de Towghmealy in 
Comitatu predicto. Ac de et in annuali redditu undecim solidorum & unius denarii exeun- 
tium ex utraque Carrucata de duabus Carrucatis terre de Farroe in Comitatu predicto. Ac 

14M 


2474 APPENDIX. 


de annuali redditu viginti duorum solidorum exeuntium ex duobus Carrucatis terre de Ballyloghe 
«& Banefunne in Mawler Geraghe in Comitatu predicto. Ac de hujusmodi regalitatibus et debitis: 
que ante hac soluta fuerunt antecessoribus suis infra portum de Glandore in Comitatu predicto. 
Et sic sesitus predictus Donell ny Carton O’Donovane obiit decimo die Maij anno domini 1580. 
Et quod predictus Donell oge ny Carten O’Donovane fuit ejus filius et proximus heres ac fuit 
plene etatis tempore mortis predicti Donell ny Carten O’Donovane & maritatus. Et quod omnia 
premissa tempore mortis predicti Donell O’Donovane tenebantur de nuper domina Elizabetha 
nuper regina Anglie &. sed per quod servicium Iuratores predicti ignorant. Dicunt etiam quod 
predictus Donell oge ny Carten O’Donovane post mortem patris sui predicti in omnia premissa 
intravit & fuit inde seisitus de feodo. Et sic seisitus existens dominus Jacobus nuper rex Anglie 
mandayit quasdam separales literas suas Arthuro Chichester de Belfast ad tune Deputatum suum 
hujus regni sui Hibernie quarum quidem separalium literarum tenor sequitur in hee verba. 
Jame Rex right trustie &e. ———  Quodque secundum tenorem predictarum literarum predictus 
Jacobus sempell miles per factum suum gerens datum vicesimo octavo die Januarij anno regni 
dicti nuper domini regis Anglie &c. duodecimo (inter alia) nominavit et constituit prefatum Donell 
oge O’Donovane et quendam Moreartagh mac Donell O’Donovane heredes & assignatos suos recipere 
& obtinere a dicto nuper domino rege heredibus et successoribus suis unam vel plures concessionem 
vel concessiones dictis Donell oge O’Donovane et Moreartaghe me Donell O’Donovane conceden- 
dam &conficiendas de premissis predictis. Et ulterius dicunt quod post confeccionem dicti facti 
assignacionis per dictum Jacobum Sempell militem prefato Donell oge O’ Donovane et Moreartaghe 
mac Donell O’Donovane in formam predictam iidem Donell oge O’Donovane et Murtagh mac 
Donnell per quoddam factum suum sursumreddicionis gerens datum xxviii die Junii Anno regni 
dicti nuper domini Regis Angle &c. decimo tertio sursumreddiderunt premissa predicta in manus 
ipsius nuper domini Regis virtute cujus sursumreddicionis idem nuper dominus Rex Jacobus fuit 
seisitus de omnibus premissis de feodo. Et sic seisitus existens per literas suas patentes gerentes 
datum apud Dublin vicesimo nono die Junii anno regni dicti nuper domini regis Jacobi xiii° con- 
cessit omnia premissa predicta prefato Donell Oge O’ Donovane et Moreartagh mac Donell O’ Dono- 
vane heredibus et assignatis suis imperpetuum Tenendum de dicto nuper domino rege Jacobo 
heredibus &c. suis ut de Castro suo Dublin in libero et Communi soccagio virtute quarum quidem 
literarum patentium idem Donell Oge O’Donovane et Moreartagh mac Donell O’Donovane in 
premissis intraverunt & fuerunt inde seisiti de feodo. Et sic seisiti existentes per chartam suam 
datam xxii° die Decembris anno regni dicti nuper domini Regis decimo tertio supradicto in consi- 
deratione summe centum liberarum feoffavit quendam Moroghe O’Donovane heredes et assignatos 
sos imperpetuum de predictis tribus'Carrucatis et tribus gneeves terre in Carrowearruffe pre- 
dicto in Comitatu predicto et postea per factum suum relaxacionis datum decimo quarto die 
Octobris 1629 idem Donell Oge ny Carten O’Donovane remisit &c. prefato Morogh O’ Donovane 
totum jus suum in predictis tribus Carrucatis et tribus gneeves terre in Carrowgarruffe predicto. 
Et ulterius quod predicti Donell Oge & Murtagh post concessionem dictarum literarum patentium 
in consideratione summe triginta et sex librarum feoffaverunt quendam Wilielmus Yonge heredes 
et assignatos suos imperpetuum de dimidio Carrucate terre de Carigyloskie predicto per modum 
mortui vadii sub condicione redempcionis. Ac etiam post confectionem dictarum literarum pa- 


APPENDIX. OATS 


tentium scilicet feoffaverunt quendam Johannem Yonge heredes et assignatos suos imperpetuum 
de Carucata terre de Milleenen Cloyntie predicto per modum mortui vadii in consideracione 
summe septuaginta librarum sub condicione redempcionis. Et ulterius Juratores predicti dicunt 
quod predictus Donell Oge ny Carten O’Donovane de ceteris premissis ut prefertur seisitus exis- 
tens obiit inde seisitus vicesimo quarto die Januarii anno domini 1629. Et quod Moriertagh mac 
Donell Oge O’Donovane est ejus filius et proximus heres ac fuit plene etatis tempore mortis patris 
sui predicti et maritatus. Et quod omnia premissa tenentur prout lex postulat.” 

Moriertagh Mac Donnell Oge O’ Donovan was succeeded by his son, 

XLII. Dante, Mac Mortocu O’Donovan of Cloghatradbally and Rinogreny, who flourished 
during the Insurrection of 1641, as appears by two depositions in the Library of Trinity College, 
Dublin, 7th vol.for Cork. His name appears in the list of attainted persons in a manuscript in the 
same Library, as ‘ Daniel O’ Donovan de Gallinlaghlin [1. e. of Clann-Laghlin] in Comitatu Cork ;” 
but he was not attainted, for we have sufficient evidence to shew that he was succeeded by his son, 

XLIV. Jeremy Donovan, Esq., M. P. for Baltimore in 1689, who obtained letters patent from 
Charles IL, on the 9th of December, in the thirty-sixth year of his reign, of various lands in the 
baronies of Carbery and Courcy, in the county of Cork, and in the south liberties and suburbs of 
the city of Cork; also in Back Lane, Corn Market, and James’s-street, in the city of Dublin; in 
the town of Bray; and in the barony of Duleek, in the county of Meath. His lands in the county 
of Cork were erected into the manor of Donovan’s Leap, with a Court Leet, Court Baron, and 
Cort of Record, and all the privileges to a manor belonging.—Inrolled 3rd Feb. 1684. 

This Jeremy Donovan was chief of the Clann-Loughlin. He was a Protestant, and married, in 
1686, Miss Elizabeth Tallant. He was appointed Registrar of the Admiralty in Ireland by James IL. 
on the 23rd of July, anno regni quinto.—See manuscript T. C. D., E. 3. 25. 

A deed, dated 30th November, 1708, between Jeremiah Donovan, Esq., of the city of Dublin, 
and the Honourable Allan Broderick, Her Majesty’s Attorney-General, and Speaker of the House 
of Commons, recites a marriage article, dated 11th day of June, 1686, between Oliver Tallant of 
the one part, and said Jeremiah Donovan of the other part; states the marriage of said Jeremiah 
Donovan with Miss Elizabeth Tallant; and then, in pursuance of an agreement at the marriage, 
he conveys to Allan Broderick, in trust, the following lands: the Manor of the Leap, alias 
©’Donovan’s Leap and Kilmacabea, containing as follows: 3 plowlands of Kilmacabea; 1 plowland 
of Knockscagh, part of Ballyrery; 2 plowlands of Ballinloghy, Bawnfune, Maulnagira; the plow- 
land of Keamore; the plowland of Kappanabohy; the lands of Leap, Ballyroe, Cullane, Modrana; 
the plowland of Brulea; the plowland of Kilcoleman", in the county of Cork; the lands of Little 
Bray, in the county of Dublin; the lands of Balsarne and Blackditch, in the county of Meath 
the Marsh of Monerea, in the south liberties and suburbs of the city of Cork ; Pouldorane, Gort- 
naclassy, Gortnahoregan, in the said county of the city of Cork; in trust for his own live use and 
for a jointure of £160 per annum of his wife, Elizabeth Tallant; and then to the use of Jeremiah 
Donovan the younger, his son, for life and his issue male; in failure of same, then to John 
Donovan, his second son, for life, and his issue male; and then to Anne Cusack, alias Donovan, 


" Kileoleman.—This townland, which is situated in the O’Donovan, of the sept of Mac Eneslis, in 1641.—See page 
barony of Courcies, had belonged to Captain Daniel Boy 2438, supra. 


14m2 


2476 APPENDIX. 


his only daughter, wife of Adam Cusack’, Esq., of Rathgare, in the county of Dublin, and her 
issue male, taking the name of Donovan. 

This Jeremiah or Jeremy Donovan died in 1709, leaving his sons minors. 

XLV. Jeremy Donovan, Junior. In 1722, he levied fines and suffered a recovery of all his 
father’s property, and mortgaged and incumbered all his lands. It appears from the following 
advertisement of his in Pue’s Occurrences, on the 25th of August, 1730, that he had then a very 
considerable estate in the county Cork : 

““The following Lands to be let from the first of May, 173i, for lives, with or without Re- 


newals, or for any Term of years : AST: | Ps 
“The Town and Lands of Kilmacabea, Arable and Pasture, containing,. . . . 397 1 31 
‘The Town and Lands of Cappynabohy, Arable and Pasture, containing . . . 298 0 O 
‘“The Town and Lands of Knockscagh, Arable and Pasture, containing. . . . 349 018 
“«The Town and Lands of Gorteendooge, Arable and Pasture, containing . . . 287 0O 30 


‘¢The Town and Lands of Ballinlogh and Ballyryreen, Arable and Pasture, con- 

GALI Ga fi hiees i Vk sy. Leh eta Teimio Lcs oly! s de dalnibeIeS maa) MP OND (a bel ieee eed ones PN SDL an OMICS 
‘*The Town and Lands of Mannogyra, Arable and Pasture, containmg . . . . 337 1 29 
‘The Town and Lands of Keymore, Arable and Pasture, containing. . . . . 466 3 2 
‘‘ All situate in the county of Cork; 24 miles distant from Cork, 10 from Kinsale, and 14 

from Bandon. Note: the Bay of Glandore beats on the lands of Kilmacabea, where a ship of 

100 tun may ride. 

‘‘ Two Fairs yearly held on part of the Lands of Kilmacabea, known by the name of Donovan’s 
Leap. 

‘“« A parcel of ground in Coleman’s Lane, in the City of Cork, containing 145 Feet in front. 

“The Lands of Little Bray, in the county of Dublin, within 10 small miles of Dublin, with a 
good large dwelling House, out Houses, and 3 new stables, all well improved, containing 

127a. OR. Op. 

‘¢Commons thereunto belonging . . . . « + s+ + oot Tiga Bae Gao D One) 

‘“« A dwelling House in Back-Lane, in the City of Dublin, iden by the name of Donovan’s 
Arms. 

‘* Whoever hath a mind to treat for said Land and Houses, are desired to send their proposals 
to Jeremiah Donnovan, Esq., at Sir Compton Domvill’s house, in Bride-street, Dublin.” 

In 1737, March 6, this Jeremiah Donovan, junior, sold for £5,400, to Richard Tonson, all the 
lands called the Manor of Donovan’s Leap, and died unmarried in the year 1743. His brother, 
John, then brought ejectments, under the limitations of the deed executed by his father on the 
30th of November, 1708, to recover possession; but before trial he died without issue. On John’s 
death, his sister, Anne Donovan, the wife of Adam Cusack, became entitled, but she was so poor 
that she could not go to law. In March, 1770, Anne Donovan, alias Cusack, died, leaving two 


¥ Adam Cusack of Rathgar was the son of Robert Cusack, her John Cusack, Esq., of Rathgar, who married Mary 
who died at Bath in October, 1707, as appears from his Armstrong, but died without issue; and Edward, who was 
tomb there. This Adam married Anne Donovan, the only living, according to Monsieur Lainé, in 1767, and died s. p. 
daughter of Jeremy Donovan, Esq., of Dublin, and had by in 1780.—See Lainé’s Genealogy of the House of De Cusack. 


APPENDIX. 2AT7 


sons, John Cusack and Edward Cusack. In February, 1775, John Cusack, as heir at law of 
Jeremiah Donovan, entered his claim at foot of fines levied by his uncle in 1722, but, being poor, 
and at law in other ways, did no other act as to the county of Cork estates during his life. He 
died without issue, leaving his only brother, Edward, his heir, and the heir of Jeremiah Donovan. 
On the 26th April, 1780, Edward Cusack died without issue and unmarried, and left his estates 
in the county of Cork to his kinsman, Jeremiah Donovan, and devised his estate in the city of 
Dublin to Robert Fitzgerald. This Jeremiah Donovan was descended from Cornelius O’ Donovan, 
the brother of Jeremiah O’ Donovan, M. P. in 1789. 

XLIV. Cornetius O’Donovan of Kilmacabea. A deed, dafed 3rd February, 1700, between 
Cornelius O’Donovan of Kilmacabea and Jeremy O’Donovan, his eldest son and heir, and Denis 
Mac Carthy”, of Spring House, in the county of Tipperary (the ancestor of the Count Mac Carthy), 
and Ellen, his daughter, states that a marriage was about to take place between said Jeremy and 
Ellen. She had a fortune of £400, and Cornelius O’Donovan conveyed the lands of Rinogreny, 
the lands of Ballincroky, in the Liberties of the city of Cork; and the lands: of Curraheen and 
Ballymacrone, in the barony of Ibane, for the uses of the said marriage. : 

XLV. Jeremy Donovan. He married Ellen Mac Carthy above referred to, and had issue, 
James, who had one daughter, and 

XLVI. ALEXANDER Donovan. He married a Miss Catherine O’Keeffe, by whom he had 
issue: 1. Jeremiah Donovan, the devisee of Edward Cusack in 1780, of whom presently; 2. James 
Donovan of Clonakilty, M. D., the father of the late Alexander Donovan, Esq., of Gray’s Inn, 
London, who was appointed a district Judge in Jamaica in 1842, of Jeremiah O’Donovan of Mid- 
dleton, in the county of Cork, whose son, Richard O’Donovan, is one of the editors of the London 
Daily News; and of Richard Donovan, Clerk of the Crown for the county of Cork ; 3. Alexander 
Donovan of Squince, the father of Alexander, and Daniel O’Donovan of Squince, and James 
O’Donovan of Gravesend, in Kent. 

XLVII. Jeremian Donovan, Captain, R. N., father of 

XLVIII. ALeExanper Donovan, Lieutenant, R. N., who married a Miss Scott, and has issue, 

XLIX. Jeremtan Donovan, Esq., of Wood-street, Dublin, Solicitor. 


THE DONOVANS OF BALLYMORE AND CLONMORE, IN THE COUNTY OF 
WEXFORD. 


The descent of the Wexford branch of the O’Donovans had been sent to Munster by a member 
of that family about the year 1740. James O’Donovan of Cooldurragha, in a letter to the Editor, 
dated January 16, 1843, writes: ‘I had an old manuscript pedigree of the Leinster branch of the 
O’Donovans, written about 100 years ago, which I gave Collins, and thought no more about it till 
the present time. It has lately occurred to me that something material might be contained in it, and 


W Denis Mace Carthy.—See Monsieur Lainé’s Pedigree of | was the daughter of Charles Mac Carthy, M. D., of Cork, 
the Count Mac Carthy. There was another branch of this by Ellen, eldest daughter of Pierce Nagle, Esq., of Aghna- 
family of Rinogreny seated at Ross, in the county of Cork.  kishy, the brother of Sir Richard Nagle, Attorney-General 
Cornelius ©’Donoyan, Esq., of Ross, married Mary, who to James II.—Pedigree of O’ Kearney. 


2478 APPENDIX. 


I have made every inquiry, and taken several journeys in search of it, but all to no purpose.” 
Taking for granted that this pedigree was correct and correctly copied by Collins, the descent of 
the Leinster Donovans will be as follows : 

XLI. Donnett OcEe na Carton O’ Donovan, who died in 1629, was father of 

XLII. Ricuarp na Carton O’Donovany, father of 

XLII. Murroves O’ Donovan, who was father of 

XLIV. Mvurtrovex O’ Donovan, who had a son, 

XLV. Ricxarp Donovan, who left Munster and settled at Clonmore, in the county of Wexford. 
He was bequeathed the Wexford estates by the will of his brother-in-law, Alderman Thomas 
Kieran, on the 20th of January, 1694. On the 13th August, 1696, on the marriage of his then 
eldest son, Mortagh, he made a deed of settlement of the castle, town, and lands of Upper Fernes, 
together with all the other townlands he possessed, to trustees, to the use of his son, Mortagh, and 
the heirs male of his body lawfully to be begotten ; and, for want of such issue, to the heirs male 
of the body of the said Rickard Donovan, his father, lawfully to be begotten; failing such remainder, 
to the issue female of the said Mortagh; and in failure of such remainder, to the right heirs of said 
Mortagh for ever. Rickard Donovan married, first, Bridget, sister of Alderman Thomas Kieran, 
who was sheriff of the City of Dublin in 1687. He married, secondly, Julian Carew; and had 
issue, by his first wife, five sons and three daughters, viz.: 

1. Rickard, died unmarried. 

2. Mortagh, his heir, head of the Ballymore family. 

3. Cornelius of Clonmore, who married, first, Bridget, daughter of Abraham Hughes, Esq., 
of Ballytrent, county of Wexford, and had issue: 1. Abraham, a physician in Enniscorthy, died 
unmarried; 2. Rickard of Clonmore, married Winifred, daughter of Henry Milward, of Ballyhar- 
ron, county of Wexford. His will was proved in Dublin in 1781, and he left issue five co-heiresses, 
viz.: 1. Eliza, married Cadwallader Edwards, Esq., of Ballyhire; 2. Sarah, married John Cox, 
Esq., of Coolcliffe; 3. Winifred, married Rev. Joseph Miller, of Ross, second wife; 4. Lucy, mar- 
ried John Glascott, Esq., of Pilltown; 5. Julia, married Richard Newton King, Esq., of Macmine : 
all in the county of Wexford. 

Cornelius Donovan, of Clonmore, married, secondly, Mary, daughter of John Harvey, Esq., of 
Killiane Castle, county Wexford. His will is dated 20th October, 1735, and was proved in the 
diocese of Ferns, 18th J uly, 1739, and he had issue by his second wife, John, Cornelius, Elizabeth, 
and Juliana, who married Cornelius Fitz-Patrick, Esq., and had Cornelius Donovan Fitz-Patrick. 

4. Rickard, who resided at Camolin Park. He was a captain of Dragoons, and married a 
daughter of Richard Nixon, Esq., of Wexford, and had issue five sons and one daughter, viz.: 
1. George; 2. Cornelius, who had a daughter, Mary, who married Robert Blaney, of Camolin ; 
3. Richard; 4. Rickard; 5. Denn-Nixon; 6. Juliana, married, first, 15th September, 1741, 
Richard, sixth Earl of Anglesey; secondly, Matthew Talbot, Esq., of Castle Talbot. 

5. Thomas, who married a lady of the Fitzgerald family, and had issue a son, Murtagh. 

lke 
daughters, Mary and Elizabeth. 


, who married 








Gough, of Ballyorel, and had issue one son, Arthur, and two 


i) 


, who married 








King, and had issue Richard, William, and Mary. 


APPENDIX. 2479 


3. Elizabeth, who married (articles dated 24th July, 1701) the Rev. Michael Mosse, Prebend 
of Whitechurch, county Wexford, and had issue Mary. 

Rickard Donovan, of Clonmore, first settler in Wexford, made his will 2nd June, 1707; it was 
proved in the diocese of Ferns, 4th December, same year, and he was succeeded by his second son, 

XLVI. Morraeu Donovan, Esq., of Ballymore, a colonel of horse, who was born the 20th May, 
1697, and baptized 7th June following by the Rev. Nathaniel Huson, the sponsors being Colonel 
Robert Wolseley and John White, Esq., godfathers; Mrs. Christine Shapland and sister, Mary 
Archer, godmothers. He married, first, 13th August, 1696, Lucy, daughter of Henry Archer, of 
Enniscorthy, and had issue: 

1. Richard, his heir. 

2. Henry, who left issue. 

He married, secondly (settlements being dated 23rd May, 1704), Anna, third daughter of Robert 
Carew, Esq., of Castletown, in the county Waterford, by whom (whose will was proved in Dublin in 
1713) he had issue two-sons, Robert being one of them, and three daughters; one of them, Cathe- 
rine, married the Rev. S. Hayden, Rector of Ferns, who was killed at Enniscorthy in the Rebellion 
of 1798. Colonel Donovan died intestate in 1712, and was succeeded by his eldest son, 

XLVI. Ricnarp Donovan, Ese@., of Ballymore, a captain of horse, who, in Trinity Term, 
1731, suffered a common recovery of the estates, and thereby docked the several remainders 
created and limited by the deed of 13th August, 1696, and shortly afterwards married Elizabeth, 
daughter of Major Edward Rogers, of Bessmount, near Enniscorthy, and had issue: 

1. Edward, his heir. 

2. Lucy, married Sir Wilfrid Lawson, Bart., of Brayton Hall, (umberland. 

3. Mary, died unmarried. Will proved in Dublin, in 1805. 

4. Frances, married Charles Hill, of St. John’s, county Wexford. _ 

5. Henrietta, died unmarried. Will proved in Dublin, in 1795. 

Captain Donovan’s will is dated 8th June, 1767, and, dying 15th July, 1768, his will was proved 
in Dublin same year, and he was succeeded by his only son, 

XLVI. Epwarp Donovan, Es@., of Ballymore, who was called to the Irish bar. He mar- 
ried (the deed of settlement made by his father on said marriage being dated 19th January, 1747) 
Mary, daughter of Captain John Broughton, of Maidstone, in the county of Kent, and had issue, 

1. Richard, his heir. 

2. Robert, of 24, Peter-street, Dublin, Attorney, died unmarried. Will proved in Dublin, 1828. 

3. George, went to America, married Miss Devereux, and had issue. 

4. John, of Dublin, and also of Charles-street, Westminster, London, died unmarried. Will 
proved in Dublin, 1817. 

5. William, of Dublin, Lieutenant, Royal Navy, died unmarried. Will proved in Dublin, 1814. 

6. Edward, in holy orders, of Ballymore, in the county Westmeath, died unmarried. Will 
‘proved in Dublin, 1827. 

7. Mary, of Dublin, died unmarried. Will proved 1824. 
8. Eliza, died unmarried, February, 1831. 
9. Julia, married Robert Verner, Esq., of Dublin, and has issue: she died in 1840. 


2480 APPENDIX. 


10. Lucy, married James Barker, Esq., of Dublin. 
11. Caroline, unmarried. 

Counsellor Donovan’s will is dated 15th March, 1773; proved in Dublin, 26th April, same 
year. His widow’s will was proved, same place, 1794. He was succeeded by his eldest son, 

XLIX. Ricnarp Donovan, Ese@., of Ballymore, who, having attained his age of twenty-one 
years, on the 6th May, 1778, in the Easter Term of that year, suffered a common recovery of the 
estates, and it was declared by said deed, that the said recovery should enure to the use of the 
said Richard Donovan, and his heirs and assigns for ever. He married (settlement being dated 
27th and 28th June, 1780) Anne, daughter of Goddard Richards, Esq., of the Grange, in the same 
county, and had issue, ; 

1. Richard, his heir, now of Ballymore. 

2. Goddard Edward, Captain, 83rd Regiment, died unmarried, at the Cape of Good Hope, 1808. 

3. Robert, married Miss Taylor, and had issue: 1. Richard; 2. Robert; 3. Henry; 4. Edwin; 
5. Albert William ; 6. Henrietta Anne, married, 1837, James Mac Kenny, of Dublin; 7. Laura ; 
8. Mary Medora. 

4. John, died unmarried. Will, Dublin, 1829. 

5. George, married, and has issue. 

_ 6. William, married Miss Dallas, of Portarlington, and has issue, William John. 
| 7. Henry, died unmarried in Jamaica. 

8. Solomon, in holy orders. 

9. Arthur, died young. 

10. Anne, married Solomon Speer, Esq., of the county of Tyrone, called to the Irish bar, and 
had issue. 

11. Catharine, died unmarried, 24th January, 1837. 

12. Mary, married John Glascott, Esq., called to the Irish bar, and has issue. 

13. Eliza, married Mr. William Russell, of Bloomfield, county Wexford, and has issue. 

14. Caroline. 

Richard Donovan, of Ballymore, was in the commission of the peace for the county Wexford. 
He died the 9th January, 1816, and was succeeded by his eldest son, 

L. RicHarp Donovan, Es@., now of Ballymore, born 21st April, 1781; married, 18th October, 
1816, Frances, eldest daughter and co-heir of Edward Westby, Esq., of High Park, county Wick- 
low, and has issue: 

1. Richard, born 17th October, 1819. 

2. Edward Westby, born 6th September, 1821, Lieutenant, 33rd Regiment. 

3. Henry George, born 2nd Feb., 1826; baptized at Clifton, Gloucestershire, 17th April, 1826. 

4. Robert, born 5th April, 1829; baptized at Clifton, 17th April, same year. 

5. Phebe. 

6. Frances. 

7. Anne. 

Richard Donovan served the office of High Sheriff of the county of Wexford in 1819. 
Arms.—Argent, issuing from the sinister side of the shield a cubit dexter arm, vested gules, 


APPENDIX. 2481 


cuffed azure, the hand proper grasping an old Irish sword, the blade entwined with a serpent 
proper. 

Crest.—A falcon alighting. 

Mottoes.—“‘Adjuvante, Deo in hostes ;” also “Vir super hostes.” Irish, 61a ap a namaio abt. 

Estates.—In the counties of Wexford, Queen’s County, and Tipperary. 

Seat.—Ballymore, Camolin, Wexford. 

Ferns was granted by Queen Elizabeth, in 1583, to Sir Thomas Masterson, Knight, a Cheshire 
gentleman, who was sent over as governor of this district, and appointed Grand Seneschal and 
Constable of this castle, with a lease of the manor, whose son, Sir Richard Masterson, Knight, left, 
in 1627, four co-heiresses, viz.: Catherine, married Edward Butler, Esq., of Cloughnegairah, 
County Wexford (Wilton), Baron of Kayer; Margaret, married Robert Shee, Esq., of Uppercourt, 
in the county of Kilkenny; Mabell, married Nicholas Devereux, Esq., of Balmagir, in the county 
of Wexford; and 
Wexford. This property was forfeited after the Rebellion of 1641, and was granted by patent 
of Charles II., dated 20th May, in the twentieth year of his reign, to Arthur Parsons, Esq., 
comprising the townlands of Upper Ferns, the Castle part of the town; Ferranagananagh, Poule- 








, married Walter Sinnott, Esq., of Rosgarland, in the county of 


deogherory, Ballyshane, Ballygormockane, and Agheremore, alias Agnemore, alias Aghnemore, 
with their appurtenances, containing 1070A. 2r. 32p.; Ballymollen, alias Milltown, containing 
954.; Kilkesan, alias Killany, Ballycreene, Ballyregane, Ballymore, Ballyel gia alias Ballyolly, alias 
Ballyfolly, containing 900 acres in fee. 

Thomas Kieran, by his will, dated 20th of January, 1694, bequeathed (with the exception of 
Ballymore, which by same will be bequeathed to Mortagh Donovan) all the above townlands 
unto his brother-in-law, Rickard Donovan of Clonmore, in the county of Wexford, Gent., his heirs 
and assigns, which Rickard is mentioned in said will as father of Mortagh Donovan; and which 
will was witnessed by Cornelius Donovan, Eskenah Carr, and Owen Bardan. 

25th Nov. 1667, Charles II., by patent, granted 100 acres of the south-east part of the town- 
land of Clonmore to Charles Collins. 

30th June, 1668, Charles Collins conveyed same to Thomas Holme. 

7th January, 1681, Thomas Holme conveyed same to Francis Randall, acknowledging in the 
deed that the patent was made in the name of Charles Collins only as a trustee for Randall, who 
was an officer stationed at Barbadoes. 

7th January, 1713, Samuel Randall, merchant, of Cork, son and heir of Francis Randall, 
granted a lease of lives, renewable for ever, to Cornelius Donovan, of the townland of Clonmore, 
with all the rights, &c. &c., as heretofore enjoyed by Rickard Donovan, father of Cornelius, 
reserving a head rent of £16, and renewal fines of £8 each life. 

20th July, 1740, Richard Donovan of Ballymore renewed the above lease at the desire of 
Rickard Donovan of Clonmore; he, Rickard Donovan of Ballymore, having acquired the fee from 
Samuel Randall. 


THE O’DONOVANS OF CALRY-CASHEL. 
There was another family of this name seated in the territory of Calry-Cashel, in the present 


county of Tipperary. These are also sprung from the royal line of Oilioll Olum, King of Munster, 
14.N 


2482 APPENDIX. 


but not through the same son as the Hy-Figeinte, but from his third son, Kian, who was also 
the ancestor of the O’Carrolls, O’Meaghers, and other families in the neighbouring territories. 
Duald Mac Firbis gives the descent of Donovan, their progenitor, as follows, in his Genealogical 
Manuscript (Lord Roden’s copy, p. 633): Donovan, son of Colman, son of Randal, son of Cormac, 
son of Laighnen, son of Cumara, son of Murchadh, son of Muirchertach, son of Eochaid Faebharghlas, 
the ancestor of O’Meagher, son of Conla, the ancestor of O’Carroll of Ely O’Carroll, and of O’Conor 
of Glengeven,in the north of Ulster, son of Teige, son of Kian, son of Oilioll Olum. 

There are various families of the Donovans of this race living at present in the Glen of Agher- 
lagh, as well as in the neighbourhood of Fethard, and various other places in the county of 
Tipperary, where they still retain the manly vigour and warlike characteristics of their great 
ancestor, Teige mac Kein. 

In the time of the Editor’s grandfather, three brothers of this race settled at Kilmacow, in the 
county of Kilkenny, namely, Michael Donovan, Bernard Donovan, and Luke Donovan, of whom the 
last left no issue. Michael married Anastasia O’Neill, daughter of Laurence O’Neill, Esq., of Bally- 
neill, by Catherine Power, and had issue two sons: 1. John, the father of Michael Donovan, Esq., 
11, Clare-street, Dublin, the author of an Essay on Galvanism, and of various scientific articles in 
Lardner’s Encyclopedia, and who, by his discoveries in chemistry, has reflected honour, not only 
upon his name, but upon the ancient Irish race, who, until recently, have been supposed incapable 
of originating anything in metaphysics, physiology, or chemistry, having during the two last 
centuries distinguished themselves over Europe more as soldiers, diplomatists, and orators, than as 
philosophers, chemists, and cultivators of the fine arts. 2. Laurence O’Neill Donovan, who went 
to India, where he realized a large fortune; he returned to Dublin in 1807, and married a 
sister of Dr. Singer, F.T.C.D., but died without male issue. Bernard Donovan, the second bro- 
ther, married Rose O’ Neill, the sister of Anastasia aforesaid, by whom he had issue three sons, and 
one daughter: 1. John; 2. Laurence; 3. Neal. John held a high rank in the Spanish service, and 
married the daughter of the Governor of East Florida, by whom he had two sons. Laurence, the 
second son of Bernard, was Commissary-General in the British service, and Comptroller of Surinam, 
in the West Indies. He died unmarried. Neal Donovan, the third son of Bernard, went to South 
America, and is supposed to have been drowned. Bernard Donovan’s daughter, Lucinda, married 
Laurence Crowe, Esq., of the county of Clare and of the city of Dublin, by whom she had several 
sons and one daughter, Maria Carolina, who is married to the Prince of Bassano, son of the Prince 
of Peace, who was Prime Minister and Generalissimo to Charles IV. of Spain. 


O’DONOVAN OF TUATH O’FEEHILY. 


It should be also remarked that there had been a family of O’Donovan seated in Tuath- 
O’Feehily in O’Driscoll’s country, before the Hy-Figeinte had been driven from the plains along 
the River Maigue, in the present county of Limerick. They are mentioned in a very curious 
tract on the tribes, districts, and history of the territory of Corca-Luighe, preserved in the Book 
of Lecan, fol. 122 e sequent., and in Duald Mac Firbis’s Genealogical work, p. 677, as situated in 
Tuath O bhFithcheallaigh, extending from Gaibhlin-an-ghaithneamhna to Oilen Insi-Duine, and 
from Dun-Eoghain to Glaise-Draighneacha. The other feudatories of the same district were 


APPENDIX. 9483 


O’Comhraidh, O’h-Iarnain, O’Nuallain, and O’Croinin. No pedigree of this sept, who are pro- 
bably of the same race as the O’Driscolls, has been discovered. It would appear that the old fort of 
Dangan-Donovan was erected by their ancestor, for it is certain that this fort is much older than 
the time that the Hy-Figeinte O’Donovans settled in Corca-Luighe. It is highly probable that a 
great number of the O’Donovans of the county of Cork are of this family. The Hy-Figeinte may 
in general be distinguished from them by their small hands and feet, and a peculiar formation of 
the toes, by which the race of Cairbre Aebhdha are infallibly known to one another. 





PEDIGREE OF MAC CARTHY OF DUNMANWAY, 
CHIEF. OF GLEANN-A-CHROIM. 


Frost Lughaidh, the third son of Oilioll Flannbeg, No. V., supra, was descended, 

XXV. Cartuacn, a quo Mac Carthy. He was the great-grandson of Callaghan of Cashel, 
King of Munster, and was killed in the year 1045. 

XXVI. Mutreapuace Mac Carty, died 1095. 

XXVII. Cormac Mac Carruy of Magh-Tamhnaigh, King of Desmond, slain in 1138. 

XXVIII. Drarmar Mac Carruy of Kill-Baghaine, King of Desmond, slain 1185. 

XXIX. Donnett More na Curra Mac Cartuy, K. D., slain1185. He had two sons: Cormac 
Finn, K. D., who died in 1215, the ancestor of Mac Carthy More and Mac Carthy of Muskerry, 
and of Mac Donough of Duhallow, and various other septs; Domhnall God, the ancestor of Mac 
Carthy Reagh, chief of Carbery, and of Mac Carthy of Gleann-a-Chroim. 

XXX. Donnett Gop Mac Carruy. 

XXXI. Donnett Mart Mac Cartuy. 

XXXII. Donnett Cam Mac Cartay. 

XXXII. Donnett Guas Mac Cartuy. He had three sons: 1. Donnell Reagh, the ancestor 
of Mac Carthy Reagh, Chief of Carbery; 2. Cormac Donn, the ancestor of Mac Carthy of Gleann- 
a’-Chroim ; and a third son by the daughter of O’Croimin, called Mac Inghine Ui Chroimin, from 
whom are descended the Mac Carthys of Clancromine, who had a strong castle at Beal-atha-an- 
Urchair till 1641, when their chief was slain, and their territory forfeited. 

XXXIV. Cormac Donn Mac Cartny. He was Chief of Carbery, and was slain in 1366.— 
See p. 633, supra. He had eight sons, viz.: 1. Dermot; 2. Felim; 3. Donnell; 4. Owen; 5. Teige; 
6. Fineen; 7. Cormac; 8. Donough; of whose descendants little is known, except those of Felim, 
from whom the subsequent chiefs of Gleann-a-Chroim are descended. 

XXXV. Fetm Mac Cartuy. 

XXXVI. TE1ce Mac Cartuy. 

XXXVI. Fineen or Florence Mac Cartuy. 

XXXVIII. Cormac Mac Carruy. He had four sons, viz.: 1. Fineen, or Florence, who, 
according to a pedigree of this family, preserved in a manuscript at Lambeth Palace, Carew Col- 
lection, No. 635, fol. 151, ‘ was slayne by his nephew, Cormocke Downe.” This Fineen had 

14n2 


2484 APPENDIX. 


married a daughter of O’Sullivan Beare, by whom he left a son, Cormac, who married More, 
daughter of Dermot Oge O’Leary, by whom he had a daughter, who married Dermot O’Crowly of 
Coill-tSealbhaigh, and two sons,—Felim, who was slain in 1641, and Cormac Reagh. 2. The second 
son of Cormac, No. XXX VIII., was Dermot-na-nGlac, the ancestor of the subsequent chiefs, of 
whom presently; his third son was named Owen; and his fourth son, Felim; but it is stated by 
the writer of the Lambeth Pedigree, just referred to, that their descendants were all dead when he 
was writing, which was about the year 1652. 

XXXIX. Dermort-na-natac Mac Cartuy of Dunmanway, Chief of the Gleann-a-Chroim. He 
married Ellinor, the daughter of the celebrated Sir Cormac Mac Carthy of Muskerry, the friend of 
the Lord Deputy, Sir Henry Sidney, and had issue: 1. Cormac Donn, who, according to the 
Lambeth Pedigree, married a daughter of Connogher O’Leary, and was “ Hanged in chaynes at 
Corke, for murdering his Vnkle Fynin,”—he left one son, Felim, and a daughter, who was 
married to Arthur O’Crowly; 2. Fineen, who died without issue; 3, Teige-an-Fhorsa, i. e. 
Timothy of the Force, ancestor of the subsequent chiefs ; and one daughter, who was married to 
David O’Crowly. 

XL. Tr1ce-an-Fuorsa, i.e. Timothy of the Force, usually called Teige Onorsie by English 
writers. He married, first, a daughter of Mac Fineen, and widow of Turlough Backagh Mac 
Sweeny; and secondly, Ellenor, daughter of Rory Mac Sheehy, who survived him, and had issue: 
1. Teige-an-Duna, of whom presently; 2. Dermot, who, according to an Inquisition taken at the 
King’s Castle in Cork, on the 26th of August, 1618, claimed Togher, Shancrane, Quynrath, 
Dyereagh, and various other lands in the neighbourhood of Dunmanway ; and a daughter, who 
was married to Randal Oge O’Hurley. He had also an illegitimate son, Fineen. 

Queen Elizabeth, by letters patent, under the great seal of Ireland, dated at Dublin the 28th 
day of December, the thirty-third year of her reign, granted to this Teige Mac Dermot Mac 
Carthy the Castle of Dunmanway, and the entire territory of Gleann-a-Chroim. He afterwards 
surrendered to James I. and received a re-grant of all his territory. This appears from two Inqui- 
sitions, one taken at the King’s Old Castle, in Cork, on the 26th of August, 1618, and the other 
at the same place on the 13th of August, in the twenty-first year of the reign of James I. These 
Inquisitions are as follows: 4 

‘« Inquisitio capta apud le Kinges Castell in Corck, in Comitatu Cork, xxvi.° die augusti, 1618, 
annoque regni domini Jacobi &c., decimo sexto, coram Richardo domino Boyle Barone de Youghill 
(et aliis) per sacramenta proborum &c., qui dicunt quod Teig mac Dermodie Cartey, alias Norsey, 
de Downemeanwy in Comitatu Cork, armiger defunctus, diem suum clausit extremum apud civi- 
tatem Cork, tertio die Julii anno millesimo sexcentesimo decimo octavo; Et quod tempore vite sue 
seisitus fuit de feodo, viz.: de Castro, villa et terra vocata Downemeanwye, alias Downemeanvay, 
in dicto Comitatu Cork, continente tres carrucatas terre, inGlawn Icryem, in Baronie de Carribry, 
valoris per annum xx.*; Ac de villa et terra sive quarterio terre de Dromeleyn in dicto Comitatu, 
continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xx.°; Ac de villa sive quarterio terre de Inshy, 
in Comitatu predicto, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xx.'; Ac de villa sive 
quarterio terre de Quynrath in dicto Comitatu, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum 
xx.°; Ac etiam de villa, sive quarterio terrae vocata Togher, continente tres carrucatas terre in 


APPENDIX. 2485 


dicto Comitatu, valoris per annum xx.’; Ac etiam de villa et quarterio terre vocata Altaghe, in 
dicto Comitatu, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xx.°; Ac etiam de villa et 
terra de Ballyhalogge, in dicto Comitatu continente duas carrucatas terre, valoris per annum 
xiii.*; Ac etiam de villa et quarterio terre vocata Mahoney, alias Mahona, in dicto Comitatu 
Cork, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xx.°; Ac etiam de Kileonan in dicto 
comitatu continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xx.$; Ac etiam de villa et quarterio 
terre vocata Lyssebealyd, alias Lyssebelfaddaghe, in dicto Comitatu, continente tres carrucatas terre, 
valoris per annum xx.*; Ac etiam de et in villa sive quarterio vocato Ferlaghan, alias Bealaghane, 
in dicto Comitatu, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xx.°; Ac etiam sexdecem 
Gnyves terre jacentibus in duobus carrucatis terre de Clonnwgane, Cloungane in Glanykroym 
predicto, ac nuper in tenura dicti Teig mac Dermody Cartey, alias Teig I Norcey, valoris per 
annum xx.°; Ac etiam de dimidio unius carrucate terre de Dyrrynecaharragh, in Comitatu pre- 
dicto, valoris per annum ii.°; Ac etiam de una carrucata terre in le occidentali Drynighe, alias 
Drynigh-in-tample, valoris per annum iii.’ iiii."; Ac etiam de villa, sive quarterio terre, vocata 
Kilvarry alias Kilwarry, in dicto comitatu, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum 
xv.°; Ac etiam de villa, sive quarterio vocato East Drynagh in dicto comitatu, continente tres 
carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xv.°; Ac etiam de quatuor Gnyves terre vocatis Farren Inny- 
neherrin, valoris per annum ii.*; Ac etiam de villa, sive quarterio terre vocata Curraghnymaddery, 
alias Tullagh, in dicto comitatu Cork, continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per annum xv.*; Ac 
de villa et terra de Carroughnyhomogh alias Twllaghe continente tres carrucatas terre, valoris per 
annum Xv.* 

‘Et ulterius dicunt quod predictus Teig mac Dermody Cartie per cartam suam datam x.° die 
Februarii, 1608, concessit Thome fitz John Barry, de Ballyne Corry, in dicto Comitatu Cork, et 
Donogho mac Teig O’Learie, de Tome, in dicto Comitatu, generosis, de omnibus, villis, terris, &c. 
de Ratherownyhawne, Kahaurow mac altigg, in dicto comitatu, continente sex carrucatas terre, 
cum omnibus boscis,et aliis pertinentibus quibuscumque, ad opus et usum suum proprium durante 
vita sua naturali, et post mortem suam Ellenore ny Reyry mac Shyhy uxori ejus et post mortem 
suam ad opus et usum Dermicii mac Teig mac Cartey et heredibus suis masculis de corpore suo 
legittime procreatis, sub certis aliis conditionibus in eadem Carta expressis. 

‘“« Ac ulterius dicunt quod predictus Teig mac Dermody Cartey, alias I-Norsey, seisitus fuit sub 
modo et forma predicto de dimidio unius carrucate terre vocate Garranetonereigh, in dictoComitatu, 
valoris per annum u.*; Ac Juratores predicti ulterius dicunt quod predictus Teig mac Dermody 
Cartey, alias I-Norsey, seisitus fuit, de feodo, de annuali redditu exeunte de terris sequentibus viz. : 
de et ex villa et terra de Littergorman alias Kippagh, in dicto Comitatu, continente unum quar- 
terium terre iii.’ viil.* x.* obolique sterlingorum per annum; Ac etiam de et ex villa et quarterio 
terre de Dromedrastill, alias Coulkelloure, in dicto Comitatu, iiii.’ vill.’ x." obolique sterlingorum 
per annum. 

‘“‘ Ac ulterius dicunt quod Ellenor ny Shyhy vidua et relicta predicti Teig mac Dermody Cartey, 
alias I-Norsey, legittime fuit maritata, et clamat dotem omnium premissorum. 

‘“* Ac etiam dicunt quod predictus Teig mac Dermody Cartey, alias I-Norsey, tempore vite sue 
seisitus fuit de omnibus Castris, villis, terris, et hereditamentis, et tenuit eadem de Domino rege, 


2486 APPENDIX. 


virtute literarum patentium dicti Domini Regis, datarum apud Dublin, vicesimo nono die Juni 
anno regni Jacobi Anglie &c. xiii° per quasquidem literas patentes dictus Dominus Rex concessit 
omnia premissa predicto Teig mac Dermody et heredibus suis in feodo simplice, sub annuali redditu 
L iii’. iii. Hibernie; et quod tenentur in libero et communi soccagio, et non in Capite; Et ulterius 
dicunt quod predictus Teig mac Dermody Cartey, alias I-Norsey, sic seisitus existens de premissis, 
obiit inde seisitus, et quod premissa tempore mortis sue predicte et tunc tenebantur in libero et 
communi soccagio de dicto Domino nostro Jacobo Rege ut de Castro de Dublin, per fidelitatem 
tantum; Et ulterius dicunt quod Teig oge mac Cartey, alias I-Downy, est filius et legittimus 
heres predicti Teig mac Dermody Cartey, alias I-Norsey, et quod tempore mortis predicti patris 
sui fuit etatis triginta annorum, aut circiter, et tempore captionis hujus Inquisitionis, fuit etatis 
triginta quatuor annorum, aut circiter, et maritatus tempore mortis predicti patris sui; Et ulterius 
dicunt quod Dermisius mac Teig mac Dermody clamat proprium jus hereditatis de et in terris 
sequentibus, viz.: de et in villa et in duobus carrucatis terre et novem gnyves de Tougher; Ac de et 
in villa et una carrucata terre de Shancrane et de et in villa et dimidio unius Carrucate terre de 
Quynrath et de et in villa et dimidio unius carrucate terre de Dyereagh et de et in villa et qua- 
tuor gnyves terre vocatis Inenerery ac etiam de et in villa et quatuor gnyves terre vocatis Derry- 
maheraghe; Ac de et in villa et duobus carrucatis terre de Cwylmontaine et Caherownymaddery ; 
Ac de et in villis et quatuor gnyves terre de Drinaghintample in Clanloghlin; Ac etiam de et in 
villa et dimidio unius carrucate terre de Garranetoneroaghie in Clanloghlin predicto.” 

‘“‘Inquisitio capta apud the King’s Old Castle in Comitatu Cork, decimo tertio die Augusti, 
Anno regni domini Jacobi, &c., vicesimo primo, coram Willielmo Barker armigero supervisore 
Curie Wardorum (et aliis) per sacramenta proborum, &c., qui dicunt quod Domina Elizabetha 
nuper Regina Anglie per literas suas patentes sub magno sigillo hujus Regni Hibernie sigillatas 
datas apud Dublin decimo octavo die Decembris anno regni sui tricesimo tercio, concessit prefato 
mac Dermodi Carthy totum illum Castrum villam et terram de Downemanevy in Comitatu Cork, 
cum pertinentibus annualis valoris xx... Unum quarterium terre vocatum the quarter of Kilwarry 
in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris x.*; et unum aliud quarterium terre yocatum Dromlina, 
cum pertinentibus, in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris x.*; in omnibus, &., unum aliud quar- 
terium terre vocatum Inshie cum pertinentibus in Comitatu annualis valoris v.°; unum aliud 
quarterium terre vocatum Dromdriastell cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris 
v..; unum aliud quarterium terre Quinraghe cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis 
valoris v*.; unum aliud quarterium terre vocatum Karrownamadderie cum pertinentibus in 
Comitatu predicto, annualis valoris v.4; unum aliud quarterium terre vocatum Togher cum per- 
tinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris v..; unum aliud quarterium terre vocatum 
Tullhighr cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris v.*; unum aliud quarterium 
terre vocatum Altaghe cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris v.*; duas Carru- 
catas terre in Ballyhallowige cum pertinentibus annualis valoris v.°; unum aliud quarterium 
terre vocatum Mahownie cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris v..; unum 
quarterium terre vocatum Kilronane cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris v.*; 
unum quarterium terre vocatum Lisbiallin cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto, annualis 
valoris v.'; unum quarterium terre vocatum Drinaghe cum pertinentibus in Comitatu predicto, 


APPENDIX. 2487 


annualis valoris v..; unum aliud quarterium terre vocatum Littergorman cum pertinentibus in 
Comitatu predicto, annualis v.°; unum aliud quarterium terre vocatum Vearlaghane cum perti- 
nentibus¥in Comitatu predicto, annualis valoris v.*; duas Carrucatas terre, cum pertinentibus, in 
Cloineodowgane in Comitatu predicto annualis valoris v.‘; Dimidium Carrucate terre cum perti- 
nentibus in Derrincarraghe in Comitatu predicto, annualis valoris i1.*; et de dimidio Carrucate 
terre cum pertinentibus in Inynyingherrin in Comitatu predicto, annualis valoris ii.*; jacentia in 
Cantreda de Glanchrime, in Comitatu predicto; Habendum et tenendum prefato Thadeo mac 
Dermody Carthy et heredibus masculis de corpore suo legittime procreatis et procreandis: Tenen- 
dum de dicta Domina Regina in Capite per vicesimam partem unius feodi militis prout per dictas 
literas patentes plane apparet virtute quarum quidem literarum patentium dictus Thadeus mac 
Dermody Carthy in omnia premissa intravit et fuit inde seisitus de feodo. Et Juratores predicti 
ulterius dicunt quod Dominus noster nunc Rex Anglie per literas suas gerentes datum apud New- 
sted decimo quinto die Augusti Anno regni sui Anglie, &., duodecimo, inter alia authorizavit et 
requisivit Arthurum Dominum Chichester ad tune deputatum dicti domini Regis generalem dicti 
Regni sui Hibernie ad accipiendum sursumreddicionis ad usum dicti domini Regis terrarum et 
tenementorum in Baronia de Carbrie quarum quidem literarum tenor sequitur in hee verba : 
‘James Rex, right trusty,’ &c. Et ulterius dicunt quod prefatus Iacobus Simpell miles per et in 
consideracione ducentarum librarum prefato Jacobo per predictum Thadeum mac Dermody Carthy 
pro manibus solutarum per quoddam scriptum suum gerentem datum vicesimo octavo die Januarii 
Anno domini, 1614, nominasset constituisset et authorizasset prefatum Thadeum mac Dermody 
Carthy ad capiendum et recipiendum a dicto domino Rege literas patentes de dicto castro villa et 
terra de Downmanevy predicto ; et de omnibus aliis premissis cum eorum pertinentibus Haben- 
dum et tenendum prefato Thadeo mac Dermod heredibus et assignatis suis imperpetuum prout 
per dictum scriptum predicti Jacobi Simple militis magis plane liquet. Et ulterius dicunt quod 
predictus Thadeus mac Dermody Carthy per quoddam scriptum suum et in Curia Cancellarie 
domini nostri Jacobi tune Regis hujus Regni sui Hibernie irrotulatum datum vicesimo octavo die 
Junii Anno Regni dicti domini Regis Anglie, &c., decimo tertio sursum reddidisset in manus dicti 
domini Regis nunc totum illud Castrum villam et terram de Downemanevy predicta et omnia 
premissa cum eorum pertinentibus : Habendum et tenendum dicto domino Regi heredibus et suc- 
cessoribus suis imperpetuum, ea tamen intencione quod dictus dominus Rex per literas suas 
patentes sub magno sigillo suo Hibernie sigillatas reconcederet omnia premissa prefato Thadeo mac 
Dermody Carty heredibus et assignatis suis imperpetuum, ad solum et proprium opus et usum 
dicti Thadei heredum et assignatorum suorum imperpetuum. Virtute cujus quidem sursum red- 
dicionis dictus dominus Rex seisitus fuit de omnibus premissis predictis cum eorum pertinentibus. 
Kt sic inde seisitus existens dictus dominus Rex per literas suas patentes gerentes datum apud 
Dublin vicesimo nono die Junii Anno Domini, 1615, concessit omnia Castra, villas, terras, et tene- 
menta predicta cum eorum pertinentibus prefato Thadeo mac Dermody Carty heredibus et assig- 
natis suis imperpetuum : Habendum et tenendum prefato Thadeo mac Dermody Carthy heredibus 
et assignatis suis imperpetuum; tenendum de dicto domino nostro Rege Jacobo ut de Castro suo de 
Dublin, in libero et communi soccagio et non in Capite neque per servicium militare. Virtute 
quarum quidem literarum patentium idem Thadeus mac Dermody Carthy in omnia premissa pre- 


2488 APPENDIX. 


dicta cum eorum pertinentibus intravit. Et fuit inde seisitus (prout lex postulat). Et sic inde 
seisitus existens predictus Thadeus mac Dermody Carthie districtus fuit per breve dicti domini 
Regis e scaccario suo hujus Regni sui Hibernie emanens ad comparendum in eadem Curia @t ad faci- 
endum dicto domino Regi homagium per omnibus Castris villis, terris, et tenementis predictis cum 
eorum pertinentibus super quod idem Thadeus postea, scilicet, decimo die Novembris Anno regni 
dicti domini Regis nunc Anglie, &c., decimo quinto, in eadem Curia comparuit et dixit quod ipse ad 
faciendum homagium dicto domino Regi pro premissis seu pro aliqua parte sive parcella inde com- 
pelli non debeat quia adtune dixit quod dictus dominus Rex per literas suas dictas patentes 
concessit sibi prefato Thadeo mac Dermody Carthie omnia Castra villas terras et tenementa pre- 
dicta cum eorum pertinentibus habendas sibi et assignatis suis imperpetuum: Tenendum de dicto 
domino Rege ut de Castro suo Dublin in libero et Communi soccagio et non in Capite nec per 
servicium militare unde non intendisset quod dictus dominus Rex nunc ipsum in ea causa ulterius 
non distringere seu exonerare velit; unde adtunce petiisset iudicium. Et quod ipse quoad ad facien- 
dum dicto domino Regi homagium pro premissis seu pro aliqua inde parcella a Curia predicta 
dimittatur; Et Johannes Davies miles ad tune attornatus generalis dicti domini Regis dicti Regni 
sui Hibernie qui pro eodem domino Rege in ea parte ad tune sequebatur visis tam donacionis 
sursumreddicionis predicte per prefatum Thadeum dicto domino Regi heredibus et assignatis 
suis de premissis in facto quam dictis literis patentibus a dicto domino Rege prefato Thadeo de 
premissis in forma predicta concessis Idem Attornatus adtunc non dedixisset sed fatebatur 
placitum prefati Thadei ad tunc placitatum fore verum unde adtunce consideratus fuit per Barones 
dicti Scaccarii quod predictus Thadeus quoad homagium dicto domino Regi pro premissis faciendum 
ab eadem Curia ad tune dimittatur. Et ulterius Juratores dicunt quod predictus Thadeus mac 
Dermody Charty de premissis sic ut prefertur seisitus existens obiit sic inde seisitus secundo die 
Julij anno domini 1617. Et quod Thadeus mac Carty alias Teige-y-downie est filius et proximus 
heres prefati Thadei Mac Dermody et fuit etatis triginta annorum tempore mortis predicti patris 
sui et maritatus. Et quod omnia premissa predicta tenentur de dicto domino nostro Rege Jacobo 
prout lex postulat. Et ulterius dicunt quod immediate post obitum prefati Thadei mac Dermody 
Carthie idem Thadeus alias Teige-y-Downie in omnia premissa intravit, et exitus et proficia inde 
huc usque percepit et habuit. Et ulterius quod post obitum prefati Thadei mac Dermodi Carthie 
predictus Thadeus alias Teige-y-Downie solvit dicto domino Regi summam L. iii.‘ ii. nomine 
relevil prout per acquietanciam sub manu vice thesaurarii dicti domini Regis Regni Hibernie 
pro recepcione inde plane apparet. Et quod Ellinor Carthy est vidua et relicta prefati Thadei 
mac Dermody Carthie modo superstes ac indotata omnium premissorum.” 

The lands surrendered and regranted to this Teige Inorsa, will appear from the following ex- 
tracts from the Patent Rolls. 

“VII. 16. Surrender by Teige Mac Dermott Cartie, otherwise Teig Inorse of Downemenway, 
in Cork Co., gent., of all his estate in Cork co., with the intention that the King shall reconvey the 
same to him by letters patent.—28 Jun., 13th. | 

“VIII, 18. Deed, whereby Sir James Semple, knt., appoints Teige Mac Dermody Cartie, of 
Downemeanwy, in Cork co., to accept a grant or grants from the King, of part of the lands and 
premises expressed in article X., for the sum of £280.—28 Jan., 12th. 


APPENDIX. 2489 


“IX. 19. Deed, whereby Sir James Semple, knt., appoints Teige Mac Dermody Cartie other- 
wise Teige Innorsy, of Dounemeanvoy, in Cork co., gent., to accept a grant or grants of the 
remaining part of the lands and premises expressed in article X., for the sum of £50 10s. 6d.— 
28 Jan., 12th. 

““X. 21. Grant from the King to Teig or Thady Mac Dermott Cartie otherwise Teige Inorse, 
of Downemenvoy, gent. 

“* Cork Co.—In Carbrie Bar. The castle, town, and lands or qr. called Downmanvoy* otherwise 
Downemeanvey*, containing 3 plowlands in Glancroim; Dromeline’*, Inshie**, Quin-Rath**, 
Togher>* and Altagh**, each containing 3 plowlands; Ballihalloige’*, 2 plowlands ; Mahoney® 
otherwise Mahouna*, 3 plowlands; Killronanf*, Lissebealidd otherwise Lissbealfadda’*, Fear- 
laghan" otherwise Vearlaghan*, each containing 3 plowlands; sixteen gnives in the 2 plowlands 
of Cloneowgan otherwise Clonioungan or Cloynoungan*, Dirrinycaharaghi*, $ plowland; all in 
Glancroim; in the West-Drinaghi otherwise Drinaghentemple*, 1 plowland in Clanloghlin; Kill- 
varrie* otherwise Killwarrie*, 3 plowlands in Glancroim; Drinagh*, 3 plowlands; Farren-Innirerie 
or Inynrerie, 4 gnives*; Carrownemaddrie otherwise Tullagh, 3 plowlands; Carrownehaw other- 
wise Tullhagh*, 3 plowlands ; all in Glancroim; Garrantonereigh*, 4 plowland ; a chief-rent of 
£4 10s. 844d, Eng., out of Lettergorman otherwise Kippagh; out of Dromdrasduyll' otherwise 
Coolekellour, £4 10s. 842d., the said town and lands of Dromdrasduyll *, 3 plowlands in Glancroim, 
Littergormane otherwise Kippagh*; rent for all the preceding lands, except those in W. Drinagh- 
and Carrantoneregih, £2 13s. 4d., and to keep 10 able footmen at the command of the chief go- 
vernor ; Kincahbegg™, 1{ plowland in Kiltallowe ; in Kannagh, 4 gnives ; in Lissellan, 8 gnives ; 
in the N. plowland of Liss-Ihillane, 4 gnives; in Kannagh, 8 gnives, all in Kiltallow; Balliboy- 
loneoughtragh",1] plowland; Lissicarran®, 1 plowland; Cappin?, 1 plowland; Bellaghenure’, 1 plow- 
land; Caherneknave otherwise Kahernegnave’ otherwise called the W. half plowland of Furrowe’, 
4 plowland in Clanloghlin; Garren-Iven, 1 plowland in Clanloghlin; 3 gnives in Courturk, in the 
2 plowlands of Dromully, in Clanloughlin ; all chief-rents, services, and privileges payable to 


kerranmore and Kilmeen. 
i Dirrinycaharagh.—Now Derrynacaharagh, in the pa- 


* Downmanvoy.—Now Dunmanway. 
Y Dromeline.-—Now Drumleena, in the parish of Fan 


lobain, now anglice Fanlobus. 

z Inshie.—Now Inch, East and West, in the parish of 
Fanlobus. 

& Quin-Rath.—Now Keenrath, in the same parish. 

> Togher, sic hodie: a townland, containing the ruins of 
a castle, in the same parish. 

© Altagh.—Now Aultagh, in the parish of Kilmichael. 

4 Ballyhalloige——Now Ballyhalwick, in the parish of 
Fanlobus. 

© Mahoney.—Now Mahona, in the same parish. 

f Kilronan.-_Now Kilronane, East and West, in the 
same parish. 

& Lisbealidd.—Now Lisbealad, East and West, in the 
parish of Drinagh. 

h Fearlaghan.—Now Ferlihanes, in the parishes of Kil- 


rish of Fanlobus. 

J West-Drinagh.—A townland in the parish of Drinagh. 

k Kilvarrie.—Now Kilbarry, in the parish of Fanlobus. 

1 Dromdrasduyll.—Now Drumdrasdle, in the parish of 
Fanlobus. 

™ Kincahbegg.—Now Kinneigh, in a parish of the same 
name. 

0 Balliboyloneoughtragh.—Now Ballyvelone West, in the 
parish of Kinneigh. 

© Lissicarran.—Now Lissycorrane, in the same parish. 

P Cappin.—Now Cappeen, East and West, in the same 
parish. 

4 Bellaghenure.—Now Ballaghanure, in the same parish. 

' Kahernegnave.—Now Caher, in the parish of Kinneigh. 

8 Furrowe.—Now Froe, in the parish of Rossearbery. 


140 


2490 APPENDIX. 


Donell Mac Cartie, the King’s ward, or any of his ancestors, together with all his right to all or 
any of the premises, are hereby excepted. 

‘¢ The premises thus marked * are created the manor of Downemenvoy, with 500 acres in de- 
mesne, power to create tenures, and to hold courts leet and baron; to hold a Saturday market at 
Kilbarah, and a yearly fair at Ballyhallowe, on 24 Sep. and the day after, unless when the said 
day falls on Saturday or Sunday, then the said fair to commence on the following Monday; with 
courts of pie powder and the usual tolls; rent 13s. 4d. 

“To hold for ever, as of the Castle of Dublin, in common soccage.””—29 Jan., 13th. 

This Teige-an-Fhorsa or Teige Inorsie Mac Carthy, died ‘on the 3rd of July, 1618, as appears 
by the Inquisition taken at the King’s Old Castle, im Cork, on the 26th of August, 1618, above 
printed for the first time, and was succeeded by his son, 

XLII. Teren-an-Duna, usually called by English writers, Teige Odowney or Teige Idownie. 
He was a very conspicuous character, and second in command of the forces of Mac Carthy Reagh, 
during the insurrection of 1641. The author of Carbrie Notitia, who wrote in 1686, after 
speaking of Clancahill, has the following notice of his territory: 

“To the north-East hereof we shall finde Dunmannaway, a small village, well situated on the 
banks of the river Bandon, fortified with an old castle, and to the north thereof, the castle of 
Togher, a large, strong pile. This tract is called Glanacrime or Slughtfelimy” [i.e. Race of Felim, 
son of Cormac Donn] ‘and belonged unto Teig Odoony, one of the best branches of the Carthyes, 
and alwayes reckoned one of the best housekeepers in Carbry.” , 

This Teige-an-Duna Mac Carthy was thirty-four years old in 1618, and married. According 
to the Lambeth Pedigree, he married, 1. A daughter of Brian mac Owen Mac Sweeny of Cloghda; 
but it appears, from various other documents, that he married, secondly, Honora, daughter of 
Donnell O’Donovan, chief of Clancahill, by Johanna, the daughter of Sir Owen Mac Carthy Reagh. 
His second wife was living, a widow, in 1652, as appears by a deposition made by her respecting 
the taking of the castle of Dundonnell, now preserved in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin. 
Teige-an-Duna left three sons: 1. Teige-an-Fhorsa; 2. Dermot, living at Dunmanway in 1641, as 
appears by the depositions of 1641; and 3. Callaghan, living, in 1652, with his mother, Honora Ni 
Carthy, alias Donovan. 

XLII. Tretee-an-Fuorsa II. It appears from Decrees of Innocent’s (VIII. 53), that he 
married, on the 22nd of October, 1641, Jennet Coppinger, relict of Nicholas Skiddy, of the 
city of Cork, merchant. He was then possessed, in his demesne, as of fee of the ‘‘ townes, lands, 
tenements, and hereditaments following, viz.: the town and lands of Ffearlaghan, known by the 
names of Tullaghglass, Gortnidihy, Maulcullanane, and Carrigatotane, in the parish of Kilmeen, 
barony of Carbery, and county of Cork; the town and lands of Curreboy, one ploughland in the 
parish of Drinagh, Coolemontane, and Tullagh; three ploughlands in the parish of Inchegeelagh; 
and being thereof so seised and possessed, did, by his last will and testament in writing, devise 
same unto claimant Gennet for her life, in lieu of dower, and soon after died. After whose death, 
by virtue of said will, said Gennet was seised and possessed of the premises, until she was 
expulsed by the late usurping powers. The Court of Claims find that Nicholas Skiddy, her first 
husband, died before the 22nd of October, 1641, and that Teige Carthy dyed in the yeare 1650. 


APPENDIX. 2491 


But as for and concerning the lands of Kilbarry, with the two water mills thereon, and the said 
lands of Ffearlaghane, called Tullaghglass, Gortnedihy, Maulo Icullenane, Carrigetotane, Curre- 
boy, Coolemountane, and Tullagh, in regard the said Claimants (George Skiddy and his mother, 
Gennet), and each of them, failed to make out any title thereunto, it is considered, ordered, and 
adjudged and decreed by this Court, that the same and every part thereof are and be excepted 
out of this precept, order, and decree, and that the claymants be left to such other course, either 
in law or Equity, as they shall think fit.” 

Jeremy Carthy, Esq. (who was evidently Teige-an-Duna’s second son), was restored to the 
following townlands, most of which are situated in Gleann-a-Chroim, under the Commission of 
Grace, in 1684, viz.: 





A RP: 
Darah; * «<1 Weis) + cS aN eee OLE anit Ue ee lee Ge need ee nO 
Basbiall etiend, licslaauy, 0. aceite nsec.) Ua: Pea hn tee Ae ee ety Ger nad: 
Oceulane, alias Camacullane;, yap) ei necoyeieend * sompeth Ad wns eras) Se 6 ae promiable: 
ad 53 hat Bie io-tied Heated Initio bind ed ndloran ade GpEcoute ble. 
Drumlynagh, . ob RRs oie e it ae vi Ce a er or OR aed) 
Kiarath, eas Karma hs. cay ns diien sy EEE! culge ted Sap nee Hehe ca tere 400 he. 30) onal ble: 
es rs bon Sak pelle edeen bb ae eee Seedy ie ne ee, aapradntalaber 
Mioresin the. samme’ 2 oe dures enue lips a sot talent at teeth = RE bh hte Secale Gh nat) 
Carnomiaddelay de ad's. vad Lite ab paca Bei ale oe ae ees ee Oe Oe Gl 
Anges called Naskcin. pants. vic rn lista lls tenet oe tae ee, he ES | GO 
Astagmore, . BF. Re ee OT AS AES ge OO Gs! Mee pal rt OTT Re Ey 
Mate vivir GSC ac 6 ae og eet oar oy pa ween bhe Rares einen has ope 8. 12°25 
Drumgarrufiand: Garramand,, 9°.) \istiipris saaritep -witeieeend Gerke oct blot 22holelO proktable 
# si ant hidiseed cllmar oth awinieiid) 25h ab Oly Oeunprontabie 
Carhumalderyy sce acacia enna Apel salts! Mid eRMEII ES as Wie F<ttGud Oa hOn ao) 
Glanakerne alias Glannykamnysje;..: i.) dieyronnper sith disap hosurs! saw S82 he,olyprofitable, 
a3 a £4) ae leineal aries a cet a-ha te LO a Oe nO minreiniaic. 
Total in the barony of Carbery, “ithe 8 snes A: 
Lisnekelly, ¥ TAB OLCO toQ 
Longford, . 47 0 0 profitable. 
iF 40 0 O unprofitable. 
Total in the barony of Coonagh, county Limerick, 226 0 0 
Kilbonaw, . : 457° 0 @ 
Lumanagheitragh, . 93 "0° 0 
Total in the barony of Glanarought, county Kerry, . 590 O O 








Dated January 3rd, 1684; Inrolled 31st January, 1684. (R. 6. f., m. 8, fo. 18.) 


1402 


2492° APPENDIX 


The Editor has not been able to learn the after history of this Jeremy. John Collins, of 
Myross, in his pedigree of O’Donovan, speaking of O’Donovan’s daughter, Honora, who was 
married to Teige-a-Duna, has the following remark: 

‘‘From the said Teige-an-Duna sprung several military gentlemen who distinguished them- 
selves abroad, such as Charles of Lorrain, otherwise called Cormac na nglac.” 

He also says that this family had possessions in Gleann-a-Chroim till 1690, when he refers to 
a Teige-a-Duna, the Hospitable, nominal Lord of Gleann-a-Chroim. 

Teige-an-Fhorsa II. is mentioned in several copies of the Book of Munster, as having a son, 

XLIV. Tr1ee-an-Duna II., and this is evidently the person called nominal Lord of Gleann-a- 
Chroim by Collins. Three generations more of this pedigree are given in an Irish manuscript, 
in the Library of the Royal Irish Academy (O’Gorman’s Collection, 16, 5), which are as follows : 

XLV. Feri Mac Cartay, son of Teige-an-Duna II, born circiter 1672. 

XLVI. Dermot Mac Cartny, son of Felim, born crc. 1702. 

XLVII. Cormac Mac Cartuy, son of Dermot, born circ. 1734. 

The last acknowledged head of this ancient sept of the Mac Carthys was an old gentleman, 
well known in the south of Ireland by the name of Jerry-an-Duna. He died at O’Donovan’s Cove 
some years since, in the eighty-fourth year of his age. His generous friend and kind benefactor, 
Timothy O’Donovan, Esq., in whose house he died, mentions him, in a letter to the Editor, as the 
undoubted head of this family, and the great-grandson of Teige-an-Duna, the last who resided in the 
castle of Dunmanway. He adds: ‘“ His appearance was most respectable, and he had the manners 
and information of a gentleman; all classes about Dunmanway had a respect for him to the last, and 
all admitted his descent from Teige-an-Duna. He was married to a Miss Callanan, of Kinsale, a very 
respectable lady, who ran off with him, and he spent what fortune she brought him with his Irish 
recklessness. He often told me that his family papers were in a chest which he left with a Mrs. 
Mac Carthy of Glanda, near Dunmanway. He made a request to me to have him interred in the 
family tomb at Kilbarry” [one mile west of the town of Dunmanway ], “which, of course, I 
complied with, and he was burted with his ancestors, and with all due respect. His eldest 
son, Charles, is now in Cork; he is, Iam told, a well-conducted honest man, but in very low 
circumstances.”’? The Editor hopes that these documents will be preserved. 

From this branch of the Mac Carthys are descended in the female line the family of Schuldham 
or Shouldham, of Dunmanway, whose ancestor, Edmond Schuldham, Crown Solicitor in the reign 
of Queen Anne, married the daughter and eventual heiress of Denis Mac Carthy, Esq., of Dyereagh, 
three miles to the north of Dunmanway, through whom the townlands of Crustera, Cuilkilleen, 
Goulacullin, Farnanes, Durragh, and Droumleena, are believed by the Mac Carthys and Schuld- 
hams to have passed into the Schuldham family. However this may have been, the Schuldhams 
have for some generations quartered the Mac Carthy arms, and not only acknowledge, but boast 
of their descent from this once great family. 

From Cormac or Charles Mac Carthy Glas of Tullyglass, the brother of the aforesaid Denis, 
whose property passed to the Schuldhams, and, according to the tradition in the country, which 
can be proved by private and recorded documents, the cousin-german of Dermot-an-Duna of 
Dunmanway, is descended Daniel Mac Carthy, Esq., late of Florence, and now living in Paris, a 


APPENDIX. 2493 


gentleman of refined taste and high literary attainments, author of the Siege of Florence, Masaniello, 
and the Free Lance. His descent from this sept of the Mac Carthys has been kindly communi- 
cated by Mr. Bartholomew Rochford of Ardcahan, near Dunmanway, the living repertory of the 
traditions of Gleann-a-Chroim, and who is himself the grandson of Charles Mac Carthy, son of 
Daniel, son of Cormac or Charles Mac Carthy of Tullyglass, the brother of the aforesaid Denis Mac 
Carthy of Dyereagh. It is as follows: 

1. Charles Mac Carthy Glas, of Tullyglass, in the parish of Fanlobus, married Angelina 
Hurley, by whom he had four sons: 1. Daniel; 2. Jeremiah, a priest; 3. Charles; and 4. Justin, 
who had a son, Denis, who died in France. This Charles Mac Carthy Glas died about the year 
1735, and was buried in the family vault of his ancestors at Kilbarry. He had a brother named 
Denis, who resided at a place called Dyereagh, and who married Elizabeth Donovan, by whom he 
had two children, a son and a daughter. ‘The daughter [her name was Mary, according to the 
Schuldhams] eloped with and was married to a Mr. Schuldham [Edmond]. The son was shot by 
some unknown person, soon after this marriage, so that the daughter became an heiress, and the 
property of this branch of the Mac Carthys passed to the Schuldhams. 

2. Daniel, son of Cormac or Charles Mac Carthy. He married Catherine Crowley, and, after 
the death of his father, removed from Tullyglass to Drumdeega, in the parish of Fanlobus, where 
ht died, leaving three sons, viz.: 1. Charles, the grandfather of Bartholomew Rochford of Ardcahan ; 
2. Denis; 3. Daniel; who, after their father’s death, removed to a place called Shean, where Charles 
died, and whence Denis and Daniel, after having sold their property, removed to England, where 
Denis died without issue, leaving his property to his brother Daniel. 

3. Daniel Mac Carthy. He was born about the year 1740, and died in 1813, having realised 
a considerable fortune as a merchant. 

4. Daniel Mac Carthy died before his father, leaving * . 

5. Daniel Mac Carthy, Esq., late of Florence, and now residing in Paris, Vir doctus et ornatus 
hance antiquam domum restauraturus. He married Harriet Alexandrina Basset, daughter of Admiral 
Sir Home Popham, and has issue: 1. Henry Popham Tenison Mac Carthy; 2. Florence Stracham 
Mac Carthy; and 3. Elizabeth Radcliff Mac Carthy; all now living. 


Tue following pedigrees and descents have been given in the course of the notes to these 
Annals : 

O’Fynn or O’Lyn of Hy-Tuirtre and Firlee. For the descent of this family see note 4, under 
the year 1176, p. 24, supra. The modern history of this family is unknown. 

O’Henery of Glenconkeine, in the county of Londonderry. | For his descent see note ', 1192, 
p: 92. 

O’F yn of Sil-Mailruain, in the county of Roscommon. For the name of the present head of 
this family see note ', A. D. 1192, p. 92. 

KavanaGu, for the descent of, see note f, A. D. 1193, p. 96. 

Mac Devirt of Inishowen, descent of, note 4, A. D, 1208, p. 158. 


2494 APPENDIX. 


O’Hanty of Kinel-Dofa, in the county of Roscommon, pedigree of, note *, A. D. 1210, 
p- 171. 

O’Frnacuty of Clann-Conway, descent of, note ', A. D. 1232, p. 265. 

Descent of O’Hrnnessy and, O’Huatianan of Clann-Colgan, in the now King’s County, 
A.D. 1414, note !, p. 820. 

O’DunneE of Iregan, pedigree of, pp. 957, 958, 959, A. D. 1448; and p. 1840, A. D. 1585, 
note ». 

O’Gowan, pedigree of, pp. 1189 to 1193, A. D. 1492. 

Mac Manus Macurrg, descent of, p. 1242, A. D, 1498. 

Mac Donne tt of Leinster, descent of, pp. 1641 to 1644. 

O’NEILLts of Clannaboy, pedigree of, p. 1678, A. D. 1574. 

O’Byrnes of the county of Wicklow, notices of various branches of, p. 1702, A. D. 1578; 
pedigree of, p. 1747, A. D. 1580. 

O’Reitty of East Breifny, pedigree of, as in a paper in the State Papers’ Office, London, 
p- 1806, A. D. 1583. 

Mac Donne tt of Antrim, pedigree of, p. 1892, A. D. 1590, note °. 

O’Tootss of Leinster, pedigree of, pp. 1900 to 1904, A. D. 1590, note f. 

Mac Namara of Moyreask, descent of, p. 1910, A. D. 1592, note ’. 

O’Ketiy of Dunamona, descent of, p. 1911, A. D. 1592, note ”. 

Mac Carruys, dispute amongst the, concerning the oldest branch, pp. 1994, 1995. 

O’ Byrne of Glenmalure, pedigree of, p. 2018, A. D. 1597, note ". 

O’Donovan, pedigree of the Editor’s sept of, p. 2155. 

O’REILLY, pedigree of, carried down to the present day, p. 2240, A. D. 1601, note ”. 

Macuire, pedigree of, carried down to the present day, p. 2366, A. D. 1608, note °. 


ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA. 


PaGE 24, col. 2, note *, for “the pedigree of this famous family, who were the senior,” &c., 
read, ‘the pedigree of this famous family, a distinguished sept of the Oirghialla, who settled in 
the country of the senior branch of the Clanna-Rury.” 

P, 345, A. D. 1252, Cluainfiachna, now anglice Clonfeakle, a parish in the north of the county 
of Armagh. 

P. 418, the first Edward was made King, A. D. 1272.—Sir Harris Nicolas states, in his 
Chronology of History, Preface, p. xii., that every table of the regnal years of the Sovereigns of 
England, hitherto printed, is erroneous, not in one or two reigns only, but in nearly every reign 
from the time of William the Conqueror to that of Edward the Fourth. He also says that Richard 
the First styled himself only “Lord of England,” in the interval between his father’s death and 
his own Coronation; and that the Kings’ reigns were actually dated from their Coronations. The 
Editor first thought that by plogad, when applied to the Sovereigns of England, the Four Masters 


APPENDIX. 2495 


meant their Coronation; but, on comparison with the commonly received dates, it appears that 
by it they mean their proclamation. According to the Constitution of England for several cen- 
turies, there could be no interruption in the succession; but Sir Harris Nicolas shews that the heir 
to the Crown in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, did not, as at present, succeed to a full, 
complete, and real possession of the Throne, but ‘to a mere inchoate right, at the instant when 
the former sovereign expired.” 

P. 464, A.D. 1295. The Castle of Baile-nua, the Castle of Magh-Breacraigh, and the Castle of 
Magh-Dumha.—These castles, which were demolished this year by Jeffrey O’Farrell, were not very 
far asunder. Baile-nua is Newtown, in Clanshane, barony of Granard, and county of Longford ; 
Magh-Dumha is the present Moydoe, in the same county; and the castle of Magh Breacraigh 
stood at the village of Street, in the barony of Moygoish, and county of Westmeath, not far from 
the boundary of the county of Longford. The castle of Baile-nua, levelled by O’Farrell on this 
occasion, is therefore to be distinguished from Newcastle, in the county of Wicklow, mentioned 
in Grace’s Annals as burned by the Irish of Leinster in the same year. 

P. 599, A. D. 1351, note *, for ‘ barony of Magheraboy,” read “ barony of Clanawley.” 

P. 633, A. D. 1366, for ‘O’Kerry,” read “ O’Conor Kerry.” 

P. 638, A. D. 1367, for ‘* Inis-mor Loch m-Bearraidh.—These names are now obsolete,” read 
“‘ Inis-mor Locha m-Bearraidh, now Inishore in Lough Barry, a part of the Upper Lough Erne, 
lying between the baronies of Tirkennedy and Clanawley, in the county of Fermanagh.” 

P. 666, note 4, A. D. 1376, for “‘ this place,” read “ this name.” 

P. 682, A. D. 1381, note °, col. 2, line 11: ‘ This is a great oversight.” This sentence should 
be inserted after ‘‘ O’F fox!” col. 2, line 1, same page. It slipped out of its place and passed the 
Editor’s notice till the sheet had been worked off. 

P. 733, A. D. 1394, note ', line 1, for ‘* O’Reilly of Magh-Druchtain,” read “ O’Kelly of Magh- 
Druchtain.” 

P. 755, A. D. 1397, text, line 10, for ‘“‘ Mac Sheely,” read ‘“‘ Mac Sheehy.” 

P. 765, A. D. 1399, note ™, col. 2, line 3, for “‘ West Corca Vaskin,” read “ East Corca 
Vaskin.”’ 

P. 775, A. D. 1402, line 9, remove the brackets. 

P. 828, A. D. 1417, note ¥, col. 2, line 5, for “it was restored to O’Conor Sligo, &e.” read “ it 
was given to O’Conor Sligo in the ransom of O’ Doherty, and it remained in O’Conor’s hands during 
the reigns of ten successive lords of Carbery, when it was recovered by O’Donnell.” 

P. 829, A. D. 1417, note °, col. 2, line 11, for “‘innuera,”’ read ‘‘ innumera.”’ 

P. 837, A. D. 1411, line 14 of translation, for ‘‘Church of Cuil Silinne,” read “ Cill-Cuile- 
Silinne” [now Kilcooley, in the barony and county of Roscommon ]. 

P. 898, A. D. 1434, note 4, col. 2, line 4, for “ legal tradition,” read ‘ local tradition.” 

P. 939, A. D. 1444, note x, col. 1, line 16, for “‘ I-cluain & I-Ere & I-Hogain,” read “ I-Cruinn 
& I-Erc & I-Eogain.” 

P. 958, A. D. 1444, col. 2, line 10, for ‘‘ but it has not been connected with the ancient line above 
given,” read, “and it can be connected with the ancient line above given, on the authority of an 
Irish manuscript in the O’Gorman collection, in the Library of the Royal Irish Academy, which 


2496 APPENDIX. 


makes Leyny O’Dunne” [who built Castlebrack] ‘“ the son of Rory, who was the son of Donough, 
the last generation given by Duald Mac Firbis. This Leyny O’Dunne, had four sons, viz.: 1. Teige 
O’Dunne, chief of Hy-Regan, and ancestor of the Brittas family; 2. Feradhach; 3. Dermot; 
4, Awley.” . 

P. 993, A. D. 1454, col. 1, lines 2, 3, for ‘‘ Domino,” read ‘‘ Domicello.” 

P. 1031, A. D. 1464, line 14 of translation, between “slain” and after ‘ Gilla-Glas Dillon,” 
insert ‘‘ with one thrust of a spear.” 

P. 1050, note “, col. 2, line 27, for ‘‘ nevebat,”’ read ‘‘ vivebat.” 

P. 1057, A. D. 1468, line 25, Beann-uamha. The following note should have been given here: 
“« Beann-uamha, i.e. the Ben or Peak of the Cave, now the Cave-hill, in the barony of Upper 
Belfast, and county ofAntrim. The townland is now called Benvadigan.” 

P. 1059, A. D. 1468, note ”, col. 2, line 7, for “‘ district name,” read ‘‘ distinct name.” 

P. 1198, A. D. 1492, note §, for “in the barony and county of Leitrim,” read ‘‘ barony of 
Mohill and county of Leitrim.” 

P. 1231, A. D. 1497, line 22 of translation, for ‘‘ were given by Henry Oge O'Donnell,” read 
‘“‘ were given by Henry Oge to Donnell.” 

P. 1416, A. D. 1533, for ‘“*Annagh,” read “ Annagh, alias Hazelwood, the seat of Owen 
Wynne, Esq.” 

P. 1449, A. D. 1538, note ®, col. 2, line 1, for “ Killymard,” read ‘‘ Killodonnell.” 

P. 1475, A. D. 1542, note °, for ‘ Bel-atha-Uachtair, a townland in the parish of Kilcorky, &c.,”’ 
read ‘‘now Belloughter, in the townland of Lurgan, parish of Shankill, in the barony and county 
of Roscommon.—See the Ordnance Map of that county, sheet 22.” 

P. 1501, A. D. 1547, line 5, for Donnell Oge and Donnell Oge,” read ‘‘ Donnell Oge and 
Brian Oge.” 

P. 1509, A. D. 1548, line 25, for ‘* O’Carroll,” read “‘ O’Carroll, Teige Lusc.” 

P. 1551, A. D. 1557, note ®, col. 2, line 8, for “‘ perfecto,” read ‘‘ preefecto.” 

P. 1575, A. D. 1559, line 17, for ‘the son of O’Donnell, read “the son of Donnell.” 

P. 1606, A. D. 1565, note *, col. 1, lines 3, 4, for ‘* Glenflesk,” read ‘“‘ Glenshesk.” 

P. 1637, A. D. 1570, line 4, for “the brother of Hugh Boy Roe,” read ‘and his brother, 
Hugh Boy Roe.” i 

P. 1648, A. D. 1570, note ', col. 1, line 12, for “‘in the very centre of this river,” read, ‘in 
the very centre of this territory.” 

PP. 1682, 1683, A. D. 1572, notes* and », for ‘‘ barony of Islands,” read ‘* barony of Clondera- 
law.” 

P. 1786, A. D. 1582, note 4, col. 1, last line, for ‘“‘ William IIL,” read ‘* William IV.” 

P. 1903, col. 2, last line, for ‘‘a Miss Hatchell,” read ‘ Eliza, daughter of Henry Archer, Esq,., 
of Ballyseskin, county of Wexford.” 

P. 1904, col. 2, line 3, for ‘died sine prole,” read ‘‘ married Jane, daughter of the Rev. John 
Jacob, rector of Kilscoran, county of Wexford, and had a numerous family.” 

P. 1913, A. D..1592, note ", col. 1, line 12, for ‘* Kilmore,” read “ Touaghty.—See Ordnance 
Map of the county of Mayo, sheet 100.” 


APPENDIX. 2407 


P. 1502, note °, Faztche-Chiarain, now Faheeran, a townland containing the ruins of a castle, 
in the parish of Kilcumreragh, barony of Kilcoursey, and King’s County. 

P. 1923, A. D. 1592, note *, col. 2, line 13, for ‘‘ daughter,” read ‘ great-granddaughter ;” for 
“©1641,” read ‘ 1688.” ; 

P. 1990, for “‘now anglice Tiran, &c.,” read ‘now anglice Tirahan, alias Fairfield, in the 
parish of Lickmolassy, barony of Longford, and county of Galway.” 

P. 2021, “a natural son, Thomas Esmond.” ‘The Editor regrets that he was led into the 
assertion that the first Sir Thomas Esmonde was illegitimate, by a statement to that effect in a 
former edition of Burke’s Peerage, which has been rectified in the recent edition of that work 
(1847), to which he refers the reader. ‘There can be little doubt that the Lord Esmond was 
married to the sister of O’Flaherty, but, subsequently repudiating her without a divorce, married 
Ellice Butler, daughter of the fourth son of the ninth Earl of Ormond. The Lord Esmond died 
in 1646. 

His extensive estates during the Cromwellian usurpation were granted to the Duke of Albemarle. 
But the first Sir Thomas Esmonde, had he been illegitimate, as has been alleged, would not have 
claimed the right of succession to those estates, as he did before the Commissioners under the Act 
of Settlement and Explanation, ‘‘as by descent from his father, Laurence, Lord Esmond, Baron 
Limerick, &c.” The documents relating to this claim are extant in the Surveyor-General’s Office. — 
(See Reports of the late Record Commission, vol. ii. p. 264.) 

The powerful influence of the Duke of Albemarle was, however, so far successful as to obtain 
a private Act of Parliament, which is still extant, though not among the printed Statutes, and 
the main features of which are incorporated in the Public Acts relating to the ‘“ Settlement,” 
vesting in the King the lands in Wexford county, ‘now in the possession of the Duke of Albe- 
marle, and forfeited by Sir Thomas Esmonde,” in order to secure a grant of them to the Duke 
of Albemarle-—See Rep. Rec. Com., vol. iii. p. 649. 

While contending with this powerful personage the first Sir Thomas Esmonde died, leaving 
his eldest son and heir, Laurence, a minor, who, after a protracted lawsuit, carried on in his name 
by the Duke of Buckingham, as his “ next friend,” succeeded in recovering the estates of the Lord 
Esmonde, much of which are still in the possession of the present worthy Sir Thomas Esmonde 
of Ballynastra. 

That the recognition of the peerage should not have followed the recognition of the legitimate 
title to the estates of the Lord Esmonde, can be but little matter of surprise when we remember 
that his grandson was only an “ innocent papist,” and as such, at that peripd, labouring under 
peculiar disadvantages. 

P. 2069, A. D. 1598, note", col. 1, line 22, for ‘ between truth, as, &c.,” read ‘“ between 
truth and falsehood, as, &c.” 

P. 2245, col. 1, line 4, for ‘“‘ Durvalante,” read ‘Surveillante,” and add ‘“ Captain Dowell 
O’Reilly commanded the seamen’s advanced battery at the siege of St. Sabastian, and assaulted 
the breach. He commanded the Flotilla to cross the bar of the Adour, of which the Duke of 
Wellington speaks, in his despatches, as conducted with .a degree of skill and bravery seldom 
equalled.” 

l4°P 


2498 APPENDIX. 


P. 2400, line 33, third son of Con O'Donnell. The Editor has since discovered, that, though 
Con Oge is named third in order in O’Clery’s Genealogical manuscript, and also in the additions 
in the autograph of the Venerable Charles O’Conor, to the greater genealogical manuscript of 
Duald Mac Firbis ; nevertheless, Mac Firbis, in his own abstract (according to the copy of that 
compilation in the Royal Irish Academy), made sixteen years later, places Con Oge second, and 
Hugh Boy third. 

P. 2400, line 35, @ heraldic genealogy with the seal of Chichester Fortescue. At the time the 
above note was written, the Editor had before him a brief abstract of the Austrian pedigree, which 
misled him as to the source and authority from which that pedigree emanated. He has since seen 
a full and perfect copy of the original, and finds that it was not issued from the office of Chichester 
Fostescue, or of any other herald, but that it was a solemn attestation as to the race and descen- 
dants of Con Oge O’Donnell, and of the sixteen quarterings to which the sons of Charles (the 
common ancestor of the O’Donnells of Castlebar, Spain, and Austria) were entitled, signed by 
some of the highest dignitaries of the Irish nobility and Roman Catholic Church. The names 
attached to it, with their arms, are those of ‘‘'Taafe Comes Camerarius et Generalis, Vice Mares- 
challus sue Sac. Ces. Regie Apostolice Majestatis ;’’ ‘ Kildare;” ‘‘ Dunboyne;” ‘ Kingsland ;” 
‘“‘ Trimblestown;”’ ‘‘ Patritius Archiepiscopus Dubliniensis et Hibernie Primas;” ‘“ Jacobus Epis- 
copus Kildariensis;” ‘‘ Philippus Episcopus Rapotensis;” ‘Fr. Thomas Ord. Pred. Episcopus 
Associatus.”” 

P. 2440, after paragraph ending line 8, insert: “It appears from Patent Roll of 11th year of 
Edward II.(A. D. 1318), that John Odinevan [recte O’Donevan] obtained a general pardon from 
the King ; but no clue has been discovered to engraft him in his proper place on the genealogical . 
trunk of this family.” 

P, 2456, line 1, for ‘ 1896,” read ‘* 1689.” 

P. 2477, line 8, for ** 1789,” read ‘** 1689.” 

P. 2490, line 30, for ** Decrees of Innocent’s,”” read ‘* Decrees of Innocents.” 


THE END. 

















= = < — 
“Aus. = aoa 
QOFCALFORy, <x OFCALIFOR, 
= 5 & B 
= z = = 
ne Savana’ 
EWE, yOSANED 
2 es 
E-NSS % s 
“manson “Visa 
<NEUNIVERS, JOS ANGELES 
Sore St 
= ns S 
ehe 2: 
ZS S ¢ 
“OTIOAV-SO} CSAS 
<QEUBRARVOs, _<QEUIBRARY Oe 
a | 
= = 3 
“Auoamvoss — “Aaoanvr-40* 
gOFCALFORy, a OFCALIFORY 
= As | 
avian Seqavuans’ 
EUUNERI, sp lOSNCELEY, 
2 r 6 i 
z S 3 S 
Yemowsos® — Wnannnas” 
NEUE, sp lOSANCLEDy, 
=  S = 
= ez z 
a sg = 
% Goran? 
TNKY SOV WSINNNAWS: 
SELIBRARYOs, _-gELIBRARYQe 


Bs 
o Aoinv40" 


University of California 

LIBRARY FACILITY 

g Lot 17 « Box 951388 
FORNIA 90095-1388 


to the library from which it was borrowed. Ravuanas 


305 De Neve Drive - Parkin 
LOS ANGELES, CALI 
Return this material 


ie 


E-LIBRARY, 


re) 

= 

S 
MaOAIW)-40' 


on a] 
= 
Y 


a 


2 
= 
S$ 


LIBRARY.Q¢ 
JIT¥}-40 


Ns 


2 
= 
: 


70 


nial 


(3 


a 0F-CALIFOR 
vo 


NOS ANCELEs, 


! 
SagAINNaWS 
{LOS ANGELES, 





UogNINNAWS 





AELIBRARY., 


A4OsNVI-30 
x OF-CALIFORY 


<AIC UNIVE, 


oxwvean® 


Me 


| gp lOSANCELES 


Ss 


SUIAINN IAS 


OF CALIFOR, 


x 


Ggennnaes 


<gEUBRARVO, 
Sie 


-/?: 


F-CALI FORY,, 





et UBRARYOs, 


or 
ee FORY 


Cin} | 
2 B 


ORAVIGIY” 


SHUOSMNCELEy 


cs 


pe ~~ 
sslOSANCELE, 


iE 
a 
© 
S 


COSuaAINNAN 
AQELB 


“0 


ERN REGIONAL | 





==nps \& 
—— a 
a ana 

=> 
VERS 


ts son 


a 
é Eh 3 
e : 
“haganva-s0 
gOFCAUFOny, 


VR: 


Laren a 


git a 


LIBRARY Qs 
dITVI-30 


ee 


3 
“onaonyson 


AN 


URE 


OAMVHAIIYY 


SHEUNIVER 
“maw 


LOSANCELES, 
Z, 


CALI Ne 


= 
o 
E 


~) 
SHINN INS 


AF 


Ss 
= 
= 
a 
re 
y 


SEUNIVERS > 
“STIONY-SOF 


% 
B 
= 
e 


OF CALIFOR, 
YOVUATAS 


1G 


<QE-LIBRARY 
HAQsIV-4 


% 


Coannnaws 
gM OSANCE 


gp l0s MCE 


EUNIVERS/p 
“STIONY-SOF 


Ri, 
a= 
oo 
3 
Y 


S 


E-LIBRARY: Of, 


N 


OsNVI-30° 


We 


Ter 


7404 fIv)-40 


oF 


alte 


OF-CALIFO 


i: 


aganinn Te 


al 


<QELIBRARY.O, 


Ten 


VAOINI-3V 
OF CALI FORM, 


S$ 


Ep 
Wy 


% 


Zenon 
cenEATE A, 
HMOs) -40° 


{iE UNIVER 
N 
sf 
Z 
= 
4%, 


<S 


YON SAAS 


LOS:ANGELES, 


& 
‘3 


AUVUaITAS 


SHUSANCEL 
C/SYIAINDIBY 


% 
= 
° 
oe 

Y 


$ 
= 
S 
oid 
= 


OF CALIFORY, 


‘a 
= 
= 
eS 
F 


OF-CALIFORY, 
“OANA 


SMEUNIVERS, 


USMININD: ws 


NE-LIBRARY.Q¢ 


$ 


ELIBRARYOe, 
4AOSITVI-30 


A 
= 
2 
% 


splOSANCEE 
ee oised 


Ws0s NWI-30 


an 


<STIONY-S0 


AWEUNIVERS/7> 


; S 


SELIBRARYOS, 
Wu03 HV)-J0 


AN 


STONY: os 
tt ea 


AELIBRARY.O¢ 


$ 


spc lOS ANGELES 
TOSAAINTIWS 


“N 


i) . 


My 
= 
a 

< 


ace 
“STINV-SOF 


OANA 


HE UNIVERS/>y 


JO" 


Un 


YOANN 


Zs 


<SHEAMIVER 


108: nil 


“Z 


aor 


OF-CALIFORY 
ZONA IY 


USMANINN: tS 


Up, 
: 
2 
& 3 


OF-CALIFOR 
YOAMVUATAS 


ste UnveRtyy, 
: 
on 


Mp 
é 
“s 


OF CALIFORY 
“OMNIA 


§ 
= 
= 
iis 
S 


4QE-lIBRARY 
41 f= 


Pre) 


LOS ANCELEy 
S 


wae  , 


LIBRARY.) 
oF 


\2 
Ss 


aA {i =e 


Uses 
nit 


Ma esnne 
bASWAE str y 


REIV ER Sy yey 


ee 


i 
Fash 


chad 
ie Me 
Fe? sy 


th, 





