«^O''*'-^^ 


REGISTRUM 
METELLANUM, 
I. 

M.DCCC.XXXI. 


^^VOCA?.^^ 


The  Registrum  Metellanum  is  intended  not  ouly  to  suggest 
Works  which  may  be  judged  worthy  of  being  printed,  by  the 
Chib,  or  by  its  Members ;  but  also  to  point  out,  from  time  to 
time,  as  they  may  be  discovered,  documents  ilhistrative  of 
the  History,  Literature,  and  Antiquities  of  Scotland. 


ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY. 


I.  Chartularium  Glasguense,  2  vols.  4>fo. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  tlie  Uiiiversity  of  Glasgow ; — certified  by  Priiicipal 
Gordon,  of  the  Scots  College,  Paris.  The  original  Chartiilary  is  now  in  the 
possession  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Bishop  of  Edinburgh. 

II.  Chartularium  de  Dunfermline. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

III.  Chartularium  Domus  Sanctai  Trinitatis,  nuncupattt  HospitaHs  de 
Soltre. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

IV.  Liber  Sanctae  Maria?  de  Calchou.     [Commonly  called  the  Chartu- 
lary  of  Kelso.] 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

V.  Liber  Sanctae  Marige  de  Londors,  Ordinis  Cisterciensis, 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

VI.  Registrum  Capellae  Regiae  Strivilinensis. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

VII.  Registrum  Ccenobii  Paslatensis. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 


VIII.  Registrum  Monasterii  de  Aberbrothoc. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

IX.  Chartularium  de  Elgin. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

X.  Historia  Abbatum  Cisterciensis  Familiae  Monasterii  a  Kynlos.     Jo- 

anne  Ferrerio,  Piedmontano,  Authore,  15.37- 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow ; — takeu  from  the  copy  which 
Dr  J.  Jamieson  transcribed  from  the  original,  in  the  Queen  of  Sweden's  Li- 
brary  at  Rome.  On  a  blank  leaf  at  the  beginning  is  written,  "  Auctor  hujus 
libri  unus  erat  ex  Georgii  Buchanani  in  Lusitania  accusatoribus,  anno  1550. 
Vide  Buchanani  vitani  a  seipso  scriptani." 

Another  MS.  not  perfect,  but  varying  from  tbe  above,  is  in  the  Library  of 
the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Edinburgh. 

XI.  The  Rentals  or  Assedations  of  the  Lands  within  the  Lordships  of 
Paisley,  Glen,  Kilpatrick,  and  Kill,  framed  at  difFerent  periods  be- 
tween  1460  and  1525.  This  last  is  entituled : — "  Rentale 
reverendi  patris  Domini  Johannis  Hamiltoun,  Commendatarii 
Monasterii  de  Pasleto,  et  abbatis  futuri  ejusdem,  ac  Assedationes 
omnium  terrarum  dicto  Monasterio  spectan.  et  pertinen.  factum  in 
mensibus  Octobris  et  Novembris,  1525,  scriptimi  manu  religiosi  viri 
Domini  Alexandri  Walcar,  prioris  tunc  claustrahs  prefati  Monas- 
terii,  necnon  dicti  Domini  Commendatarii  administratoris  deputati." 
There  is  also  at  the  end  of  the  MS.  a  Rental  drawn  up  by  John 
Archbishop  of  St  Andrews,  who  was  Abbot  of  Paisley  in  1550, 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XII.  Rental  of  the  Bishoprick  of  Moray,  in  the  year  1555. 

MS.  In  the  Librarv  of  the  Facnlty  of  Advocates. 


XIII.  A  List  of  Monasteries  and  Nunneries  in  Scotland,  tlieir  names, 
Shires  where  they  lye,  their  Church  orders,  and  their  founders. 
Also  an  alphabetical  index  of  all  tlie  Parishes  in  Scotland ;  the 
shires,  dioceys,  presbyteries,  and  commissariots,  wherein  they  lye, 
and  of  the  patrons  thereof.     4^o. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XIV.  Solemn  League,  signed  by  the  King  and  Council,  in  1587;  with 
original  Signatures. 

MS.   In  the  Library  of  Sir  John  Maxwell  of  Polloc,  Baronet. 

XV.  Ane  Bond  of  Association,  for  defence  of  the  Protestant  religion, 
against  the  detestable  conspiracy,  then  called  the  Holy  League, 
made  by  foreign  Papists.  Which  Bond  is  subscribed  by  King 
James,  with  a  great  number  of  the  Nobility,  Gentry,  and  Burgesses. 
Anno  1588. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XVI.  An  Original  Bond,  containing  a  Confession  of  Faith  ;  during  the 
time  of  Morton's  Regency.     Subscribed  by  Cluirchmen. 

MS.  In  the  Xibrary  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XVII.  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  from  the  Reformation  till 
1633. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  Luton  Park. 

XVIII.  The  Historie  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  from  1596  to  I6l0  ; 
and  the  Ryseing  and  Usurpation  of  our  pretended  Bishops.  By 
Mr  James  Melville. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Edinburgh. 


XIX.  Mr  David  Calderwood's  Large  History  of  the  Cliurch  of  Scotland. 
6  vols.Jblw. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XX.  Various  Articles,  relating  chiefly  to  the  Church  of  Scotland,  from 
1572  to  1612.  Written  by  John  Robertsone,  Wryter,  Edinburgh. 
In  1  vol.folio. 

On  the  first  page,  "  This  boke  containetli  a  relation  of  severall  passages  that  fell 
out  in  Britanie,  betwixt  1638  and  1642.  Written  by  Mr  Robertsone,  for  his 
own  private  use,  and  now  usefull  to  others,  for  their  information.  And  now 
come  to  my  band  at  Konigsberg,  1672,  M.  Browne."  On  the  next  leaf, 
"  This  buik  is  written  and  begun  be  me,  Johne  Robertsone,  upon  the  23  day 
of  Julij  1637." 
MS.  In  tbe  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XXI.  Collections  as  to  the  Lives  of  the  Reformers,  and  eminent 
Ministers  and  Members  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  down  to  l620. 
By  The  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow,  Minister  of  Eastwood — 9  vols.  folio 
and  15  vols.  4to. 

The  work  which  "Wodrow  contemplated,  and  wbich,  by  these  CoUections,  he  has 
gone  far  towards  accomplishing,  might  have  been  called,  A  Protestant  Biogra- 
phy  for  Scotland.  The  Lives  amount  to  more  than  a  hundred  in  number. 
The  Life  of  John  Knox  extends  to  upwards  of  two  hundred  folio  pages,  and 
is  accompanied  with  a  Glossary,  explaining  obsolete  words,  and  an  Appendix, 
containing  Proofs  and  IUustrations.  After  that  cf  Knox,  the  next  Life,  in 
point  of  interest  or  extent,  is  that  of  George  Buchanan.  It  occupies  about  a 
hundred  and  forty  quarto  pages.  The  Life  of  Andrew  Melville  is  given  at 
great  length.  The  Life  of  Jaraes  Melville,  who  was  Professor  of  Divinity  at 
St  Andrews,  extends  to  a  hundred  and  sixty  quarto  pages,  and  includes  large 
extracts  from  the  Diary  written  by  himself,  which  has  been  recently  printed 
as  a  contribution  to  the  Bannatyne  Club.  The  Lives  of  Archbishop  Spottis- 
woode,  Archbishop  Adamson,  and  Archbishop  Gladstones,  are  pretty  fully 
given ;  as  are  also  the  Lives  of  John  Davidson,  Minister  at  Salt-Preston,  David 


Black,  Minister  at  St  Andrews,  Robert  Bruce,  Minister  at  Edinburgb,  David 
Hume  of  Godscroft,  and  John  Cameron,  Professor  of  Divinity  at  Saumur,  and 
afterwards  Principal  of  the  College  of  Glasgow.  One  of  the  longest  and  most 
interesting  Lives,  is  that  of  Robert  Boyd  of  Trochridge.  It  extends  to  two 
hundred  folio  pages,  and  includes  largo  extracts  from  a  Diary,  kept  by  him- 
self,  which  Wodrow  had  seen,  and  which,  although  it  may  still  exist,  hasliot 
since  been  discovered.  The  Life  of  David  Weems,  Minister  at  Glasgow,  is 
of  considerable  length,  and  contains  some  curious  particulars  of  the  ecclesias- 
tical  state  of  the  city,  soon  after  the  Reformation. 
MSS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XXII.  Mr  Laurence  Charters'  Short  Account  of  Scots  Divines,  1500 
—1700. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

XXIII.  The  History  of  the  Estate  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  pp.  316. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  — There  is 
the  following  note  on  this  MS.  "  The  Preface  bears  it  was  written  by  an 
old  Minister,  and  I  have  some  thoughts  this  may  be  Mr  John  Davidson's  MS. 
History,  which  I  find  Mr  Calderwood  in  his  MSS.  mentions." 

XXIV.  The  Book  of  all  the  General  AssembUes  of  the  Church  of  Scot- 
land  since  the  Reforniation  ;  wherein  the  Heads  and  Conckisions, 
devised  by  the  Ministers  and  Commissioners  of  the  particular  kirks 
thereof,  are  especiaUie  expressed  and  conteinet,  for  the  setting  forth 
of  God's  glorie  and  the  furderance  of  trew  rehgion,  within  this  our 
kingdom.    folio. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  ttie  University  of  Glasgow — This  is  commonly  called 
"  The  Buik  of  the  Universal  Kirk." 

XXV.  The  Sessions,  Actings  and  Canons  of  the  Two  General  Assem- 
bhes  liolden  att  Glasarow  and  Edenburgh — tlie  one  in  1638.  the 


other  in  1639-  containing,  at  great  length,  everie  thing  that  was 
either  spoken  or  done  therein.    folio.  116  leaves. 

MS.  In  Stirling's  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 

XXVI.  A  perfyte  Inventar  of  all  the  pious  donations,  mortified  and  doted 
in  Scotland,  since  the  days  of  King  Jaraes  the  First  to  the  reigne  of 

"  King  James  the  Sixth  inclusive.    foUo.  94>  leaves. 

MS.  In  Stirling's  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 

XXVII.  Annales  Ecclesia^  Scotorum,  a  tempore  Reformationis  ad 
obitum  Jacobi  Regis  VI.  Authore  Arch.  Simsono,  Pastore  Dalke- 

thiensi,  4>to. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  tlie  Uiviversity  of  Glasgow. 

XXVIII.  Life  of  Mr  Patrick  Simson,  by  his  brother  Archibald.  26  pp. 
4>to  ;  with  a  Funeral  Sermon,  by  the  same  Author,  on  his  brother's 
death,  preached  at  Stirling. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faciilty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

XXIX.  Certain  Records  touching  the  state  of  the  Church  of  Scotiand 
since  tlie  reformation  of  rehgion  therein,  till  the  Parliament  holden 
at  Perth,  anno  1606.     157  pp. 

MS.  In  the  Libraiy  of  the  Faciilty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  16. 

XXX.  Queries  and  Reasons  about  the  Scottish  Service  Book,  1638.  34 
pp.  Jblio. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  42. 

XXXI.  Reasones  proveing  that  the  late  meetting  at  Sanct  Andrewes  is 


9 

not  a  lawfuU  free  General  Asseniblie  of  tlie  Kirk  of  Scotland — witli 
ansueres  to  the  objectiones  in  the  contraire. 

MS.  In  Bibliotheca  Leightoniana,  Dumblane. 

XXXII.  A  Short  Account  of  the  General  Assembly,  at  St  Andrews, 
1651,  by  Mr  Alexander  Gordon,  the  only  surviving  member  of  that 
Assembly,  [1703]  taken  from  his  MS.  which  he  wrote  during  that 
Assembly.     12  pp.  4<to. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  tbe  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  18. 

XXXIII.  Anent  the  purging  of  Edinburgh  of  Outed  Ministers. 

MS.   In  Stirliug's  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 

XXXIV.  Distribution  of  Bishopricks,  Abbacies,  and  Priories,  in  Scot- 
land.     By  Mr  Davidson. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

XXXV.  Statistical  Accounts  of  several  Parishes,  in  the  counties  of 
Edinburgh,  Haddington,  and  Berwick,  drawn  up  by  their  respec- 
tive  Clergymen,  in  the  year  1627,  in  obedience  to  certain  Queries 
of  the  Commissioners  appointed  by  King  Charles  I.  for  that  pur- 
pose.     About  25  in  number. 

Transcribed  frora  the  originals,  preserved  in  the  General  Register  House,  Edin- 
burgh,  by  A.  Macdonald,  Esq. 

XXXVI.  The  Town  of  Edinburgli's  Bond  in  case  of  Conventicles  keeped 
within  their  Liberties. 

MS.  In  Stirling'»  Public  Library,  GIa.«gow. 


CIVIL  HISTORY. 


I.  History  of  the  Royal  Line  of  Scotland,  from  the  most  early  times  to 

the  year  1688.     By  Frederick  Van  Bosen, 

MS.  Iri  the  Library  of  the  Hunterian  Museum,  Glasgow. 

II.  Le  proces  criminel  de  Thomas  Howart,  en  son  vivant  Duc  de  Nor- 

folk,  pretendant  epouser  Marie  Stewart  a  present  Reyne  d'Ecosse — 
Avec  une  table  bien  ample  des  principales  choses  contenues  au  dict 
proces — Le  tout  traduit  des  langues  Angloise  et  Escossoise  en  la 
Francoise. 
Version  Angloise  en  langue  Francoise,  par  Jean  Benard  Secretaire  du 
Roy,  son  Interprete  et  Historiographe  genei-al  des  langues  Septen- 
trionales  et  etrangeres.  1573.     4<fo. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Hunterian  Museuni,  Glasgow. 

III.  The  Historie  of  Scotland,  first  written  in  the  Latine  tounge,  by  that 
famous  and  learned  man  George  Buchanan,  and  afterward  translated 
into  the  Scottish  tounge,  by  John  Read,  Esquyar,  brother  to  James 
Read,  Parson  of  Banchory-Ternan,  whyle  he  lived. — Tliey  both  ly 
interred  in  the  parish  churche  of  that  towne,  seated  not  lar  from  the 
Banke  of  the  river  Dee,  expecting  the  general  resurrection  and  the 
glorious  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ  their  Redeemer.     163-1'.    Jblio. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

IV.  The  Historie  of  Scotland,  since  the  original  thereof,  until  the  reign 
of  King  Charles.     1642. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow This  MS.  contiiins  Poems 

on  the  diiferent  Kiuffs. 


11 


V.  Tlie  Chroniclcs  of  Perth,  by  John  Mercer,  Towii  Clerk — ending 
«c:  tt-.'*-     with  the  year  1668.        (  feti^oi  "  ?^k^^    tUf-o^tU'  y^    fk. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

VI.  Collections  respecting  the  Antiquities  and  History  of  Scotland,  by 
Sir  Lewis  Stcwart  of  Kirkhill,  Advocate. 

MSS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 


VT '  '  MS.   In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 


VII.  The  Household  Book  of  Cardinal  Beaton 
V 

VIII.  AlHance  entre  Charlemagne  et  Le  Roi  d'Ecosse. 

MS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

IX.  Recueil  d'Affaires  d'Ecosse  depuis  l'an  1423  jusq  :     1491. 

MSS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

X.  Alliance  entre  Charles  VII.  et  Jaques  Roi  d'Ecosse.   144.5. 
MS.  In  tbe  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

XI.  Recueil  de  pieces  commen^ant  par  un  Traite,   entre  les  Rois  de 
France  et  d'Ecosse,  en  1517. 

MSS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

XII.  Contrat   du    Mariage    entre   le    Dauphin    Fran^ois   et   la  Reyne 
d'Ecosse  1558.  et  autres  pieces. 

MS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"   Paris. 

XIII.  Inventaire  des  Bagues  de  la  Reyne  d'Ecosse. 
MS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 


12 

XIV.  Remonstrances  aux  Seigneurs  Ecossois,  1,57-1- 

MS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

XV.  Traitez  entre  les  Rois  de  France  et  les  Rois  d'Ecosse. 

MSS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  Luton  Paik. 

XVI.  Speeches  by  and  to  King  James.     I6O7. 

MSS.  In  the  Library  of  tbe  Marquis  of  Bute,   Luton  Park. 

XVII.  Tlie  Installation  of  James,  Marquis  of  Hamilton,  at  Windsor,  1623. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  Luton  Park. 

XVIII.  Memorial  of  AfFairs  touching  the  Duke  of  Monmouth  and  the 
Earl  of  Argyle. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  Luton  Park. 

XIX.  The  Genealogie  of  the  illustrious  and  antient  family  of  Wallace 
of  Craigy,  in  the  Shire  of  Aire. 

MS.   In  the  Library  of  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  Luton  Park. 

XX.  The  Genealogy  of  Porterfield  of  that  ilk. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

XXI.  Descent  and  Genealogy  of  the  Hamiltons  of  Kinkell.     7  PP-  4^0. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  97. — This 
is  the  original  by  Mr  Henry  Hamilton. 

XXII.  Liber  Domicilu  Supremi  Domini,  miJlesimo  quingentesimo  vice- 
simo  quinto,  Jacobo  Colvile  de  Ucliiltre  ministran.  in  officio  com- 
potorum  Rotulatoris. 


13 

MS.  In  tlie  Library  of  tlie  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

The  accounts  commence  17th  August,  1325,  and  end  1526;  and  are  ar- 
ranged  under  four  heads.  The  fii-st  gives  the  daily  expense  of  the  King's 
table  in  articles  furnished  from  the  Panetria,  Bnttellaria,  and  Coquina ; — the 
secoud,  the  expense  of  spiceries  and  chandlery  ; — the  third,  the  quantity  of 
wine  bought  and  used ; — and  the  foui'th  states  the  expense  incurred  by  niain- 
taining  the  King's  horses  in  oats  and  hay. 

XXIII.  Liber  Domicilii  Supremi  Domini  nostri  Regis  invictissimi,  de 
anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  XXXVII.  Jacobo  Colville 
de  Estwemys,  Milite,  Computorum  Rotulatore. 

MS.  In  the  General  Register  House,  Edinburgh. 

This  Houseliold  Book  of  King  James  V.  may  be  illustrated  by  extracts 
from  the  volume  of  Treasurer's  Accounts  for  the  same  period. 

XXIV.  The  Compt  of  tlie  money  debursit  be  my  Lord  Comptroller, 
To  the  Archearis  of  our  Soverane  Ladyis  Oaird,  To  ilk  man  in 
particulare  as  followis  in  his  Compt. 

MS.  In  the  General  Register  House,  Edinburgh Drawn  up  about  1561  or 

1562. 

XXV.  Catalogue,  and  a  Short  Account  of  all  tlie  Great  Constables 
of  Scotland,  from  Malcohn  III.  to  Charles  I.  By  Sir  James 
Balfour. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XXVI.  .iSilbudag,  or  the  Western  Islands,  with  the  State  of  the  Diocese 
of  the  Isles.     By  Sir  James  Balfour.     26  pp.  folio. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XXVII.  Catalogue  of  the  Chancellors  of  Scotland,  from  Malcohn  III. 


14 

to  Charles  I.  ;  with  a  List  of  the  Treasurers  and  other  OfRcers  of 
State.     By  Sir  James  Balfour. 

MS.  In  tlie  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Adrocates. 

XXVIII.  Tracts  respecting  the  institution  of  Heralds,  Pursuivants  at 
Arms,  &c.  in  reference,  principally,  to  the  estabUshment  of  the 
ofRce  of  Lyon  King  of  Arms,  in  Scotland. 

MS.  Tn  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Denmylne  Collection. 

XXIX.  History  of  the  Lives  of  James  I.  and  II.  of  Scotland.  By  Sir 
James  Balfour.  Dedicated  to  the  Lords  and  Estates  of  the  Scots 
Parhament. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  tbe  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XXX.  History  of  Aifairs  in  Scotland,  chiefly  during  the  reign  of  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots. 

MS.  In  the  possession  of  John  Dillon,  Esq. 

XXXI.  Original  Letters  and  other  Documents  of  Mary  Queen  of 
Scots,  Henry  Darnley,  King  James  VI.,  Regents  Murray  and 
Morton,  and  of  the  Earl  of  Gowrie — chiefly  addressed  to  "  Tlie 
Laird  of  Barnbarroch,"  between  1569  and  1602. 

MSS.  In  the  possession  of  Colonel  Vans  Agnew,  of  Sheuchan  and  Bambarrocii. 

XXXII.  Sutherlandiae  Comitum  Annales,  in  quibus  eorum  origo  et  in- 
crementa,  vitge,  et  res,  bello  paceque,  gestse,  dilucide  expUcantur. 
Authore  Alexandro  Rossfeo,  Aberdonense,  Scoto,  1631. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XXXIII.  Letters  and  Journals  of  Transactions  in  Scotland,  from  1638 


15 

— 1662.     By  Robert  Baillie,  Principal  of  the  University  of  Glas- 
gow.     3  vois.  folio. 

MSS.   In  the  Library  of  tlie  Uuiversity  of  Glasgow. 

XXXIV.  Mr  Robert  Douglas'  Diary,  while  with  the  army  in  England, 
1644.     pp.  45,  800. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  10. 

XXXV.  The  Diary  of  John  Nicoll,  froni  1650—1666. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XXXVI.  Acts  and  Statutes  of  tlie  Burgh  of  Edinburgh,  from  1551 — 

1558.— Of  Craill,    in    the   year  1572 And    "  The  Actis,  Ordi- 

nancis,  and  Statutes  of  the  Burgh  of  Cuh-os,"  from  1588 — 1599. 

Transcripts  frora  the  Records  of  the  respective  Burghs,  in  the  possession  of 
A.  Macdonald,  Esq. 

XXXVII.  Letters  and  Instructions  of  State  betvveen  England  and  Scot- 
land,  1571— 1581.     S  vols.foUo. 

MSS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Marquis  of  Bute,  Luton  Park. 

XXXVIII.  Account  of  Lodowick,  Duke  of  Lennox,  Commissioner  to 
the  Scottish  ParUament  in  I6O7  ;  consisting  of  the  particular  fur- 
nisliings  to  his  Household,  during  his  stay  at  Holyroodhouse,  and 
on  his  visit  to  Glasgow,  Hamilton,  and  the  North  of  Scotland. 

MS.  The  original  in  the  General  Register  House,  Edinburgh. 

XXXIX.  Ane  Abbreviate  of  his  Majesties  proper  and  constant  rent 
payit  be  the  several  fewars,  for  theu"  respective  Lands,  and  be  the 
severall  SherifFs,  for  the  Blensh  dewties,  Castell  wards,  and  others. 


16 

out  of  theu-  respective  Shires,  as  the  same  compts  by  the  present 
RoUs,  with  the  deductions  and  difFerences  betwixt  the  same  and  for- 
mer  Rolls,  preceding  King  James  going  to  England  in  anno  1603  ; 
collected  out  of  the  Rolls  and  Records  of  Exchequer,  by  Sir 
Wilham  Purves  of  Woodhousehe,  Knight,  his  Majesties  Solhcitor  in 
anno  I667. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. — The  Abbreviate  is  preceded 
by  a  Dissertation  on  the  nature  of  the  Royal  Revenue,  and  of  the  Court  of 
Exchequer,  which  is  entrusted  w-ith  the  management  of  it. 

XL.  Account  of  what  most  remarkable  liappened  to  us  in  our  voyage 
from  Dundee  to  New  Edinburgh,  in  Caledonia ;  (begun  9th  March, 
1700,  and  perfected  l6th  June,  yrafter,)  and  thence  back  to 
England.     43  pp.  folio. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  106. 

XLl.  A  Short  Account  of  the  proceedings  of  the  last  Session  of  the 
Scots  Parhament,  with  some  necessary  reflexions  thereupon,  by  a 
Member  of  both  that  and  the  preceding  parliament.     4>to,  45  pp. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS.  Vol.  75. 

XLII.  A  CoHection  of  Letters  addressed  to  the  late  Rev.  John  Stirhng, 
Principal  of  the  College  of  Glasgow,  chiefly  relating  to  Scots  aflTairs 
from  1701—1727.     4  vols.  Uo. 

MSS.  In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

XLIII.  The  Massacre  of  Glencoe.  A  Collection  of  the  papers  rela- 
tive  to  tliat  event. 

Transcripts  in  the  General  Register  House,  Edinburgl:. 


17 

XLIV.  The  Speech  without  cloors  against  Sir  Andrew  Ilamsay's  con- 
tinuation  in  the  Provestrie. 

MS.  In  Stirling's  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 

XLV.  The  state  of  the  Controversy  between  the  Merchants  and  the 
Trades  of  Edinburgh,  with  the  Bills,  Proposals,  Answers,  Acts  and 
other  papers  that  past  betwixt  theni  thereanent  in  I66I.  and  there- 
after  anent  the  mutual  breaches  of  the  Sett — witli  an  account  of  Su" 
William  Thomson's  deprivation  from  the  Clerkship  ;  tlie  disorder 
between  the  two  Ministers  of  the  West-Kirk  in  1665.  and  the  up- 
roar  of  the  Merchand  apprentices  against  Sir  Walter  Setoun,  and  the 
debate  between  the  Provest  of  Edinburgh  and  the  Lords  of  Session 
about  precedencie,  upon  occasion  of  choosing  a  Humanity  Regent. 

MSS.  In  Stirling's  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 

XLVI.  A  Prettie  discourse  anent  the  Trade  of  Scotland,  and  remedies 
for  reUeving  and  improving  thereof. 

MS.  In  Stirling's  Public  Library,  Glasgow. 

XLVII.   Wodrow's  Correspondence  relative  to  the  Rebellion  in  1715. 

MSS.  In  tbe  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

XLVIIL  Orderly  Books  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  Army,  during 
their  march  from  England  in  October  1745,  till  after  the  battle  of 
Culloden,  in  April  I746  ;  continued  to  l-itli  Augustof  that  year. 

Transcript  in  the  possession  of  A.  Macdonald,  Esq. 

XLIX.  Letters  from  King  James  VI.  and  Charles  L,  relative  to  the  in. 
stitution  of  the  Order  of  Baronets  of  Nova  Scotia. 

MSS.  In  the  General  Register  House,  Edinburgh, 


18 

L.  An  Original  Bond,  subscribed  by  the  Earl  of  Morton,  Regent,  witli 
most  of  the  Nobility,  Gentry,  and  Burgesses,  for  the  coronation  and 
defence  of  King  James  VI.     Anno  1567. 

MSS.   In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

LI.  Mackay's  Memoirs — containing,  General  Remarks  upon  the  Scots 
Wars  in  the  years  89  and  90,  with  the  Occasions  of  the  Beginning, 
Increassing,  and  Continuation  of  the  RebelHon  against  their  Majes- 

ties'  Government Memorandum  of  the  Chief  Things  to  be  re- 

marked  and  enlarged  upon  occasion  serving,  since  I  came  to  Scot- 
land. — Some  Short  Remarks  upon  the  present  State  of  Scotland. — 
Lettres  ou  Depeches  Ecrittes,  par  Monsieiu-  Hugh  de  Mackay, 
Lieutenant-General  a  sa  Majeste  Britanique,  et  au  Comte  de  Port- 
land  lors  qu'il  commandoit  en  chef  les  Troupes  de  sa  ditte  Majeste 
en  Ecosse  1690. 

MSS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates.  There  are  in  the  possession 
of  the  Earl  of  Leven  and  Melville,  various  original  Letters  of  General  Mackay, 
and  of  other  eminent  individuals  of  the  same  period,  addressed  to  Lord 
Melville,  his  ancestor,  who  was  Secretary  of  State  for  Scotland  at  this  period. 
These  would  form  a  most  interesting  and  vahiable  Appendix  to  the  Memoirs. 


LITERARY  HISTORY. 


I.  Ane  Inventar  and   Repertoir  of  the  MSS.  extant,  wliich   I  have 

seen  or  been  informed  ot',  that  relate  to  the  History  of  Scotland, 
Geographical,  Natural,  Civil  or  Ecclesiastical  and  Political. 

MS.   In  the  Library  of  tlie  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

II.  Bibhotheca  Scotica,  or  an  account  of  the  Scottish  Authors,  who,  by 

their  writings,  have  improved  all  sort  of  learning,  from  1500 — I7OO. 

WS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

III.  Account  of  the  Masters,  &c.  of  the  College  of  Glasgow,  froni  1590 
— 1692.  Collected  froni  the  Records,  by  the  Reverend  and 
Learned  Mr  WilHam  Dunlop,  Principal. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Wodrow  MSS. 

IV.  Wodrow^s  Analecta,  I7OI— I73I.     6  vols.  IQmo. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates — This  is  the  Diary  of  the 
revereud  Historian  of  the  Church,  in  which  he  eugrossed  such  notices  of  the 
passing  events  of  his  time,  as  well  as  information  on  religious,  historical,  lite- 
rary,  and  nuscellaneous  subjects,  as  he  could  procure.  Besides  anecdotes  of 
Pope,  Steele,  Addison,  AUan  Ranisay,  Dr  Pitcairn,  and  otlier  literary  charac- 
ters  of  the  time,  it  is  very  rich  in  Historical  and  Biographical  notices,  many 
of  which  have  been  bitherto  unknown.  By  excluding  the  notes  for  the  Lives 
of  the  Reformers,  niosl  of  wbich  are  embodied  in  the  work  No.  XXI.  Eccle- 
siastical  History,  the  Analecta  would  form  a  bandsome  volunie. 

V.  Nineteen  Discourses,  by  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow.     1  vol,  12mo. 

MS.  In  the  possession  of  the  Rev.  George  Logan,  Minister  of  Eastwood. 
These  Sermons  were  written  between  1697  and  1703,  and  seem  to  have  beeu 
delivered  as  Exercises  in  the  Divinity  HalI,or  before  the  Presbytery  of  Paisley. 


20 

VI.  Catalogue  of  the  Curiosities  in  Natural  History,  collected  by  the 
Rev.  Robert  Wodrow,  Minister  of  Eastwood.     I7OI. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  Anderson's  University,  Glasgow. 

VII.  Representation  to  the  Privy  Council  of  Scotland,  by  Captain  Slezer, 
pubUsher  of  the  Theatrum  ScoticB,  and  an  account  of  his  charges 
"  in  perfyting  his  ancient  and  present  state  of  Scotland."     I696. 

MS.  In  the  General  Register  House,  Edinburgh,  transcribed  by  A.  !Macdonald, 
Esq. 

VIII.  Dr  Archibald  Pitcairn's  Letters. 

MS.  In  the  Sloanian  Library,  British  Museum. 

IX.  The  Autobiography  of  Sir  Robert  Sibbald,  together  with  his  lite- 
rary  correspondence. 

The  former  from  a  collation  of  the  various  MSS.  andthe  latter  from  the  Wodrow 
MSS.  and  the  Sibbaldi  Adversaria,  in  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

X.  The  Literary  Correspondence  of  James  Anderson,   Esq.    Editor  of 

the  Diploraata  Scotiae,  with  the  most  eminent  men  of  his  time,  from 
1700  to  1726. 

MSS.  Selected  from  the  Anderson  Papers,  in  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Ad- 
vocates. 

XI.  Tiie  Literary  Correspondence  of  the  Rev.  Robert  Wodrow  with 
Archbishop  Nicholson,  and  other  distinguished  Men  of  the  period. 

MSS.  Selected  frora  the  Wodrow  Letters,  in  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Ad- 
vocates. 

XII.  The  Correspondence  of  George  Patou  with  Richard  Gougli,  Esq. 
relative  to  the  Literature,  History,  and  Topography  of  Scotland, 
from  1771  to  1804. 

MSS.  Iii  the  Library  of  the  Facnlty  of  Advocates.  A  judicious  Selection  froni 
these  curious  and  valuable  Letters,  would  forni  an  important  addition  to  tlie 
Historv  of  Scotland. 


LETTERS,   &c. 


I. — 1 .  Precept  from  the  Lords  of  Council  of  King  James  V.  to  the 
Laird  of  Nether  Pollok,  to  ineet  his  Queen  when  she  came 
first  to  Scotland,  dated  8th  Feby.  1537. 

2.  Letter  fiom  Mary,  Qiieen  Regent  of  Scotland,  to  the  Laird  of 

Nether  Pollok,  dated  7th  Feby.  1559- 

3.  Letter  from  Earls  Morton,  Mar,  Atliol,  Glencairn,  and  Sanquhar, 

to  the  Laird  of  Nether  Pollok,  anent  the  murder  of  the  King, 
dated  20th  June,  1567- 

4.  Letter  from  Q.  Mary  to  the  Laird  of  Nether  Pollok,  before  the 

battle  of  Langside,  dated  5th  May,  1568. 

5.  Letter  from   K.  James  to  the  Laird  of  Nether  Pollok,  for  a 

hackney  to  the  Queen,  to  be  sent  to  Dumfermhne,  from 
Nether  Pollok,  to  her  Majesty's  Master  of  Stables,  dated  at 
Falkland,  13th  August,  1590. 

6.  Letter  from  the  Lords  Blantyre  and  Hay  to  the  Laird  of  Nether 

PoUok,  requiring  provision  to  entertain  the  Foreign  Ambassa- 
dors,  who  had  specially  come  to  Edinburgh,  to  attend  the 
Prince's  Baptism,  dated  19  July,  1594. 

7.  Receipt,  to  the  Laird  of  Pollok,  from  the  Clerk  of  Propynes  for 

his  of  Wedders,  and  sohciting  butter  and  kye,  to  be  sent  in  witli 
haste  to  Edinburgh,  dated  8  Augt.  1594. 

8.  Letter  from  the  King,  to  the  Laird  of  Pollok,  requiring  provi- 

sion  to  the  Prince's  Baptism — 8  Augt.  1594. 

Tlie  preceding  MSS.  are  in  tbe  Library  of  Sir  Jolin  Maxwell  of  Pollok, 
Baronet. 


22 

II. — 1.  Letter  from  King  James  VI.  to  our  richt  traist  friend  the  Laird 
of  Cauldwell,  "  disyring  you  to  haif  directed  hither  to  the  Queine 
our  Bedfallow,  ane  haiknay  for  transporting  of  the  Ladies  ac- 
companying  hir,"  &c.  dated  "  HaHruidhous,  the  fyrst  day  of 
October,  1590. 

2.  Letter  from  the  King,  to  the  Laird  of  Cauldwell,   "  Having 

disponit  the  Esheatie  of  James  and  Mr  WilUame  Hallis,  sonis 
to  umquhill  Adam  Hall  of  Fuibar,  denuncit  our  Rebelles  and 
fugitives  from  our  lawis,  for  the  lait  slauchtir  of  umquhill 
Johnne  Montgomerie  of  Scottistoun,"  &c.  dated  "  Falkland 
the  29th  day  of  Maij,  1591." 

3.  Letter  from  the  King,  "  relevis  Robert  Mure  of  Cauldwell  of  his 

present  waird,  appointed  be  ws  to  him,  be  Eist  edge  Buckline 
bray,"  &c.  dated  Nov.  1591. 
i,  Passport  "  To  our  weilbeloveit  Robert  Mure  of  Cauldwell,  To 
depairt  and  pas  furth  of  this  realme,  to  the  pairtis  of  France, 
Flanders,  Ingland,  Itahe,  Spaine,  and  wtheres,  bezond  sey,"  &c. 
dated  "  of  our  Regnn  the  twentie  fyve  zeire  1591- 

5.  License  "  To  the  said  Robert  Mure  of  Cauldwell,  to  gang  and 

repair  quhair,  and  in  quhat  place  and  boundis,  within  our 
reahiie,  best  pleases  him,"  &c. 

6.  Instructions  from  the  King,  To  The  Laird  of  Cauldwell,  "  Un- 

derstanding  that  ourweill  belovit,  Robert,  Archbishop  of  Glas- 
gow,  is  to  repair  and  travell  to  the  visitatioun  of  all  kirkis  within 
the  boundes  of  his  dyocis,  for  ordour  taking  and  reformatione 
of  abuses,  within  the  samyn,  according  to  his  dewtie  and  charge, 
&c.  dated  "  Falkland  July  22." 

7.  Letter  from  King  James  VI.  "  To  our  traist  Cusing  the  Lord 

of  Paisly.  Traist  Cusin  we  greit  zou  weill.  Forsamikle  as  we 
wryte  to  zou  of  befoir,  ia  the  fiivour  of  ane  Lord  Sempill,  touch- 


23 

ing  the  teindis  of  the  three  kirkis,  quhareto  he  and  his  prede- 
cessouris  have  beine  kyndhe,"  &c.  dated  "  From  Halyruidhous, 
the  penult  day  of  July,  J593." 

Tlie  precediiig  MSS.  are  in  the  Library  of  William  Mure  of  Caldwell,  Esq. 
III.  Recueil  de  Lettres — commen^antpar  une  lettre  de  la  Reyne  d'Ecossc 
a  Messrs — de  Mauvissiaire  et  de  Chateauneuf,  en  1,585. 

JNISS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

I^'.  Recueil — commen^ant  par  une  lettre  de  Marie  Stuart  a  M.  de  Nevers. 

MSS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"  Paris. 

V.  Plusieurs  Lettres  de  M.  Stuart  Reyne  d'Ecosse  et  de  hi  Reyne  Mar- 

guerite. 

MSS.   In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"   Paris. 

VI.  Lettre  de  Charles  IX.  a  Marechal  d'Ecosse. 

MS.  In  the  "  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,"   Paris. 

VII.  Original  Letters  of  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  to  her  mother,  Queen 
Regent  in  Scotland, — written  previous  to  her  marriage  with  the 
Dauphin. 

Froni  the   originals  in  the  General  Register  House,  and  in  the  Library  of  the 
Faculty  of  Advocates. 

VIII.  Notorial  Copy  of  the  Foundation  and  Endownient  of  Saint  Nicho- 
las'  Hospital,  by  Rolland  Blacadyr,  Sub-Dean  of  Glasgow.     15H . 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  Anderson's  University,  Glasgovv. 

IX.  Deed  of  Agreement  by  the  Incorporated  Trades  of  Glasgow,  for 
St  Nicholas'  Hospital,  and  for  the  Foundation  of  the  Trades'  Hos- 
pital,  Glasgow,  with  a  Ratilication  by  the  Provost  and  Magistrates, 
3d  August,  1605. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  Anderson's  University,  Glasgow. 


POETRY. 

I.  A  Poem  in  the  Scots  Language, — ending  "  Finis  quod  Rob  Steine." 

MS.  In  Bibliotheca  Leiglitoniaiia,   Dumblane. 

II.  Selections  from  tlie  Poems  of  M.  Zachary  Boyd,  Preacher  of  God's 

Word  at  Glasgovv,  entitled,  "  Enghsh  Academie,  containing  pre- 
cepts  and  purposes  for  the  well  both  of  soull  and  body,  divided 
into  tliirtie-one  dayes  Exercise," — "  Zion  Flowers;  Christian  Poems 
for  spiritual  edification," — and  "  The  Foure  Evangels,  in  English 
Verse." 

MSS.   In  the  Library  of  the  University  of  Glasgow. 

III.  The  Poems  and  Correspondence  of  Mr  James  Melville. 

MSS.  In  the  Libraries  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  and  University  of  Edinburgli. 

IV.  Poems  of  the  Sempills  of  Beltrees. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

V.  Poems  by  Sir  Wilham  Mure  of  Rowallan,  exclusive  of  those  already 

printed. 

MS.  In  the  Library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates. 

VI.  Dido  and  -^neas,  in  thrie  bookes;  a  Poem,  by  Sir  WilHam  Mme 
of  Rowallan. 

MS.  In  the  possession  of  William  Motherwell,  Esq. 


