mmfmmsmmmmmsmii^. 


Vitae  Sanctorum  Hiberniae 

PARTIM  HACTENVS  INEDITAE 

AD  FIDEM  CODICVM  MANVSCRIPTORVM 

RECOGNOVIT  PROLEGOMENIS  NOTIS 

INDICIBVS  INSTRVXIT 

CAROLUS   PLUMMER  A.M. 


COLLEGII    CORPORIS   CHRISTI    APUD    OXONIENSES 
SOCIUS   ET   CAPELLANUS 


TOMVS  PRIMVS 


OXONII 

E  TYPOGRAPHEO  CLARENDONIANO 

MCMX 


HENRY   FROWDE,   M.A. 

FUBUSHER  TO  THE  DNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD 

LONDON,   EDINBURGH,    NEW   YORK 

TORONTO   AND    MELBOURNE 


6X 
h 


1 

0 


PREFACE 

The  object  of  the  present  work  is  to  make  available  for 
students  of  Irish  Hagiology  and  Ecclesiastical  History 
materials  which  have  either  not  been  printed  before,  or  which 
are  only  to  be  found  scattercd  through  the  vast  Bollandist 
Collection  of  the  Acta  Sanctorum,  or  in  scarce  seventeenth 
century  books  like  Colgans  Acta  Sanctorum  Hiberniae,  and 
Fleming's  Collectanea  Sacra ;  works  which  require  a  long 
purse  for  their  acquisition,  and  ample  shelf-room  for  their 
accommodation  ;  and,  moreover,  do  not  in  all  cases  come  up  to 
modern  standards  in  respect  of  editing. 

The  manuscript  sources  from  which  the  h'ves  in  the  present 
collection  are  derived  are  enumerated  and  criticized  in  Part  I 
of  the  Introduction.  The  character  and  mode  of  composition 
of  the  lives,  and  the  nature  and  value  of  the  information  which 
they  contain,  are  discussed  in  Parts  HI  and  IV.  In  Part  II 
the  separate  lives  contained  in  these  volumes  are  dealt  with ; 
and  an  attempt  is  made  to  determine  the  relation  of  these  lives 
to  other  existing  lives  both  Latin  and  Irish,  and  of  the  Irish 
lives  to  one  another,  where  more  than  one  Irish  Hfe  of  the 
same  saint  is  extant.  This  has  not,  so  far  as  I  know,  been 
hitherto  attempted  ;  and  as  the  majority  of  the  Irish  lives  are 
still  unprinted,  I  trust  that  this  part  of  my  work  may  be 
useful  to  other  labourers  in  this  field,  and  may  serve  to  shovv 
which  of  these  lives  are  most  worthy  of  attention.  Some 
of  them  I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  deal  with  m^self  in 
future  volumes.  But  to  print  Irish  lives  which  are  mere  late 
translations  of  existing  Latin  Hves  can  add  nothing  to  our 
knowledge,  except  possibly  as  regards  the  Irish  vocabulary 


iv  PREFACE 

of  the  last  two  and  a  half  centuries.  In  order  to  facihtate 
comparison  and  research  I  have  placed  in  the  critical  notes 
dctailed  references  to  the  corresponding  portions  of  other  Hves, 
whether  Latin  or  Irish,  where  such  exist. 

In  the  last  section  of  the  Introduction  I  have  attempted 
to  dctermine,  with  how  much  success  my  readers  must  judge, 
what  elements  in  the  Hves  of  Celtic  Saints  are  derived  from 
thc  mythology  and  folk-lore  of  the  Celtic  Heathenism  which 
preceded  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  This  also  has  not 
been  systematically  attempted  hitherto.  In  this  way  some 
light  has,  I  hope,  been  thrown  on  the  nature  of  that  heathenism, 
and  yet  more  on  the  character  of  Celtic  hagiology.  It  is 
indeed,  as  it  seems  to  me,  impossible  to  understand  much 
that  is  contained  in  these  lives  without  some  knowlcdge  of  the 
secular  literature  from  which  I  have  striven  to  illustrate  them. 
And  the  advantage  of  this  method  of  investigation  is  that  by 
it  whole  groups  of  miracles  and  legends  find  a  common  ex- 
planation,  whereas  the  w^eakness  of  the  euhemeristic  mcthod 
adopted,  e.  g.  by  Messrs.  Baring-Gould  and  Fisher  in  their 
reccntly  published  Livcs  of  British  Saints,  is  that  a  special 
explanation  has  to  be  found  for  each  separate  legend,  and  the 
rcsult  is  as  unscientific  as  it  is  certainly  unimaginativc  and 
prosaic.  Moreover,  by  means  of  this  comparison  many  things 
in  these  lives,  which  at  first  sight  naturally  cause  offcnce,  find 
an  explanation,  if  not  an  cxcuse,  of  which  thosc  who  are 
jealous  for  the  honour  of  the  Celtic  saints  may  be  glad  to 
avail  themselves. 

The  need  for  this  comparison  with  the  sccular  traditions 
is  one  reason  why  it  is  dcsirable  that  editors,  even  of  Latin 
lives  of  Irish  saints,  should  have  some  acquaintance  with  the 
native  language  and  literature.  Other  reasons  are  the  occur- 
rence  in  these  lives  of  Irish  words  and  phrases,  and  of  Latin 
cxprcssions  which  can  only  bc  explained  by  referencc  to  Irish  ; 
and  the  intricacy  of  Irish  nomenclature  both  personal  and 


PREFACE  V 

local.  These  subjects  are  dealt  with  in  the  Indices  and 
Glossary.  In  the  Indcx  Locorum  I  have,  I  believe,  identified 
several  places  for  the  first  time.  But  morc  could  probably  be 
done  by  persons  having  local  knowledge  to  which  I  cannot 
pretcnd.  The  foundations  of  Irish  topographical  science  vvere 
iaid  for  all  time  by  John  0'Donovan  ;  others  can  only  build 
upon  the  foundations  laid  by  him. 

But  whatever  may  be  thought  of  my  own  contributions  to 
these  volumes,  I  trust  I  have  at  any  rate  provided  students 
with  reliable  texts  on  which  they  can  work  with  confidence. 

It  is  a  satisfaction  to  me  to  think  that  in  the  present  work 
I  have  done  something  towards  carrying  out  the  great  design 
at  which  Colgan  and  his  associates  laboured  with  such  pathetic 
fidelity  amid  the  storms  of  the  seventeenth  century  (see  p.  x, 
note  3) ;  though  they  would,  I  fear,  have  gravely  disapproved 
of  the  critical  theories  which  I  have  applied  to  these  compo- 
sitions.  Perhaps  I  may  also  be  allowed  to  pay  the  tribute  of 
my  reverent  admiration  for  the  labours  of  a  later  worker  in 
the  same  field,  Dr.  William  Reeves,  sometime  Bishop  of  Down 
and  Connor :  '  Gigantes  erant  super  terram  in  diebus  illis.' 

It  only  remains  for  me  to  add  my  acknowledgements  of  the 
many  kindnesses  which  I  have  receivcd  in  connexion  with 
these  volumes.  I  would  thank  the  Delegates  of  the  Clarendon 
Press  for  their  liberality  in  undertaking  a  work  which  can 
hardly  appeal  to  more  than  a  limited  number  of  students  ;  and 
I  would  thank  the  ofiicials  and  printers  of  that  grcat  establish- 
ment  for  the  skill  and  patience  with  which  they  have  executed 
a  rather  complicated  task.  To  the  authorities  of  the  Bodleian 
Library  in  Oxford,  of  the  Bibliotheque  Royale  in  Brussels, 
of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy,  of  the  Franciscan  Convent,  of  the 
King's  Inns  Library,  of  Trinity  College,  and  Primate  Marsh's 
Library  in  Dublin,  I  am  indebted  for  unrestricted  access  to 
their  manuscript  treasures,  and  for  unfailing  courtesy  and 
considcration.     The  authorities  of  the  two  last-named  libraries 


vi  PREFACE 

further  allovvcd  photographs  of  certain  manuscripts  to  be 
taken  for  my  use.  To  the  Provost  and  Fellows  of  Queen's 
College,  Oxford,  I  am  once  more  indebted  for  an  even 
larger  use  of  their  valuable  library  than  that  which  they  so 
liberally  allow  to  all  graduates  of  the  University.  To  the 
late  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  I  am  indebted  for  the  loan  of 
several  photographs  of  Irish  MSS.,  while  Mr.  J.  G.  CKeefife, 
though  at  the  time  personally  unknown  to  me,  generously 
ailowed  me  to  make  use  of  some  transcripts  which  he  had 
made  of  certain  Irish  lives  of  Saints.  To  Sir  John  Rhys 
and  Professor  Heinrich  Zimmer  my  thanks  are  due,  not 
only  for  the  stimulus  of  their  pubhshed  works,  but  also  for 
their  personal  instructions,  which  in  ycars  gone  by  first 
initiated  me  into  Celtic  studies.  I  trust  that  they  may  find 
these  volumes  not  altogether  unvvorthy  of  the  care  and 
pains  which  they  once  bestowed  upon  their  pupil,  the  editor. 

CoRPUs  Christi  College, 

OXFORD. 

January  27,  1910. 


CONTENTS   OF   VOL.    I 

PAGE 

Editor's  Preface iii 

Introduction— 

Part  I.       The  Manuscripts ix 

Part  II.     The  Separate  Lives xxiii 

Part  III.    CoMPOsiTioN  AND  Character  of  the  Lives    .       Ixxxix 

Part  IV.     The  Contents  of  the  Lives xcv 

Part  V.       Heathen    Folk-lore    and    Mythology  in    the 

LivES  OF  Celtic  Saints       ....         cxxix 

LiST  OF  Abbreviations  and  of  Works  cited        .        .        .     clxxxix 


Vita  sancti  Abbani 3 

,,      Aedi 34 

•  ,,         ,,      Albei 46 

„         „      Barri 65 

„         „      Berachi 75 

'     „          „       BOECII 87 

'       „      PRIMA  SANCTI  BrENDANI 98 

•  „      SANCTI  CaINNICI I52 

„         „      Carthagi  sive  Mochutu 170 

•  „              „         ClARANI  DE  ClUAIN 200 

,,              „         ClARANI  DE  SaIGIR 217 

„              ,,         COEMGENI 234 

'      ,,             „         COLMANI  DE  LaND  ElO 258 

*  Hitherto  unpublished. 


CONTENTS   OF   VOL.   II 

PAGE 

VlTA  SANCTI  COMGALLI 3 

*  ,,              „         CrONANI 22 

„         ,,      Declani 32 

„         „      Endei 60 

,,         „      Fechini       ...                76 

*  „             „         FlNANI  DE  CeNN  EtIGH 87 

„         „      Fintani 96 

„         „      Geraldi 107 

,,    sancte  Ite 116 

*  „    sancti  Lasriani  sev  Molaissi 131 

„         „      Maedoc 141 

„         „      mochoemog 164 

„         „      MocHUA  DE  Tech  Mochua 184 

*  ,,             „         MOLING 190 

„         „      Moluae  (sev  Lugidi) 206 

„         „      Munnu 226 

*  „         „      Ruadani 240 

*  „      SANCTE  SaMTHANNE 253 

„      SANCTI  TlGERNACI 262 


Appendix  I — 

*ViTA  secvnda  sancti  Brendani 270 

*De  sancto  Brendano  versvs  satiri  ci 293 

Appendix  II — 

Vita  sancti  Aidvi  sive  Maedoc 295 

Explanation  of  the  Indexes 312 

Index  Locorvm 313 

Index  Nominvm 344 

Index  Rervm 371 

Glossary  : 

A.— Latin 381 

B.— Irish 385 

Addenda  et  Corrigenda 389 

*  Ilitherto  unpublished. 


INTRODUCTION 


PART  I.     THE  MANUSCRIPTS 

I.  Apart  from  single  lives  which  may  be  found  in  various  MSS., 
three  great  collections  of  Latin  Lives  of  Irish  Saints  are  known 
to  me. 

The  first  of  these  is  contained  in  a  MS.  of  the  Royal  Library  at 
Brussels  numbered  7672-4,  and  commonly  knovvn  as  Codex  Salman- 
ticensis  froni  the  fact  that  it  once  belonged  to  the  Irish  CoIIege  at 
Salamanca  (S). 

The  second  is  contained  in  two  sister  MSS.,  of  which  one,  marked 
V.  3.  4,  is  in  Primate  Marsh's  Library,  Dublin  (M) ;  the  other  is  in 
Trinity  CoIIege,  Dublin,  marked  E.  3.  11,  and  numbered  175  in 
Dr.  Abbotfs  Catalogue  (T). 

The  third  is  contained  in  two  Rawlinson  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian, 
Rawl.  B.  485  (Ri),  and  505  (R-) ;  of  which  the  latter,  as  will  be 
shown  hereafter,  is  a  copy  of  the  former  '. 

S  has  already  been  published  in  extenso'  by  the  liberality  of  the 
late  Marquess  of  Bute  under  the  editorship  ofthe  BoIIandist  Fathers, 
De  Smedt  and  De  Backer',  and  therefore  none  of  the  lives  printed 
in  the  present  work  are  taken  from  that  MS.     Still  less  have  I 

*  Keating  iised  '  an  old  vellum  book'  containing  lives  of  saints,  apparently  in 
Latin,  ii.  400.  but  I  cannot  identify  it  with  any  of  the  above  collections.  In  Brussels 
MS.  2324  f.  12  v"  there  is  an  Irish  note  by  Michael  OCIery  stating  that  Simon 
Bearnaval  [Barnewall]  near  Kells  had  a  collection  of  Latin  lives  of  the  follow- 
ing  saints  among  others  :  Patrick,  Cronan,  abbot,  of  the  race  of  Dathi  [?  Mart. 
Don.  Feb.  20],  Finntan,  bishop  [?  of  Dunbleisc,  Jan.  3],  Finntan,  priest,  of  the 
race  of  Conall  Gulban  [=  Munnu],  Mide  [=  Ita],  Ebbeus  episcopus  ^1.  e.  Ailbe], 
Diarmaid,  Brendan  f?  of  Birr  or  of  Clonfert],  Cronan  [?  of  Roscrea]. 

-  As  a  rule  the  MS.  is  cited  as  S,  and  the  edition  as  C  S. 

'  Acta  Sanctorum  Hiberniae  ex  Codice  Salmanticensi  .  .  .  opera  Caroli  de 
Smedt  et  losephi  de  Backer  e  soc.  lesu,  .  .  .  sumptus  largiente  loanne  Patricio 
Marchione  Bothae,  1888.  The  edition  is  farfromperfect ;  it  suffers  from  the  fact 
tbat  the  editors  have  no  acquaintance  with  the  Irish  language,  a  knowledge  of 
which  is  absolutely  necessary  foran  editor  even  of  Latin  lives  of  Irish  saints.  The 
work  was  severely  criticized  by  Zimmer  in  Gott.  gelehrte  Anzeigen,  March, 
1891.  Still,  it  is  not  diificult  for  an  Irish  scholar  to  correct  the  mistakes  of  the 
editors,  and  with  all  its  shortcomings  the  edition  does  make  the  MS.  available 
for  students  of  Irish  matters  in  a  convenient  form.  But  for  greater  security 
every  passage  quoted  from  S  in  the  critical  notes,  and  nearly  every  passage 
quoted  in  the  Introduction  to  the  present  work,  has  been  collated  with  the  MS. 


X  INTRODUCTION 

thought  it  necessary  to  print  lives  which,  as  is  the  case  with  some  of 
those  contained  in  R'  and  R^  are  mere  duplicates  or  epitomes  of 
iives  contained  in  S.  Other  lives  of  the  same  saints  are  admitted  ; 
for  the  various  lives  form  what  Pfere  Delehaye  has  well  called  '  the 
dossier  of  a  saint ' ' ;  and  a  comparison  of  them  is  often  most 
instructive. 

For  the  other  two  coliections  nothing  analogous  has  been  done. 
Many  of  the  lives  contained  in  them  have  never  been  printed  at  all. 
Those  that  have  been  printed  are  either  scattered  up  and  down  the 
great  Boliandist  Coliection,  or  are  only  to  be  found  in  rare  works  like 
Colgan's  Acta  Sanctorum  '   and  Trias  Thauniaturga ',  or  FIeming's 

'  Les  Legendes  hagiographiques,  par  Hippolyte  Delehaye,  S.  J.,  1905 ;  chap.  v, 
'  Le  Dossier  d'un  Saint.' 

*  Louanii,  foi.  mdcxlv. 

'  ibidem,  fol.  mdcxlvii.  The  '  Trias  '  is  composed  of  SS.  Patrick,  Brigit,  and 
Columba.  In  the  A.  S.  the  Lives  are  arranged  according  to  tlie  order  nf  the 
saints'  days  in  the  calendar.  But  Colgan  only  lived  to  complete  a  quarter  of 
his  task,  the  A.  S.  containing  the  saints  belonging  to  the  first  three  months 
of  the  year.  The  scheme  of  Colgan  and  his  associates  embraced  much  more 
than  the  Lives  of  the  Saints  ;  they  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  a  complete 
collection  of  all  e.xisting  Irish  antiquities,  secular  and  ecclesiastical,  as  may  be 
seen  from  the  Preface  to  the  A.  S.  There  is,  indeed,  hardly  to  be  found  in 
the  history  of  literature  a  more  pathetic  tale  than  that  of  the  way  in  which 
Colgan  and  his  fellow  workers  (who  are  enumerated  in  the  same  Preface) 
strove,  amid  poverty,  and  persecution,  and  exiie,  to  save  the  remains  of  their 
country's  antiquities  from  destruction.  In  Rawl.  B.  487  f  68  is  a  very  interest- 
ing  draft  of  their  scheme  :  'Catalogus  eorum  quae  habemus  partim  parata 
partim  paranda  ad  praelium  (sic).'  At  the  head  of  this  stands  :  '  Vitae  san- 
ctorum  Hibemiae  qui  floiuerunt  intra  uel  extra  patriam  .  .  .  illustratae  Commen- 
tariis  in  quibus  omnes  occurrentes  in  eis  diHicultates  explicantur.'  Then,  after 
mentioning  other  items  of  their  programme,  the  writer  adds  :  '  Haec  omnia 
sunt  pene  parata  ad  praelum,  si  adessent  necessarii  sumptus  uel  modus  dandi 
cautionem  impressori  de  300  exemplaribus  comparandis  per  cum  qui  daret 
cautionem.'  At  f.  74  there  is  the  following  note  :  '  Paucas  habemus  nostrorum 
sanctorum  uitas  ex  patria  latine  scriptas,  sed  longe  multas  [?  plures]  ex  aliis 
regionibus,  eorum  nerape  qui  intcr  exteros  floruerunt.  Vnde  desideramus 
omnem  uitam  alicuius  nostratis  sancti  qui  in  patria  haberi  possit  praeter  se- 
quentes  quas  ex  patria  missas  habemus.'  Then  follows  an  alphabetical  hst  of 
forty-three  Lalin  lives,  of  whicli  all  except  three  are  to  be  found  in  M T,  S,  or 
R  ;  and  many  of  them  in  more  than  one  recension.  Then  follows  a  list  of  cleven 
fragmentary  lives,  '  unde  eas  integras  desideramus.'  Of  these  lives  all  but  four 
are  to  be  found  in  S  or  R,  or  both.  And  all  thc  lives  in  both  lists  which  come 
within  the  scope  of  Colgan's  two  volumes  are  there  printed  by  him.  In  a  port- 
folio  of  unbound  papers  in  the  Library  of  the  I.^ubhn  Franciscans  is  a  '  Catalogus 
Actuum  Sanctorum  quae  MS  habentur  ordine  Mensium  et  Dierum ',  from  April 
to  December.  This  list  is  evidcnlly  a  draft  schcme  for  Colgan's  rcmaining 
volumes  of  A.  S.;  the  first  three  months  of  the  year  having  been  already  pro- 
vided  for.  This  list  was  printcd  by  Reeves  in  Proc.  R.  I.  A.  vii.  372-3.  On 
f.  74  v°  of  the  Rawhnson  MS.  is  a  list  of  thirty-nine  Irish  Lives  of  Saints, 
headed  '  Accso  na  bcthada  fuaramar  as  ar  ttir',  i.  e.  these  are  the  lives  which 
we  have  got  from  our  country  ;  after  wliich  follows  a  lisl  of  ihirty-one  Irish 
saints,  headed  '  Agso  drong  oirdeirc  do  naomhaibh  ar  ttirc  nach  liuaramar  a 
m-bethada  ;  7  atamaid  d'iarraid,  mas  cidir  ',  i.e.  here  is  a  distinguished  company 
of  saints  of  our  country  whose  lives  we  have  not  got ;  and  we  are  trying  to  get 


THE   MANUSCRIPTS  xi 

Collectanea  Sacra '.  One  or  two  have  been  printed  separately -. 
The  object  of  the  present  vvork  is  to  malce  availablc  for  students  of 
Irish  Hagioiogy  the  materials  contained  in  MT  and  R'. 

As  S  is  only  used  for  the  purpose  of  comparison  a  brief  description 
will  suffice.  It  is  a  folio  volume  measuring  33  cm.  bya^;  written 
in  double  colunins  by  a  scribe  of  the  fourteenth  century.  It  consists 
at  present  of  a  hundred  and  seventy-five  leaves,  but  several  leaves 
have  been  lost*,  and  othcrs  have  been  misbound.  The  only  scribal 
note  vvhich  throvvs  any  light  on  the  history  of  the  MS.  is  at  the  end 
of  the  Life  of  S.  Cuanna  on  f.  219'  :  'Bennact  Cuan«a  agus  noem 
daroni  a  cattach  fris  ar  awimaiw  inti  tuc  a  gaedailch  i  1-ladin  in  bethusa. 
i.  fratris  lohannis  Mac  Kern  de  Ergallia,'  i.  e.  the  blessings  of 
Cuanna  and  the  saints  who  made  their  covenant  with  him  on  the 
soul  of  the  man  who  translated  this  life  from  Gaelic  into  Latin,  i.  e. 
Brother  John  Mac  Kernan  (?)  (=  Mac  Tiernan  or  Mac  Tighearnain) 
of  Oriel.  To  which  a  later  hand  has  added  on  the  margin  :  '  Anima 
quoque  fratris  Dermicii  I  Dhunchadha  (i.  e.  Dermot  0'Donohoe) 
requiescat  in  pace.    Amen.' 

M  and  T  are  certainly  sister  MSS.,  i.  e.  both  copied  from  the  same 
original,  but  neither  of  them  copied  from  the  other.'     They  are  both 

them,  if  possible.  Many  students  will  have  re-echoed  the  lament  of  the  Bol- 
landist  editor  of  the  life  of  Declan  (A.  S.  July  v.  597"  i  :  '  merito  cum  maiori- 
bus  doleo  non  uulgari  tandem  aliquando  A.  S.  Hiberniae,  a  Colgano  olim  per  tres 
tantummodo  menses  typis  commissa,  cum  cetera  promissa  sint  toties,  tantoque 
opere  ab  eius  magistris  per  totara  Hiberniam  conquisita.'  This  was  written  in  1727. 
'  Louanii  mdclxxvii.  fol.  Fleming's  tragical  death  is  described  in  the 
Preface  to  Colgan's  A.  S.  The  work  was  published  after  his  death  by  Thomas 
Sirinus,  i.  e.  0'Sheerin. 

*  e.  g.  the  lives  of  Bairre  of  Cork,  by  Rich.  Caulfield,  1864  ;  the  S  life  of 
Cainnech,  by  the  Marquess  of  Ormonde,  1853. 

'  With  the  exception  of  the  documents  printed  in  the  Appendices,  all  the  lives 
in  the  present  collection  are  taken  from  M  T  or  R. 

*  The  fohation  begins  with  f.  48,  so  that,  apart  from  other  mutilations,  forty- 
seven  leaves  have  been  lost  at  the  beginning. 

^  Very  incorrectly  printed  CS.  col.  937-8. 

^  That  they  must  be  copied  from  the  same  original  is  proved  by  the  numerous 
rainute  points  in  which  they  agree  :  (a)  common  errors,  e.  g.  stilam  /or  stilum, 
Ab.  §  10;  pariatura  terra /or  per  hiatura  terre,  Aed  §35;  Exhach /or  Echach, 
Ba.  §  2  ;  Roraam  /or  Roma,  bis  ib.  §  7  ;  se  ridentera  /or  stridentem,  Car.  §  32  ; 
scandentes/or  scatentes.  ib.  §51  ;  demeritate/or  teraeritate,  Com.  §  34;  frustra 
/or  frusta,  Decl.  §  25  ;  debitoribus  /or  crtditoribus,  Fin.  C.  §  17  ;  indesperatus 
/or  inde  separatus,  Mochoem.  §17;  pater/or  frater,  ib.  §  22;  profundiosi,  ib. 
§  30  ;  habentes  sanctura  acceperunt/or  habitum  sanctura  accipientes,  Rua.  §  15 
ad  finem.  (b)  Spelling,  e.  g.  cepta  /ot  septa,  Co.  E.  §  9  ;  cella  /or  sella,  Com. 
§  34  ;  arcx,  Mochoem.  §  20.  (f)  Common  omissions,  e.  g.  aemulatores,  Ab.  §  10 ; 
et  ait,  Car.  J  21  ;  in  Co.  E.  §  10  a  long  clause  is  omitted ;  shorter  ones  in  Com. 
§  44,  Decl.  §  23.  In  some  cases  M  has  inserted  the  missing  word  above  the  line, 
e.  g.  Dei,  Aed  5  27  ;  eum,  Fin.  C.  §  24,  &c.  In  these  cases  the  word  in  the 
original  MS.  may  have  occupied  a  position  in  which  it  was  liable  to  be  over- 
looked.  (d)  Common  erroneous  insertions,  e.  g.  est,  Car.  §  31,  et,  ib.  §  37  ; 
mortem  eius,  Com.  §  57  [or  it  may  be  that  these  words  should  be  retained,  and 


Xll 


INTRODUCTION 


folio  volumes  written  in  double  columns  and  very  similar  in  appear- 
ance,  the  columns  in  T  being  rather  broader,  and  the  handwriting 
rather  more  compressed  and  upright.  T  is  assigned  to  the  fifteenth 
century  in  Dr.  Abbott's  Catalogue.  M  is  an  exact  contemporary '. 
Both  MSS.  probably  contained  the  same  collection  of  lives  originally, 
but  both  are  mutilated. 

The  following  table  shows  the  arrangement  of  the  lives  in  the  two 
MSS.  as  they  exist  at  present.  The  titles  are  given  in  the  order  of 
M,  the  figures  in  the  right-hand  column  indicate  the  position  of  the 
corresponding  article  in  T.  A  dagger  suffixed  to  a  number  indicates 
that  the  life  in  that  MS.  is  incomplete,  a  double  dagger  indicates  that 
it  is  a  mere  fragment. 


M 

T 

M 

T 

it 

Antony 

17 

18 

Ita 

[20  ff. 
lost] 

2i 

Flannan 

[      ff- 

lost] 

3 

Columba 

19 

Molua 

lot 

4 

Maedoc 

8o 

Laurence  (0'Toole) 

Ilt 

5 

Brendan 

it 

[II  ff. 

lost] 

6 

Coemgen 

21 

Cainnech 

7 

Moling 

[19  ff. 

8 

Fintan 

lost] 

22 

Munnu 

I2t 

9 

Senan 

23 

Colman  Ela 

13 

lo 

Mochoemoc 

2t 

24 

Bairre 

14 

II 

Finan 

3 

25 

Aed  mac  Bric 

15 

13 

Ruadan 

4 

Here  T  inserts 

13 

Cronan 

5 

Louis  olToulouse 

16 

14 

Comgall 

6 

V.  s. 

Antony 

17 

I5t 

Carthach 

7t 

26t 

Ailbe 

18 

i6t 

Declan 

8 

27 

Abban 

I9t 

17 

Ciaran  of  Saigir 

9t 

28 

Ciaran  of  Cluain 

[ff. 

29 

Malaehy 

lost] 

some  word  Hke  '  expectantes '  inserted]  ;  enim,  Decl.  §  38  [due  to  preceding 
'  multitudiHcm'].  {e)  Wrong  ordcr  in  both,  e.  g.  habitatores  multorum  de 
gentiUtate  locorum,  /o>  hab.  mult.  loc.  de  gent.  conuertit,  Decl.  §3  ;  cf.  ib.  §  17. 
{/)  Space  left  in  both,  though  nothing  is  vvanting,  Decl.  §  36.  (^  Same  mar- 
ginal  notes  in  both,  c.g.  Aed  §  13,  Ail.  §  15,  Co.  E.  §  27,  Mun.  §  25.  (/;~  Identical 
glosses  in  both,  e.  g.  Ab.  §  3,  Co.  E.  §  27  ('  vel  Lelas'),  Ail.  §  42.  But  on  the 
other  hand  neither  MS.  is  copied  from  the  other.  (o)  T  cannot  be  copicd  from 
M,  for  it  has  words  and  phrases  vvhich  M  erroneously  omits,  e.  g.  Ab.  §8 
(futurum)  ;  in  Mochoem.  §j  24,  34,  Rua.  §  30,  M  has  omitled  vvliolc  clauses 
owing  to  homoioteleuton.  {!>)  Neithcr  can  M  be  copied  from  T,  for  similar 
reasons,  e.g.  Aed  §  13  T  omits  '  in  nie  "  ;  Co.  E.  §  8  '  toto '  ;  Mun.  §  22  '  poterant ', 
ib.  §  25  '  solutam ' ;  while  in  Mochoem.  §  34  T  has  omittcd  a  vvhole  clausc  owing 
to  homoioteleuton.  In  Aed  §  5  M  and  T  have  two  dilfercnt  readings,  both 
wrong,  neitlier  of  which  could  well  have  becn  copied  from  the  other  (edi  M, 
egni  T,/oy  cqui). 

•  Rcevcs  (I'roc.  R.  I.  A.  Jan.  1875)  thought  that  T  vvas  the  oldcr  MS.  of  thc 
two,  btit  Dr.  Macray  and  Mr.  Madan,  to  vvhom  I  submitted  pliotographs,  pro- 
nounced  thcm  to  be  absolutely  contcmporary,  Mr.  Madan  dating  both  c.  1400. 


I 


THE    MANUSCRIPTS  xiii 

From  this  it  woiild  appear  that  the  arrangenicnt  of  the  lives  in  the 
two  MSS.  was  probably  the  sanie,  with  the  exception  that  T  inserts 
tlie  two  foreign  saints,  Antony  and  Louis  of  Toulouse,  in  the  body 
of  his  MS.,  whereas  M  removed  them  to  the  beginning,  for  the  close 
resemblance  between  the  two  MSS.  makes  it  probable  that  the  life  of 
St.  Louis  was  contained  in  the  missing  part  at  the  beginning  of  M. 
The  fact  that  both  these  foreign  Saints  belonged  to  the  order  of  St. 
Francis  makes  it  possible,  as  Reeves  suggested,  that  the  original  of 
MT  bclonged  to  some  Franciscan  house.  In  the  present  work  all  the 
above  lives  are  included  except  these  two  foreign  saints,  SS.- 
Laurence  and  Malachy  (excluded  on  chronological  grounds), 
Flannan  (as  being  too  fragmentary),  Columba,  whose  life  is  a  copy 
of  Adamnan's  well-known  work,  used  by  Reeves  in  his  monumental 
edition,  and  called  by  him  Codex  D,  and  Brendan,  whose  life  accord- 
ing  to  this  recension  was  included  in  Cardinal  Moran's  Acta  S. 
Brendani.  Happily  the  two  MSS.  largely  supplement  each  other's 
deficiencies. 

From  the  above  table  it  will  be  seen  that  the  only  life  which  has 
been  lost  is  that  of  Flannan ;  the  life  of  Carthach  (Mochuda)  is 
incomplete  in  both  MSS.,  but  by  combining  the  two  texts  the  whole 
can  be  recovered  with  the  exception  of  a  few  lines  (v.  infra  i.  192, 
196  notes).  T  has  suffered  the  worse  damage  of  the  two  ;  and  there- 
fore  M  has,  as  a  rule,  been  taken  as  the  basis  of  the  printed  text. 
Only  three  lives,  Ailbe,  Carthach  (or  Mochuda),  and  Declan,  have 
been  taken  from  T,  though  it  has  of  course  been  collated  wherever 
available.  M  measures  35  cm.  by  23^  cm.  The  last  folio  (which  is 
an  inserted  slip)  is  marked  f  159  in  the  old  foliation,  but  there  are 
two  folios  numbered  135,  so  that  originally  the  MS.  contained  160  ft"., 
but  32  ff.  have  been  lost  at  the  beginning,  and  four  in  other  places. 

T  measures  33  cm.  by  25  cm.  The  first  part  of  the  MS.  contains 
a  fragment  of  some  chronicle.  The  lives  begin  on  f.  28  of  the 
original  foliation,  and  this  foliation  shows  that  no  less  than^o  ff.  have 
been  lost  in  the  body  of  the  MS.,  besides  an  uncertain  number  at 
the  end '. 

M  is  almost  certainly  the  MS.  which  Colgan  used  and  calls  Codex 
Kilkenniensls.  Reeves  denied  this,  but  I  think  on  insufiRcient 
grounds  -.    It  is  quite  certainly  the  MS.  used  by  Fleming  in  his 

'  Probably  about  nineteen,  to  judge  from  the  correspondint;  portions  of  M. 

-  Proc.  R,  I.  A.  u.  s.  ;  Adamnan,  p.  xxvi ;  v.  inf.  ii.  96,  100  notes  ;  cf.  also 
ii.  177  note  (Mochoem.  §  24),  where  a  sentence,  omitted  by  M  owing  to 
homoioteleuton,  is  wanting  also  in  Colgan :  and  the  same  is  the  case  ib.  §  34  ; 
cf.  Z.  C.  P.  V.  454.  The  lives  of  the  M  T  recension  printed  in  Coigan's  Acta 
Sanctorum  are  :  Abban,  p.  610;  Aed  mac  Bric.  p.  418;  Ciaran  of  Saigir, 
p.  458  ;  Finlan  of  Clonenagh,  p.  349  ;  Ita,  p.  66  ;  Maedoc.  p.  208  ;  Mochoemoc, 
p.  589;  Senan,  p.  512.  Of  these,  all  except  the  first  two  are  novv  lost  or 
mutilated  in  T.    Colgan's  statement  that  Cod.  Kilk.  contained  a  life  of  David, 


xiv  INTRODUCTION 

Collectanea  Sacra,  and  called  by  him  Codex  Ardmachanus.  This 
was  very  ingeniously  proved  by  Reeves'.  I  cannot  discover  in  the 
MS.  itself  any  ground  for  either  of  the  names  given  to  it  by  Colgan ' 
and  Fleming' respectively.  The  former  has  been  more  commonly 
adopted.  Reeves  thought  the  latter  more  appropriate,  though  he 
does  not  give  any  reason  for  his  opinion. 

Both  M  and  T  were  used  by  Ussher  in  his  Britannicarum  Ecclesia- 
rum  Antiquitates*,  and  it  is  probable  that  the  numerous  seventeenth- 
century  annotations  on  the  margins  of  both  MSS.  are  from  his  hand. 
Ware  also  had  saints'  lives  of  the  MT  recension.  In  Chapter  XIII 
of  his  work  on  Irish  Writers  he  gives  a  list  of  saints'  lives  with  their 
'incipits'.  Of  these,  ten  certainly  belong  to  the  MT  recension  : 
and  the  MS.  used  by  Ware  would  seem  to  have  been  our  M  ". 

ib.  p.  430,  is  probably  a  slip ;  though  the  life  may  have  occurred  in  the  lost 
portions  of  M. 

'  u.  s.  ;  V.  inf.  11.  9  note. 

2  *  Vitam  [Maidoci]  hic  damus  ex  uetustis  raembranis  conuentu^  Fratrum 
Minorum  Kill  Canniae,'  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  215''  ;  cf.  ib.  p.  596",  '  Vitam  Mochoe- 
moci  damus  ex  peruetusto  illo  codice  .  .  .  Fratrum  Minorum  Kilkeniae.' 

'  Fleming  printed  from  M  the  lives  of  Comgall,  p.  303  ;  Mo!ua,  p.  368 ;  and 
Mochoemog,  p.  381 ;  and  gave  extracts  from  those  of  Coemgen,  Cainnech, 
Carthach,  and  Munnu,  pp.  313-15.  His  texts  are  far  superior  to  those  of 
Colgan. 

'  I  cite  the  edition  in  vol.  vi  of  Ussher's  CoUected  Works.  Of  course,  in 
many  cases  it  is  impossible  to  say  from  vi^hich  of  the  two  MSS.  Ussher  took 
his  quotations  ;  where  the  source  is  fairly  certain  I  have  added  an  M  or  T  in 
brackets;  M*  or  T*  denotes  that  the  passage  cited  only  exists  uow  in  the  one 
of  the  MSS.  so  indicated  ;  but  the  MSS.  may  have  been  less  mutilated  in 
Ussher's  time  than  they  are  at  present.  The  following  lives  are  citcd  by 
Ussher :  Abban  §  g  =  pp.  348,  429  f.  (T)  ;  Aed  §  3  =  P-  534  ;  §  3'  =  P-  382  ; 
Ailbe  5§  I,  2  =  P-  333  (M) ;  §  8  =  p.  342  ;  §  13  =  pp.  342-3  (M)  ;  §  16  =  p.  346  ; 
§  19  =  pp.  432-3  ;  §§  20-22  =  pp.  346-7,  427  :  §  25  ^  p.  428  ;  Carthach  §§  59, 
61  -  pp.  475,  532  (M*)  ;  §  65  =  pp.  510-11  (T*)  ;  Coemgen  (M*)  §§  i,  4,  28 
=  pp.  524-5,  527  ;  Comgall  §  13  =  p.  475  ;  §  50  =  p.  527  ;  Cronan  §§  16-17 
=  P-  541  (T)  ;  Declan  §  i  =  p.  333  (T*)  §§  3-9«  =  pp.  334-5  ;  §  9*  =  pp.  343-4  ; 
I  12  =  p.  347  (M) ;  §  18  =  p.  355  ;  §  21  =  pp.  427-8  ;  Maedoc  §  8  =  p.  532  ; 
Mochoemog  §  4  =  p.  472;  Molua  §§  28,  47  =  pp.  484,  511  ;  Munnu  §§  26-7 
=  PP.  503-5  (T) ;  Ruadan  §  i  =  p.  472  ;  §  25  =  p.  529. 

'  The  incipits  of  the  following  lives  cited  by  Ware  are  in  M  T  :  Finan, 
Carlhach,  Ciaran  of  Saigir,  Ailbe  ;  the  following  are  now  only  in  M  :  Ccemgen, 
Moling,  Mochoemoc,  Cainnech.  In  the  case  of  Cronan  (MT)  and  Munnu  ^M*) 
the  incipits  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  S  recension,  but  I  have  discovered  no 
evidence  that  Ware  was  acquainted  with  the  S  recension.  In  the  case  of  Senan 
the  incipit  is  the  samc  in  MS.  R.  But  it  is  the  case  of  Declan  which  makes  it 
practically  certain  that  M  was  Ware's  MS. ;  for  he  notes  that  the  'incipit'of 
the  life  is  wanting,  and  he  therefore  gives  the  '  cxplicit '  instead.  Declan's  life 
is  'acephalus'  in  M,  but  not  in  T.  At  the  same  time  it  is  curious  that  Ware 
has  not  cited  more  of  the  lives  contained  in  M.  Of  thc  life  of  Abban  Ware  says 
*  the  bcginning  is  wanting  in  nty  Notgs\  This  probably  rcfers  only  to  some 
accidental  loss  or  omission  by  Ware.  It  is  not  true  cither  of  M  or  T.  I  have 
found  nothing  bearing  on  the  history  or  ownership  of  eithor  MS.  before  it 
reachcd  its  prt-scnt  placc  of  deposit  except  the  single  entry  in  T,  f.  109'':  '  Johnc 
Dillon,  his  booke.     God  make  him  a  go^^od  man] '  ;  cf.  infra,  p.  xx. 


THE  MANUSCRIPTS 


XV 


It  follows  next  to  consider  the  two  MSS.,  R'  and  R',  which  contain 
the  third  coilcction  of  lives'.  These  two  MSS.  are  also  closely 
related,  but  the  relationship  between  them  is  different.  R^  is  not 
a  sister,  but  a  daughter  of  R'.  Their  close  relationship  appears  in 
many  ways.  Though  both  are  mutilated  to  some  extent,  it  is  evident 
that  both  contained  when  complete  the  same  collection  of  lives.  And 
the  recension  of  the  various  lives  is  in  both  MSS.  identical,  although 
in  some  cases  (e.g.  Coluinba,  Brendan  of  Clonfert,  and  Finnian  of 
Clonard)  that  recension  is  highly  individual.  The  order  of  the  lives 
in  the  two  MSS.  is  very  different,  but  this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  in 
R'  the  lives  have  been  rearranged  in  the  order  of  the  calendar  for  the 
convenience  of  reading  in  choir  or  in  refectory.  The  following  table 
shows  the  relationship  of  the  two  MSS.  as  to  their  contents.  The 
first  column  gives  the  lives  in  the  order  of  R',  the  second  the  date  of 
each  saint's  festival  in  the  Calendar;  the  third  column  gives  the 
order  of  the  lives  in  R',  while  the  fourth  gives  their  order  in  F, 
which,  as  I  shall  show  presently,  is  the  seventeenth-century  transcript 
of  the  greater  part  of  R'  used  by  Colgan  for  his  Acta  Sanctorum. 
As  before,  a  dagger  indicates  that  the  life  is  imperfect  in  the  MS.  so 
marked  : — 


R' 

Date. 

R' 

F 

it 

Patrick 

March  17 

it 

a 

Columba 

June  9 

9 

3 

Baithine 

June  9 

II 

4 

4t 

Fursa 

Jan.  16 

27 

5t 

Moling 

June  17 

10 

6 

6 

Colman  of  Dromore 

June  7 

39t 

7t 

David 

March  i 

33 

8 

Finnian  of  Clonard 

Dec.  12 

23 

I 

9 

Berach 

Feb.  15 

31 

31 

lO 

Brigit 

Feb.  I 

30 

ir 

Brendan  of  Clonfert 

May  16 

7 

9 

la 

Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois 

Sept.  9 

13 

13 

13 

Molaisse  of  Devenish 

Sept.  13 

15 

5 

'4 

Aed  mac  Bricc 

Nov.  10  or  16 

20 

18 

15 

Enda  of  Aran 

March  ar 

a 

33 

i6 

Gerald 

March  13 

36 

a8 

17 

Fechin 

Jan.  20 

28 

24 

i8 

Mochua 

[March  30] 

3 

7 

19 

Tigernach 

April  4 

4 

3 

20 

Bairre  of  Cork 

Sept.  25 

16 

14 

21 

Munnu  of  Taghmon 

Oct.  21 

I9t 

17 

33 

Laurence  of  Dublin 

Nov.  14 

38 

'  For  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  contents,  character,  relationship,  and 
history  of  these  two  MSS.,  see  an  article  by  the  present  vvriter  in  Zeitsch.  f. 
Celtische  Pliilologie,  v.  439  ff.,  of  which  I  have  not  hesitated  to  make  use  here. 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


R' 

Date. 

R2 

F 

33 

Cainnech 

Oct.  II 

i8t 

16 

a4t 

Colman  Ela 

Sept.  26 

i7t 

15 

25 

Columba  of  Terryglass 

Dec.  13 

23 

20 

26 

Finan  Cam 

April  7 

37 

29 

37 

Ruadan 

April  15 

5 

2 

28 

Fintan  of  Clonenagh 

Feb.  17 

32 

32 

29 

Samthann 

Dec.  19 

25 

23 

30 

ComRall  of  Bangor 

May  10 

6 

8 

3't 

Maedoc  of  Ferns 

Jan.  31 

29 

30 

32t 

Flannan 

Dec.  18 

24 

21 

Here  in  its  present  condition  R'  ends  ;  but  the  table  of  contents 
shows  that  originally  these  additional  lives  followed  : — 


Ri 

Date. 

R2 

F 

33 

Ailbe 

Sept.  12 

14 

13 

34 

Ciaran  of  Saigir 

March  5 

34 

26 

35 

Senan 

March  8 

35 

27 

,36 

Ita 

Jan.  15 

26 

23 

37 

Coemgen 

Junes 

8 

10 

38 

Molua  of  Clonfertmulloe 

Aug.  4 

12 

II 

39 

Boetius  or  Buite 

Dec.  7 

21 

19 

If  the  lives  be  taken  in  the  order  of  the  numbers  in  the  third  column 
it  will  be  seen  that  the  object  of  R-  's  rearrangement  of  the  lives  is  to 
bring  the  order  into  conformity  with  the  Calendar'.  Beginning  with 
the  national  apostle,  Patrick,  on  March  i7,the  livcs  follow  one  another 
in  the  order  of  the  saints'  days  up  to  St.  Gerald  on  March  13.  The 
last  three  lives,  SS.  Finan,  Laurence,  and  Colman  of  Dromore,  are 
out  of  place  ;  they  were  probably  omitted  accidentally,  and  added  at 
the  end  when  the  mistake  was  discovcred.  The  life  of  St.  Moling 
(June  17)  is  slightly  out  of  place.  It  should  foUow  instead  of  preceding 
St.  Baithine  (June  9). 

F  follows  to  a  large  extent  the  order  of  R',  but  Patrick,  Columba, 
Fursa,  Brigit,  David,  Laurence,  and  Colman  of  Dromore  arc  omitted, 
and  many  of  the  lives  are  displaced  for  no  apparcnt  reason. 


'  It  is  interesting  to  note  tliat  the  lives  of  English  saints  by  John  of  Tyne- 
mouth  which  wcre  arranged  by  him  in  tlie  order  of  the  Calendar,  were 
rearranf;ed.  probably  by  Capgrave,  in  alphabetical  order.  This  inarks  the 
difference  betvveen  a  book  of  devotion  and  a  book  of  rcfcrence  ;  cf.  Horstman, 
i,  p.  ix.     The  present  work  is  arrangcd  alpbabctically. 


THE   MANUSCRIPTS  xvii 

Of  the  lives  enumeratcd  in  the  above  table  the  foUowing  (in  the 
ordcr  of  R')  are  included  in  the  prescnt  work,  Nos.  9,  11,  13,  15,  16, 
17,  18,  19,  29,  39.  The  following  lie  outside  the  scope  of  the  present 
vohimes,  Nos.  i,  2,  7,  10,  22.  The  following  are  omitted  as  being 
identical  with  lives  contained  in  C  S,  Nos.  3,  5,  6,  21,  30,  34,  35,  37, 
38  (No.  19  would  have  been  excluded  under  this  rule,  but  it  is 
imperfect  in  S).  The  following  are  excluded  because  lives  of  the 
same  saints  are  here  given  from  the  M  T  recension  ;  but  in  all  these 
cases  the  R  version  has  been  carefully  compared,  and  anything  of 
importance  which  it  contains  is  given  in  the  critical  notes  :  Nos.  [5], 
12,  14,  20,  [21],  23,  24,  26,  27,  28.  [30],  31,  33,  34,  36,  [37,  38].  The 
bracketed  numbers  had  already  been  excluded  on  other  grounds.  Of 
the  remaining  four  lives,  No.  4  (Fursa)  is  practically  identical  with 
that  in  C  S,  though  the  phrasing  differs  a  little ;  No.  25  (Columba  of 
Terryglass)  hardly  differs  from  C  S  except  by  abbreviation  ;  No.  32 
(Flannan)  is  a  shorter  and  possibly  earlier  recension  than  that  in 
C  S,  which  is  in  the  very  worst  hagiological  manner.  C  S  is 
incomplete,  but  it  did  not  seem  worth  while  to  print  the  R  version 
on  this  account  *. 

No.  8  (Finnian  of  Clonard)  difTers  from  C  S  mainly  by  way  of 
abbreviation  ;  but  the  author  of  the  recension  has  incorporated  a 
shortened  form  of  the  tract :  '  De  tribus  ordinibus  sanctorum  Hiber- 
niae,'  which  occurs  separately  in  C  S  and  elsewhere^  He  has  also 
inserted  an  account  of  Finnian's  reception  of  the  last  sacraments  at  the 
hand  of  Columba  of  Terryglass,  which  is  taken  from  the  S  R  life  of  that 
saint'.  There  are  other  minor  differences  between  S  and  R  which 
make  it  possible  that  R  is  not  taken  direct  from  S,  but  that  both  are 
independent  abridgements  of  an  earlier  life*. 

But  besides  these  general  points  of  resemblance  between  R'  and 
R'',  the  two  MSS.  agree  in  the  most  minute  points,  often  in  the  most 
obvious  mistakes '.    These,  however,  might  only  prove,  as  in  the  case 

^  The  following  summary  of  the  missing  part  will  suffice  to  show  its  worthless 
character  ;  Flannan  and  his  companions  land  on  the  coast  of  Gattl,  The  king 
of  the  Frmiks  was  at  war  with  the  king  of  Burgundy.  The  only  son  of  the 
king  of  Gaiil  had  lost  an  arm.  Flannan  heals  him.  .  .  .  The  fame  of  the  cure 
of  the  king  of  Fraiice  spread  through  the  whole  Roman  Empire,  and  made  F.'s 
way  plain.  The  pope,  John,  goes  out  to  meet  him.  He  btays  a  year  at  Rome, 
and  receives  from  the  pope  'sacros  ordines,  pontificalem  infulam,  et  licentiam 
predicandi'  .  .  He  sets  out  on  his  return.  Fourteen  leprous  monks  ask  to 
join  him.     (Here  C  S  resumes  after  the  lacuna.)     R'  f.  159,  R-  f.  164. 

^  Fleming,  u.  s.  p.  431",  notices  tbis  insertion. 

'  C  S  cc.  457-8.  For  another  instance  of  R's  incorporating  additional 
matter  sce  i.  223,  note  4. 

*  That  S  is  in  this  case  an  abridgement  of  an  earlier  life  is  shown  by  §§  5,  12 
(C  S  cc.  192,  196). 

^  e.  g.  ignorantiam  ybr  ignominiam,  i.  43  note  ;  cuIpa/o>-  lupa,  i.  65  note  ; 
prebeat/or  prebebat,  i.  78;  benedictionem  ybr -onis,  i.  98;  regiorum/or  regio- 


xvili  INTRODUCTION    ' 

of  M  and  T,  derivation  from  a  common  original.  But  the  fact  fliat 
many  of  the  peculiarities  of  R'  can  only  be  explained  as  misunder- 
standings  of  the  text  of  R}  make  it  practically  certain  that  R'  is  a 
direct  copy  of  R'.  The  commonest  form  of  error  is  a  wrong 
expansion  of  the  contractions  with  which  R'  abounds*.  But,  curiously 
enough,  the  most  conclusive  evidence  that  R'  is  copied  from  R'  is 
furnished  by  a  Jife  which  now  no  longer  exists  in  R',  viz.  the  life  of 
Boetius  or  Buite.  This  is  obviously  imperfect  in  R";  it  ends  in  the 
middle  of  a  sentence  :  '  panem  latum  preparauit,  et  butiro  superficicm 
eius,'  i.  97.  It  is  not  mutilated  in  R",  and  on  the  verj'  next  line 
another  life  begins  :  '  Incipit  uita  Sci.  Finniani  de  Cluain  Yrard." 
Now  the  table  of  contents  of  R'  shows  that  the  life  of  Boetius  was  the 
last  in  the  volume.  Evidcntly  therefore  when  R-  was  copied,  R'  had 
lost  the  last  leaf,  or  at  the  least  the  last  page  had  become  so  abraded 
from  being  the  outside  of  the  MS.  as  to  be  illegible'. 

In  the  Library  of  the  Franciscan  Convent  at  Dublin  is  a  paper  MS. 
containing  thirty-three  lives  of  saints  of  the  R  recension'.  The 
colophon  *  shows  that  it  was  copied  in  1627  by  John  Goolde,  Warden 
of  the  Franciscan  Convent  of  Cashel  '  ex  authentico  transumpto  uetu- 
stissimi  manuscripti  pertinentis  ad  Inis  na  naom  supcr  Loch  Rij ' 
(Saints'  Island  in  Lough  Ree).  It  is  practically  certain  that  F  is  a 
copy  of  R''.  It  shows  the  same  imperfection  in  the  life  of  Boetius, 
and  the  most  minute  agreement  in  smaller  points.  Any  differenccs 
between  the  two  I  regard  as  being  due  only  to  the  error  or  caprice 
of  the  scribe,  or  to  his  attempts  to  correct  the  niistakes  of  his 
original  '^,  or  his  own  misrcadings  of  that  original".     It  is  equally  clear 

nem,  i.  103  ;  duxistis/oj-  dimisistis,  i.  106;  apertus  /ur  aptus,  i.  112  :  desperauit 
_/b/' disparuit,  i.  214  note  ;  chornata /or  ornata,  ii.  68;  licentia_/br  lclitia,  ii.  266; 
progcnle  /or  pergente,  ib.  ;  hostiam  /or  hastam,  ii.  245  note  ;  ocuM  /or  olim, 
ii.  266  note.  Common  omissions,  e.  g.  ii.  67  1  Corbanus  autem  > ;  ii.  264  '  rege) ; 
ii.  134  (a  uhole  iine  omittedi.     Wrong  insertions,  ii.  68  !cnim"i  ;  ii.  139  1  in). 

'  Tliis  character  of  R',  combined  vvith  its  non-calendarian  arrangement,  would 
roakc  it  an  inconvcnient  book  for  reading  aloud.  Ahnost  every  column  of  R- 
affords  instanccs  of  the  statcraent  in  the  text.  1  give  a  few  examples  ;  orationibus 
yb»- omnibus,  i.  IiB;  habitum  dantes/or  habundantcs,  i.  127;  aliquod /or  aliud, 
i.  131  (tliis  occurs  frequcntlyi  ;  popularem  yo;-  papalem,  ii.  71  ;  corruptum /or 
corporum,  ii.  132;  declinationcm/brdemonem,  ii.  265.  R- also  ignores  lacunae 
in  K'  and  copies  straight  ahead,  e.  g.  1.  84,  85  notes. 

^  This  fact    inter  alia  1  provcs  that  R'  is  a  good  deal  older  than  R'. 

^  Sec  the  table  given  above,  pp.  xv,  xvi.      I  call  this  transcript  F. 

*  Printcd  in  full,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  452-3. 

'  Tliis  bcing  the  case  1  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  give  the  readings 
of  F  except  where  thcy  secmed  of  interest  as  illustrating  the  origin  of  cditions 
of  any  of  these  livcs  printed  in  Colgan  or  in  the  A.  S.  ;  e.  g.  Beracli.  £nda, 
Fechin,  Mochua,  Tigernach.  The  notes  to  Ihcse  lives  will  lurnish  on  cvcry 
page  proot'  of  tlic  stalements  madc  above,  e.  g.  Ber.  §§  3,  19  21,  23.  Wliere  F 
agrees  with  R'  against  R^,  tliis  is  mcrely  duc  to  thc  fact  that  the  true  reading 
was  easily  recoverable  by  conjccture. 

'  Thus  in  Ber.  §  15  thc  text  has :    '  inuocato  nominc  Dei  uiui  insutSauit  in 


THE    MANUSCRIPTS  xix 

that  F  is  the  transcript  used  by  Colgan  in  the  preparation  of  those 
lives  of  the  R  recension  which  he  editcd,  or  intended  to  edit,  in  his 
Acta  Sanctorum  ^  Several  of  the  lives  have  chapter  divisions  and 
marginal  notes,  and  these,  as  Reeves  suggested  ^  may  very  lilcely  be 
from  Colgan's  hand. 

R' is  a  smali  folio,  size  23cm.  X  i4cm.,  written  in  double  columns, 
and,  as  I  have  said,  in  a  very  contracted  hand.  It  contains  now 
i6o  ff.  How  much  is  lost  at  the  end  it  is  impossible  to  tell  exactly, 
but  probablj'  twcnty-four  ff.'  In  the  body  of  the  MS.  we  can 
show  from  the  ancient  pagination  and  foliation  that  nineteen  leaves 
have  been  lost.  The  gatherings  are  for  the  most  part  in  twelves, 
though  some  have  been  interfered  with  by  mutilation  and  other 
causes.     It  contains  some  very  interesting  marginalia '. 

R'  is  a  large  folio,  size  37  cm.  x  25-7  cm.  in  double  columns.  It 
consists  at  present  of  221  ff.',  including  ten  leaves  at  the  end  which 

eam '  [sc.  niiiem]  ;  F  misreads  'uiui'  as  '  niui ',  then  alters  it  to  'niuem',  and 
omits  '  in  eam  *. 

'  The  close  conformity  of  CoIgan's  text  with  that  of  F  may  be  easily  seen  by 
reference  to  the  lives  cited  in  the  last  note  but  one.  The  lives  actually  printed 
by  Colgan  from  the  R  recension  are  Berach,  A.  S.,  p.  340;  Enda,  p.  704; 
Fechin,  p  130 ;  Gerald,  p.  599  ;  and  he  cites  or  alludes  to,  thouf  h  he  does  not 
print,  the  following  lives  of  the  same  recension  :  Ita,  Flannan,  Maedoc,  Fintan, 
Finnian,  David,  Ciaran  of  Saigir,  Aed  mac  Bric,  Brendan,  Brigit  (v.  Z.  C.  P. 
V.  448-53  !.  Of  these  David  and  Brigit  are  not  in  F.  For  David  Colgan  used 
a  different  MS.  ;A.  S.  p.  425]  ;  of  the  life  of  Brigit  he  may  have  obtained 
a  transcript  later,  as  the  Trias  Thaumaturga  came  out  two  years  after  the  A.  S. 
Among  the  books  found  in  Colgan's  chambcr  at  his  death  was  '  Vitae  Sanctorum 
tx  Cod.  Insulensi',  Gilbert,  in  Fourth  Report  on  Historical  MSS.  p.  612". 
This  w;is  probably  F.  R-  seems  to  have  been  less  mutilated  than  it  is  novv 
vvhen  F  was  copied  from  it.  The  only  serious  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the 
above  theory  is  this.  Colgan's  edition  of  the  life  of  Enda  is  incomplete  at  the 
beginning  ;  *  caput  unum  uel  alterum  inter  schedas  nostras  est  casu  deperditum,' 
A.  S.  p.  710^*  ',  cf.  ib.  p.  43'':  'reliquas  notas  in  hanc  uitam  [Molibba]  uideat 
lector  in  addendis.'  They  do  not  seem  to  be  there,  so  probably  they  were  never 
recoveredl.  But  in  F  the  life  of  Enda  is  quite  complete.  Perhaps  the  transcript 
was  itself  transcribed  for  press,  and  the  first  leaf  of  the  copy  may  have  been 
mislaid.  For  the  soiution  of  an  apparent  ditBculty  as  to  the  fragment  of 
the  life  of  Attracta  printed  by  Colgan.  A.  S.  p.  278,  see  Z.  C.  P.  v.  451-3.  As 
Colgan  e.xpressly  says,  ib.  p.  710",  that  the  '  Codex  Insulae  omnium  Sanctorum  ' 
was  a  '  codex  membraneus  ',  it  is  clear  that  he  does  not  give  that  title  to  F,  as 
js  sometimes  loosely  done,  but  to  the  MS.  from  vvhich  it  was  transcribed. 

^  Proc.  R.  I.  A.  vii.  372. 

'  The  lives  novv  wanting  in  R'  occupy  about  18  ff.  in  R^.  Although  the  page 
of  R'  is  so  much  smaller  than  that  of  R",  it  holds  nearly  as  much,  ovving  to  the 
contracted  liand  in  which  R'  is  writtcn.  We  must  also  allow  a  little  for  the 
fact  that  as  shown  above,  p.  xviii)  tlie  life  of  Buite  was  already  mutilated  at 
the  end  when  K'  vvas  copied.  As  the  gatherings  of  R'  are  mostly  in  twelves, 
we  may  suppose  that  two  gatherings  of  twclve  leaves  have  been  lost. 

*  The  most  important  of  these  are  printed  Z.  C.  P.  v.  444-6,  and  need  not  be 
reprinted  here. 

'  The  foliation  only  shovvs  220  ff.,  but  there  are  tv\-o  ff.  numbered  85  a  and 
85  b  respectively. 

ba 


XX  INTRODUCTION 

contain  a  copy  of  Aengus'  Fdlire,  which  was  bound  up  with  the  saints' 
lives  in  the  sixteenth  or  seventeenth  century.  The  gatherings, 
allowing  for  leaves  lost  by  mutilation,  are  nearly  all  in  eights.  At 
the  head  of  the  hves  a  space  is  often  left  vacant  for  the  sainfs 
pedigree,  which  in  some  cases  has  been  added  ;  sometimes  bj'  a  nearly 
contemporary,  sometimes  by  a  much  later  hand.  The  scribe  is  fond 
of  adding  at  the  end  of  the  lives :  'cuius  meritis  deleatur  culpa 
scriptoris ' '.  In  one  instance,  the  life  of  Fursa,  he  has  given  his 
name  :  '  cuius  meritis  deleatur  culpa  Mathei  Y  Duibyr.  Amen ' '. 
But  of  this  Matthew  0'Dwyer  I  have,  unfortunately,  found  nothing. 
R"  also  contains  a  large  number  of  interesting  entries^  The  fact 
that  one  of  these  entries  is  the  obit  of  a  prior  of  Saints'  Island* 
strongly  confirms  the  view  that  R'  is  CoIgan's  Codex  Insulensis^, 
Inisensis^  Codex  Insulae  Sanctorum',  Codex  Lochriuensis*. 

The  history  of  R'  and  R^  has  been  throughout  closely  connected. 
If  R-  belonged,  as  there  is  reason  to  believe,  to  the  monastery  of 
Saints"  Island  in  Lough  Ree,  it  is  probable  that  R'  belonged  there 
also,  and  that  R^  vvas  intended  to  supersede  R'  as  a  lectionary.  In 
both  MSS.  are  entries  relating  to  the  Dillon  family  °.  In  the  sixteenth 
and  seventeenth  centuries  R'  seems  to  have  been  in  the  possession 
of  therelated  families  of  0'FarreII'"  and  Moriarty,  the  formerofwhom 
may  have  acquired  it  from  theirkinsman  the  prior  of  Saints'  Island". 


'  i-  i5i>  273 ;  '■-  21.  75.  »63,  if^9.  252.  269. 

'  A  note  on  the  margin  of  f.  5  r°  calls  attention  to  this  :  '  Matheus  O  Duibidir, 
ffar  sg>'tobtha  an  leaba;V  so  m»;-  ata  and  7  het/ia  Fursa,'  i.e.  Matthevv  CDwyer, 
the  scribe  of  this  book,  as  it  stands  here,  and  vafi  the  hfe  of  Fursa.  A  variation 
of  the  phrase  occurs  at  the  end  of  the  life  of  Aed  mac  Bricc,  where  we  find : 
'  cuius  mcritis  deleatur  dolor  capitis  scriptoris  huius  uite,'  i.  45.  The  reason 
for  this  no  doubt  is  that  in  the  body  of  the  life  is  narrated  how  St.  Aed  took 
upon  liimself  the  headache  of  a  man  who  sufTered  intolerably  from  tliat  com- 
plaint,     Hence  no  doubt  he  was  the  special  refuge  of  simiiar  sufferers. 

5  Z.  C.  P.  V.  447-8. 

*  Obitus  Flerdy  ffili  Nimee  y  Ffergaill,  qui  fuit  prior  in  Insula  Sanctorum, 
Anno  Dni.  isiiij  (1504 1 — or,  to  give  him  his  Irish  name  '  en  toutes  lettres ' — 
Flaithbertach  mac  Conmidhe  ui  Fergaill,  prior  of  Oilen  or  Inis  na  naemh,  Saints' 
Island,  in  Lough  Ree. 

»  A  S.  pp.  346",  353'',  422",  430»,  ^63'',  599,  723". 

•  ib.  130. 

'  ib.  71,  215'',  216",  397",  422",  704,  710"  (omnium  Sanctorum,  ib.  34"  ;  Tr.  Th. 
p.  526). 

>  A.  S.  p.  397\ 

'  One  of  whom  at  one  time  also  owned  T;  see  above,  p.  xiv. 

'"  There  seems  to  be  an  entry  relating  to  the  death  of  an  0'FarrelI  also  in 
R'  f.  36  v"  ;  see  Z.  C.  P.  v.  445. 

"  Z.  C.  P.  V.  443-8.  The  fact  tliat  the  name  of  Cormac  Og  Moriarty  occurs  as 
owner  both  in  the  body  of  thc  MS.  and  also  in  thc  Fclire  of  Aengus  now  bound 
with  it,  makcs  it  possible  that  it  was  in  his  timc  that  the  two  parts  were  joined 
together. 


THE   MANUSCRIPTS  xxi 

Both  MSS.  belonged  to  Sir  James  Ware '  whose  arms  are  stamped 
on  the  binding  of  R'.  Ware  died  in  1666  ;  and  both  MSS.  subsequently 
belonged  to  Henry  Hydc,  the  second  Earl  of  Clarendon,  who  probably 
acquired  them,  as  Dr.  Macray  suggested,  during  his  Irish  Viceroyalty 
(1685-6).  Both  found  their  way  into  the  collection  of  the  Duke  of 
Chandos,  at  whose  sale  in  1747  both  were  bought  by  Dr.  Richard 
Rawlinson  -,  among  whose  treasures  they  came  into  the  Bodleian, 
where  they  now  repose. 

As  to  the  date  of  the  MSS.  the  experts  differ.  Hardj'  assigns  both 
to  the  fourteenth  century  ;  Dr.  Macray  in  his  catalogue  assigns  both  to 
the  beginningof  the  fifteenth  century,  but  would  now  put  R'  c.  1350'. 

'  In  chap.  xiii  of  his  Irish  Writers  Ware  gives  the  incipits  of  the  following 
lives  of  the  R  recension  :  Aed  mac  Bric,  Ailbe,  Bairre,  Baithin,  Berach,  Boetius, 
Brendan,  Cainnech,  Ciaran  of  Cluain,  Ciaran  of  Saigir,  Coemgen,  Colman  of 
Dromore,  Colman  Ela,  Columba  of  Tir  da  glas,  Comgall,  Enda,  Fechin,  Finan, 
Finnian,  Fintan,  Flannan,  Maedoc,  Mochua,  Molaisse,  Moling,  Molua,  Ruadan, 
Samthann,  Tigemach.  (Eleven  of  these  lives  have  the  same  incipit  in  S,  but 
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Ware  knew  that  MS.)  For  his  account  of 
these  hves  Ware  clearly  used  R^,  for  in  a  volume  of  his  Collectanea  in  the 
British  Museum  i.Cod.  Clar.  39  =  MS.  Add.  4788)  there  are  extracts  from 
saints'  lives  clearly  made  from  R';  for  Ware  has  copicd  in  extenso  the  life  of 
Boetlus  as  it  exists  in  R-,  noting  its  deficiency  ;  he  further  notes  :  '  ad  finem  MS. 
de  vitis  sanctorurn  habetur  Calendarium  Hibernlce.'  This  is  the  Felire  of  Aengus 
which  now,  as  we  have  seen,  forms  part  of  R^.  In  his  extracts  Ware  also  cites 
the  R  lives  of  Gerald  and  Ita,  which  he  has  accidentally  omitted  in  his  printed 
work.  Moreover  three  of  the  above  lives,  Ailbe,  Boetius,  and  Ita,  do  not  now 
exist  in  R',  and  as  R'  has  Ware's  arms  stamped  on  the  binding,  it  must  have 
been  as  incomplete  then  as  it  is  novv.  Ware  has  also  copied  some  of  the  obits 
from  R-.  Ware  follows  the  mistake  of  R'  and  R^  in  calling  Mochua  Mochua  of 
Balla,  though  the  life  clearly  belongs  to  Mochua  of  Timahoe.  Colgan  was  more 
cautious.  In  F  the  word  Balla  is  crossed  out,  and  a  marginal  note  is  added : 
'  sed  hic  est  alius  ab  illo  Ballensi.' 

Ussher  also  used  the  R  recension,  though  less  frequently  than  M  T.  The 
beginning  of  the  life  of  Enda  is  alluded  to  by  him,  Works,  vi.  533  ;  Fechin  5§  i, 
3,  10,  12,  22  =  ib.  p.  538  ;  the  life  of  Colman  of  Dromore  (R'  f.  50",  R-  f.  210" 
=  C  S  cols.  827-9  §§  I,  3,  4;  is  cited  ib.  p.  529  (here  Ussher's  text  is  nearer  S 
than  R,  and  at  p.  475  he  cites  the  S  life  of  Mochuda  (Carthach)  as  '  alius 
scriptor') ;  the  R  text  of  Ciaran  of  Cluain  is  certainly  cited  ib.  p.  525,  for  Ussher 
has  the  false  reading  '  sylua  '  (R;  for  '  insula  '  (S),  v.  infra  i.  207  note.  The 
passage  from  the  R  text  of  Cainnech's  life  given  in  the  note  to  Cain.  §  41  is 
cited  by  Ussher  at  p.  526.  Ussher  no  doubt  borrowed  R'  or  R-,  or  both,  from 
Ware  ;  cf.  Ware's  letter  of  Sept.  21,  1627  :  '  It  is  the  least  token  of  thankfulness 
I  can  show  for  the  many  favours  I  so  often  receive  from  your  grace's  hands,  to 
let  you  have  the  view  of  all  such  old  manuscripts  concerning  the  affairs  of  this 
kingdom  which  corae  unto  me  ;  especially  knowing  the  good  useyour  graveand 
deep  judgment  may  make  of  them  '  (Ussher's  Works,  xvi.  461). 

2  Who  apparently  got  them  both,  together  with  a  Register  of  St.  Mary's 
near  Dublin,  for  the  sum  of  ten  and  si-vpence  ;  see  No.  3852  in  Rawlinson's 
copy  of  the  Chandos  Sale  Catalogue  with  prices  affixed,  now  in  the  Bodleian. 

^  Even  this  date  (and  a  fortiori  Mr.  Madan's  date  for  R')  would  be  fatal  to 
Colgan's  theory  that  the  lives  of  the  R  recension  are  due  to  the  pen  of  Augustine 
Magradoigh  or  Magradin,  a  canon  of  Oilen  na  Naem  or  Saints'  Island,  one  of 
the  continuators  of  Tigernach,  whose  death,  in  his  fifty-sixth  year,  is  entered 
in  the  continuation  of  that  Chronicle  at  the  year  1405,  where  lives  of  saints  are 


xxii  INTRODUCTION 

Mr.  Madan,  who  most  kindly  went  into  the  qnestion  at  mj'  request, 
was  inclined  to  place  R'  in  the  first  half  of  the  thirteenth,  and  R-  in 
the  first  half  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Certainly,  as  we  have  seen, 
there  must  be  an  interval  of  some  years  between  the  two. 

It  remains  to  say  a  few  words  as  to  the  character  of  the  three 
collections,  S,  M  T,  and  R.  The  lives  in  S  are  curiously  disparate  in 
character  ;  for  whereas  some  contain  extremely  primitive,  not  to  say 
savagc  elements  ',  others  are  late  and  meagre  epitomes  ^  while  others 
again  show  the  degenerate  verbiage  of  the  professional  hagiologist''. 
The  primitive  characterof  some  of  the  materials  used  by  the  compiler 
of  S  is  further  illustrated  by  the  early  form  in  which  many  of  thc 
Irish  names  of  persons  and  places  appear ;  and  by  the  retention  of 
Irish  words  and  phrases  which  the  other  recensions,  as  a  rule,  have 
obliterated*. 

M  T  represents  a  literary  recension  of  earlier  materials  fairly  evenly 
carried  out.  Things  likely  to  cause  difficulty  or  scandal  are  toned  down 
or  omitted',  and  style  and  matter  are  more  homogeneous  than  in  S. 

R  represents  a  still  later  stage.  The  object  of  the  compiler  is 
homiletic,  'to  the  use  of  edifying.'  His  sources  are  nearer  akin  to  S 
than  to  M  T.  Often  he  retains  the  S  text  practically  unaltercd.  In 
other  cases  lives  already  evidently  abbreviated  in  S  are  still  further 

mentioned  among  his  works  ;  cf.  0'Curry.  MS.  Mat.  pp.  74,  75.  Colgan  says, 
e.  g.,  A.  S.  p.  710:  *  saepius  monuimus  authorem  uel  coUectorem  uitarum  .  .  . 
in  Codice  .  .  .  Insulensi  fuisse  Augustinum  Magradin';  cf.  ib.  602.  This  idea 
Colgan  says  that  he  tooU  from  Ware  (ib.  p.  430").  But  I  cannot  find  this  in 
Ware.  Ware  says  (ch.  xi)  that  Magradin  '  writ  the  Lives  of  the  Irish  Saints'. 
But  as  he  places  all  the  lives  of  the  R  rccension  under  '  Biographers  of  an 
uncertain  age',  he  implies  that  they  were  not  by  Magradin.  In  A.  S.  p.  113" 
Colgan  cites  the  R  text  of  the  life  of  Ciaran  of  Cluain  as  Magradin's  without 
any  other  reference.  (That  it  is  thc  R  text  is  provcd  by  the  false  rcading 
'silua'  for  'insula',  which  Ussher  also  has.) 

'  e.  g.  Aed  mac  Bricc,  Comgall,  Finan  of  Cenn  Eitigh.  See  the  Introductions 
to  these  lives,  infra. 

2  e.  g.  Carthach,  Ciaran  of  Saigir,  Coemgen,  Cronan,  Moling,  Baithinc, 
Macnissi,  &c. 

'  e.  g.  Flannan,  Mochulleus. 

*  In  the  lifo  of  Ailbe  S  §  50  =  M  §  43  (infra  i.  61)  is  an  Irish  verse,  which 
in  S  is  fairly  intelligible  ;  in  M  T  it  has  become  hopelessly  corrupt,  in  R  it  is 
omittcd.  In  the  same  life  the  interesling  word  diherc  S  §  36  is  omitted  both 
by  M  T  and  R,  infra  i.  58.  notes.  There  is  a  similar  case  in  the  life  of  Caiimech, 
S  5  45i  V.  infra  i.  165-6,  notes.  Per  contra  in  the  same  life  §  33  l  —  S  §  41)  the 
horrible  practice  of  the  Scandinavian  wiltings  of  tossing  children  on  the  points 
of  spears  is  rightly  callcd  '  pall-cheid',  i.  e.  the  foreign  art,  in  M,  whereas  S 
reads  '  gial-chcrd',  a  word  meaning  hostageship  or  obligation,  and  therefore 
quile  iiiappropriale  here.  Again,  in  §  39  (  =  S  §  47')  the  Irish  word  domdelh  is 
omittcd  both  by  M  and  R  i.  167,  notes) ;  vvhile  in  §  9  ( =i  S  §  12)  the  Irish  phrase 
ofwelcome  is  given  without  translation  in  S,  with  translation  in  M,  and  is 
omittcd  altogether  in  R. 

'  Sce  the  Introductions  to  thc  lives  of  Abban,  Ailbe,  Cainnech,  Finan,  and 
Macdoc. 


THE    MANUSCRIPTS  xxiii 

shortened,  especially  by  the  omission  of  names  of  places  and 
persons'.  The  process  of  expurgation  is  carried  further  than  in 
M  T'.  The  additions  of  R  are  sometinies  explanations  of  things 
which  might  seem  obscure',  but  by  far  the  greater  number  of  R's 
insertions  are  due  to  the  homiletic  purpose  of  the  compiler,  and 
consist  of  pious  or  moral  reflexions*,  scripture  quotations  and 
paralleis,  especially  paralleis  to  those  miracles  vvliich  niight  cause 
difficuUy  or  incur  disbelief^  But  the  compiler  of  R  not  only 
abbreviates,  expurgates,  and  '  farces  '  his  materials,  he  also  conflates 
them.  The  insertions  in  the  life  of  Finnian  of  Clonard  have  already 
been  noticed  °.  In  the  life  of  Coluniba  he  conflates  materials  vvhich 
exist  (in  part)  separately  in  S '.  But  his  great  achievement  in  this 
line  is  the  life  of  Brendan  printed  in  these  vohimes,  and  here  he  has 
earned  our  gratitude  by  preserving  for  us  materials  vvhich  exist 
nowhere  else  *. 


PART  II.     THE  SEPARATE  LIVES 

Vita  Sancti  Abbani  abbatis  de  Magh  Arnaide'.  The  life  here 
printed  is  from  M,  f.  138'',  collated  for  the  first  tvvelve  sections  with 
the  sister  MS.,  T,  f  135'',  the  remainder  being  lost  in  T  owing  to 
mutilation.  There  is  another  life  in  S,  f.  140''  (C  S,  cc.  505  ft").  Our 
life  vvas  printed  by  Colgan  A.  S.,  pp.  610 ff.,  probably  from  M  ;  and 
also  by  the  BoIIandists,  A.  S.,  Oct.  xii.  2760'.,   from  Colgan's  text 

1  See  Z.  C.  P.  V.  440-1, 

^  Thus  Fin.<>n  §  13,  toned  down  as  compared  with  S  §  16,  is  omitted  by  R 
(cf.  ib.  §  16,  notes")  ;  ib.  §  9  =  S  §  10  is  much  more  expurgated  in  R  than  in 
M  T  ;  so  Munnu§  19;  v.  notead  loc. ;  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  v.  441-2.  Unfortunately,  R  also 
'  expurgates '  things  of  great  beaut}-,  i.  150,  215,  notes  ;  infra,  p.  xciv. 

'  Z.  C.  P.  V.  442-3  ;  cf.  i.  37,  note  13.  A  curious  instance  wliere  R  has  mis- 
understood  the  S  text  is  given  in  the  notes  to  Fintan  §  16.  Here  S  reads  'in 
relitjuis  sanctorum  ' ;  R  takes  this  as  =  in  reliquis  sanctis,  and  paraphrases 
'  cum  aliis  qui  orabant '  ;  but  M's  reading,  '  in  cimiterio,'  shows  that  '  reliquis ' 
is  for  '  reliquiis  '  in  the  sense  of  the  Irish  '  relic  ',  a  burying-ground. 

*  A  curious  instance  is  cited  in  the  notes  to  Ailbe  §  47. 

^  These  characteristics  of  R's  manner  may  be  seen  in  several  of  the  lives 
printed  in  the  present  collection  ;  cf.  e.  g.  Berach  55  9  ad  fi""  10  ^^^  ^n.  ; 
Enda  §§  4  ad  fin.,  7  ad  fin.,  14,  17;  Fechin  §  8  ad  fin.,  14;  Gerald  §  11  j 
Mochua  §  10. 

«  Above,  p.  xvii.  '  Z.  C.  P.  v.  435-6. 

'  See  the  Introduction  to  this  life,  and  the  references  thcre  given. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Abban  in  LL.  352"  ;  L  Br.  20'  ;  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  51"' ; 
Fel.-  p.  228.  In  the  Calendars  he  has  two  dates,  March  16  and  Oct.  27.  The 
latter  is  the  date  of  his  death,  as  the  lives  show.  Colgan  gives  his  life  at  the 
former  date  ;  Fel.,  Mart.  Tall.,  Gorman,  give  him  at  both  dates  ;  Mart.  Don.  only 
at  the  former.  The  pedigrees  make  him  son  of  Laignech,  whereas  the  lives 
call  him  son  of  Cormac.  The  latter  is  probably  due  to  a  confusion,  perhaps 
intentional,  with  his  family  name  Mac  Ui  Cormaic,  under  which  name  he  appear.^ 


xxiv  INTRODUCTION 

collated  'cum  codice  Hibernico  Dubliniensi ' ;  by  which  is  probably 
meant  not  an  Irish  life  of  Abban,  but  merelj'  a  Latin  life  written  in 
Ireland  ^  Anyhow  the  text  is  of  httle  value  critically.  Some  of 
CoIgan's  errors  are  corrected,  but  others,  thougii  glaring,  are  retained, 
and  new  ones  are  added. 

The  S  text  is  shorter  than  that  of  M,  but  cannot  be  derived  from  it, 
for  it  contains  a  section  (§  39)  which  is  not  in  M,  while  in  §  40  its 
version  is  clearly  more  original  than  that  of  the  corresponding  section 
of  M  (§  45),  which  has  been  altered  so  as  to  do  away  with  Columba's 
confession  of  blood-guiltiness  *.  On  the  other  hand  M  retains  the 
Irish  verses  in  §  3  which  S  omits  ;  and  the  reference  to  the  author  of 
the  hfe  in  M  §  26  ad  fineni  is  clearly  more  original  than  the  corre- 
sponding  notice  in  S  §  21  ^  Hence  S  and  M  would  seem  to  be 
independent  recensions  of  the  same  original. 

The  M  text  has  been  largely  '  farced '  for  homiletic  purposes. 
Thus  the  introduction  is  clearly  a  later  addition.  The  Hfe  (like 
many  other  hves)  began  originally  with  the  words  :  '  Fuit  vir  vite 
vencrabiHs'  in  §  2*.  The  homiletic  character  of  §§  10,  29,  48,  53,  is 
obvious ;  and  the  same  atmosphere  pervades  more  or  less  other 
parts  of  the  work.  Indeed  on  a  first  reading  this  homiletic  motive 
was  so  unpleasantly  prominent,  that  I  doubted  whether  the  life  was 
worth  reprinting.  Further  study,  however,  showed  that  underlj'ing 
this  ecclesiastical  whitewash  were  features  of  great  interest.  Apart 
from  the  valuable  topographical  details  as  to  the  foundation  of  groups 
of  churches  in  Munster  (§§  22,  23),  North  Leinster  (§  27),  and  South 
Leinster  (§  28),  the  mythological  importance  of  the  life  is  considerable. 
It  seems  clear  that  a  cycle  of  stories  connected  with  the  Celtic 
Water-God  has  got  attached  to  this  saint ;  perhaps  through  some 
vague  idea  that  his  name  was  connected  with  '  abann  ',  the  Irish  word 
for  river.    This  character  comes  out  not  merely  in  the  incidents 

in  the  churches  dedicated  to  him  in  Scotland,  Forbes,  Calendars,  pp.  299  f.  He 
is  invoked  in  the  ancient  Irish  Litany  L  L.  373",  L  Br.  23'':  '  Tri  1.  fer  graid. 
firriglaich  [fir  riaglach  L  Br.]  cach  hae,  do  Gaedelaib  lotar  i  n-ailithri  i  n-oenscnud 
im  Abban  mac  hiii  Cormaic,'  i.  e.  (I  invoke^  the  thrice  fifty  men  in  orders  of  the 
Gaels  who  went  on  pilgriraage  in  one  company  (lit.  synod")  with  Abban.  This 
is  evidcntly  an  allusion  to  the  incidcnt  related  in  §  19  of  our  life.  Tlie  next 
invocation  is  :  '  Tri  1.  ailither  ailc  dollotar  la  Abban  in  h-Erinn  di  nieraib 
ROman  7  Letha,'  i.  c.  thc  thrice  fifty  other  pilgrims  who  camc  with  Abban  to 
Ireland,  of  tlie  men  of  thc  Romans  and  of  Latium  ( or  Annorica].  Colgan  would 
identify  these  with  the  hundrcd  and  fifty  companions  of  Abban  in  §34,  which  is 
less  certain. 

'  In  A.  S.  May  iii.  378,  the  life  of  St.  Carthach  or  Mochuda,  vvhich  is  eer- 
tainly  of  the  M  T  recension,  is  said  to  be  taken  '  cx  antiquo  MS.  Hibeniico'. 

2  See  notes  ad  loc. ;  and  cf.  Recves,  Adamn.  pp.  253  If. 

3  Sce  note  ad  loc. 

«  The  Bollandists  have  rightly  seen  this,  and  brackct  tliis  and  many  other 
passages  as  interpolations. 


THE    SEPARATE   LIVES  xxv 

related  (§§  12,  16-19,  24,  30,  52)  but  in  the  special  power  over  the 
vvaters  which  is  expressly  attributed  to  the  saint '.  There  are  also 
features  suggestive  of  a  solar  or  fire  god  (§§  14,  34)  and  of  the  patron 
of  vvild  animals  (§§  7,  31,  35),  these  last  being  not  impossibly  con- 
nected,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Greeic  Apollo.  The  Neptune  element  is, 
however,  niuch  the  more  prominent.  Where  the  mythological 
element  is  so  distinct,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  historical  element 
should  be  correspondinglj'  vague.  Thus  on  the  one  hand  Abban  is 
made  the  son  of  a  Cormac  king  of  Leinster,  who  is  probably  intended 
for  the  Cormac  son  of  Ailill,  vvho  died,  according  to  the  Four 
Masters,  in  435 ;  he  is  also  a  contemporary  of  St.  Patrick,  vvhose 
activity  in  Ireland  extended,  according  to  the  traditional  view,  from 
432  to  492  or  493',  and  a  nephew  and  pupil  of  Bishop  Ibar  (+500, 
50  r,  or  504).  On  the  other  hand  he  is  a  contemporary  of  Finnian  of 
Clonard  (+549),  Brendan  of  Clonfert^  (+577  or  583),  Columba  (+597), 
Gregory  the  Great  (+604),  Munnu  (+635)  and  Moling  (+697).  To  his 
biographers  these  dates  vvould  occasion  no  difficultj',  as  they  give 
him  a  life  of  310  or  317  years  (§  17  and  note).  It  is  probable  that 
he  belongs  to  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries,  and  that  his  life  has 
been  prolonged  backwards  by  local  patriotism,  the  process  being 
helped  by  silently  dropping  three  or  four  links  in  his  pedigree*. 

The  Bollandists  suggest  that  the  lives  of  tvvo  Abbans  have  been 
fused  together^  In  a  sense  this  is  true.  But  it  is  an  historical  and 
a  mythological  Abban  that  have  been  combined,  rather  than  tvvo 
distinct  historical  personages. 

There  is  an  Irish  life  of  Abban  occasionally  cited  as  Ir.  in 
the  notes.  It  is  found  in  two  MSS.,  viz.  R.I.A.  Stowe  MS.  No.  9, 
p.  205,  and  Brussels  MS.  2324  x  2340  f.  146,  both  of  which  were 
probably  taken  from  the  same  original  ^    This  contains  most  of  the 

'  See  the  notes  to  §§  17,  18.  Even  in  the  purely  homiletic  §  10  the  same 
character  is  maintained,  one  of  the  texts  apphed  to  Abban  being  Apoc.  xi.  5  : 
'  potestatem  habent  super  aquas.' 

-  The  Bollandists,  following  Colgan,  understand  this  to  refer  to  that  very 
shadowy  saint,  Sen-Patraic,  or  Old  Patrick.  who  is  commemorated  at  Aug.  24. 

'  There  is  appropriateness  in  making  Abban,  the  water-saint,  a  friend  of 
Brendan  the  navigator. 

*  See  above,  p.  xxiii,  note  9. 

^  One,  the  older  saint,  the  traveller,  the  founder  of  the  churches  in  Connaught 
and  Kerry,  buried  at  Killabban  ;  the  other,  the  later  saint,  founder  of  the 
churches  in  Meath,  Leinster,  and  Cork,  buried  at  Moyamey.  The  two  festivals 
are  explained  in  the  same  way.  A  third  person  has  also  been  mixed  up  accord- 
ing  to  their  view,  viz.  the  Irish  monk  Abbennus,  the  mythical  founder  of  the 
monastery  of  Abingdon,  Hist.  Monast.  de  Abingdon  (R.S.),  i.  2-3;  cf.  §§  13-16 
of  the  life. 

^  The  Stowe  MS.  was  written  in  1627  by  Domnall  0'Duinnin  (Dineen).  Of 
the  fifteen  lives  contained  in  it,  ten  are  found  also  in  the  Brussels  MS.  2324  x 
3340;   viz.  Abban,   Ailbe,  Bairre,  Carthach,   Cranatan,   Finan  of  Cenn  Eitig, 


xxvi  INTRODUCTION 

incidents  of  M  and  S,  but  is  nearer  to  the  latter',  though  it  is  not 
directly  dcrived  from  either.  It  is  probably  incomplete  at  the  end  •. 
Colgan  (A.  S.  p.  651")  says  that  he  had  two  Irish  lives  of  Abban. 
One  of  these  was  certainly  the  above-named  Brussels  MS.,  which 
is  one  of  0'CIery's  MSS.^  What  the  other  one  may  have  been  I  do 
not  know. 

Vita  Sancti  Aedi  episcopi  filii  Bricc '.  This  life  is  printed  here 
from  M,  f.  134'',  collated  with  T,  f  iio''.  Two  other  Latin  lives  of  Aed 
are  known,  one  in  S,  f.  108''  (C  S  cc.  333  fi".),  the  other  in  R'  f.  97", 
R^  f.  149'',  and  F.  p.  165.  The  life  vvas  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S. 
pp.  418  ft",  probably '^  from  M. 

Finnchua,  Fursa,  MoLiga,  and  Senan.  Of  these,  three,  viz.  Bairre,  Cranatan, 
Fursa,  are  definitely  stated  by  0'Clery  to  have  been  copied  from  a  vcllum  book 
belonging  to  Domnail  0'Duinnin  in  1629  ;  tvvo.  viz.  Finnchua  and  Senan,  are 
definitely  stated  to  have  been  taljen  from  other  MSS.  Inregard  to  the  remain- 
ing  five,  viz.  Abban.  Ailbe,  Carthach.  Finan.  and  Molaga,  noihing  is  stated  as  to 
thc  source  whence  they  were  derived  ;  but  probably  they  also  come  from  the 
Dincen  Velhim.  But  if  so,  one  or  othor,  or  both,  of  the  scribes  took  extra- 
ordinary  liberties  with  the  original.  For  not  only  do  the  two  MSS.  differ  con- 
stantly  in  vocabulary  and  phrasing.  even  while  preserving  the  same  sense  ;  but 
one  is  sometimes  shorter  and  sometimes  longer  than  the  other,  while  the  Brussels 
MS.  has  two  chapters  which  are  in  the  Latin  lives  but  are  omitted  in  Stowe. 
In  other  points,  too,  the  Brussels  MS.  is  nearer  to  the  Latin,  and  perhaps  rcpre- 
sents  a  revision  made  by  some  one  who  had  the  Latin  texts  before  him.  Where 
it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  two  MSS.  they  are  cited  as  Ir.  (Du.J 
and  Ir.  (Br.)  respectively.  They  differ  luither  in  the  divisions  of  the  chapters. 
OCurry  prints  c.  26  of  the  Stowe  text  in  Manners  and  Customs,  iii.  44,  but  does 
not  say  whence  he  got  it. 

*  Thus  it  contains  §  39,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  not  in  M. 

^  In  the  Stowe  MS.  is  a  note  by  a  later  hand  :  '  ni  fes  dam  an  i  crioch  a 
bhetha,'  i.  e.  1  don't  know  whether  this  is  the  end  of  his  life  ;  while  0'Clery 
notes  :  '  ni  fuil  Jiiiil  sunn  ar  bhethad  Abb.ain,'  i.  e.  there  is  no  finit  here  to  the 
life  of  Abban. 

'  A  life  of  Abban  stands  first  in  the  list  of  Irish  lives  of  saints  cited  above, 
p.  X  ad  calcem,  from  Rawl.  B.  487,  f.  74  v". 

*  Pedigrees  of  Aed  are  given  LL.  347'',  L  Br.  13',  BB.  215/,  Laud  610  f.  38"^, 
Rawl.  B.  486  f.  35'' ;  also  in  the  metrical  Naemsenclius,  BB.  230'' ;  he  is  de- 
scended  from  Niall  of  the  nine  hostages.  In  the  F^Iire  Nov.  10  he  is  called 
'don  rigraid',  of  the  princes,  which  agrees  with  this  royal  pedigree,  tliough  a 
gloss  on  thc  passage  interprets  thc  phrase  metaphorically  as  meaning  that  he 
was  '  de  sanctis  '.  Nov.  10  is  his  ordinary  date  in  Ihe  calendars  ;  thc  Martyro- 
logy  of  Tallaght  gives  him  at  Fcb.  28,  and  it  is  at  ihat  dale  that  Colgan  givcs 
his  life.  Unfortunatcly  thc  Martyrology  of  Tallaght  is  dcfective  for  November. 
so  we  cannot  tcll  whether  it  mentioned  him  again  at  Nov.  10.  Nov.  10  is  the 
date  of  his  death  in  our  life.  The  S  and  R  texts  do  not  give  the  day,  Ihough  by 
thcir  use  of  thc  vvord  'hodie'  in  describing  his  dcath,  thcyshow  that  thcy  were 
intended  to  be  uscd  as  homilieson  hisanniversary.  A  later  entry  in  Mart.  Don. 
at  Nov.  16  says.  '  do  rcir  a  bhethaidh  is  aniugh  ata  a  flieil,'  i.  e.  accordiiig  to  his 
life  his  festival  is  to-day.  The  statcmcnt  is  not  true  of  any  of  our  existing  lives. 
If  Nov.  10  is  his  death  day,  Fcb.  28  may  be  a  festival  of  dedication  or  translation. 

"  Colgan's  text  agrees  closely  with  M.  In  only  one  instance  havc  I  noticed 
that  it  agrees  with  T  against  M  (viz.  'sensit*  for  'sentit '  in  §  20;.  In  §  3 
Colgan  omits  the  word  'intcger'.  In  M  this  word  is  written  above  the  linc, 
and  might  be  ovcrlooked.     In  T  it  occurs  in  the  text. 


THE   SEPARATE    LIVES  xxvii 

The  three  recensions  M  T,  S,  and  R  are  often  very  close  together, 
shovving  that  they  all  come  from  some  coinmon  original.  And  S  is 
clearly  nearest  to  this  original,  vi^hich  R  and  M  T  have  edited 
independently.  R  is  of  the  two  much  nearer  to  the  common  source 
than  M  T  ;  there  are  the  usual  omissions  of  proper  names,  &c., 
and  the  usual  insertion  of  ecclesiastical  padding,  but  the  only  section 
of  the  S  text  which  is  omitted  wholly  by  R  is  §  i8.  The  M  T  editor  has 
gone  to  work  much  more  drastically.  He  omits  the  most  characteristic 
parts  of  S,  §§  II,  13;  and  the  whole  of  §§  19,21,22,33,36,39,42-4,49, 
51.  He  also  tones  down  passages  in  his  original  which  might  be 
likely  to  cause  difflculty  or  scandal '.  The  only  positive  addition 
madc  by  M  T  is  in  §  6  (consecration  of  Aed  as  bishop).  The  M  T  text 
is  therefore  of  little  independent  value,  but  is  interesting  forpurposes 
of  comparison  as  a  specimen  of  the  way  in  which  earlier  lives  were 
treated  by  later  scribes.  The  S  text  itself  shows  signs  of  compila- 
tion  from  various  sources.  Thus  the  story  of  Aed's  chariot  flying 
through  the  air  is  repeated  in  different  forms  no  less  than  four  times 
over  (§§  II,  19,  36,  42);  and  in  all  four  cases  the  story  is  retained 
by  R  and  omitted  by  M  T.     I  know  no  Irish  life  of  Aed  mac  Bricc. 

By  origin  Aed  belongs  to  Neath  or  the  southern  Hy  Neill ;  and 
that  is  the  main  sphere  of  his  activity  according  to  the  lives,  though 
we  find  him  also  in  his  mother's  country,  Munster,  and  in  Connaught 
and  Leinster.  Nothing,  on  the  other  hand,  is  said  to  explain  his 
connexion  with  Slieve  League  in  Donegal,  where  his  cult  still 
survives,  unless  the  incident  in  S  §  16  (much  altered  in  M  T  §  12), 
refers  to  that  district  -. 


'  Compare  5§  9.  n,  14  with  the  corresponding  parts  of  S  referred  to  or  cited 
in  the  notes.  In  the  last-named  section  the  curious  story  of  the  birth  of  Aed 
Slane  is  omitted,  which  the  S  text  has  transferred  bodily  from  the  secular 
literature  ;  cf  Zimnier  in  Giltt.  gel.  Anz.  1891,  p.  170.  In  the  original  story 
(LU.  52''  10  ff.  1  Finnian  of  Magh  Bile  is  associated  with  Aed.  [R  omits  the 
whole  section.]  It  was  this  expurgated  character  of  the  MT  recension  which 
commended  it  to  Colgan.  He  says  of  R  ,and  the  remark  is  a  fortiori  applicable 
to  S,  which  Colgan  also  refers  to  lower  down  i  that  it  contains  *  quaedam  .  .  . 
quae  plus  examinationis  postularent  quam  apportant  utilitatis'.  p.  422".  From 
the  fact  that  in  §  31  the  monastery  of  Inishboffin  in  Lough  Ree  is  spoken  of  as 
still  existing.  Colgan  argues  that  our  life  must  have  been  written  before  1089, 
when  that  monasterj'  was  destroyed  bj'  the  Danes. 

^  In  S  Aed  produces  a  fountain  in  order  to  wash  the  heads  of  three  decapi- 
tated  maidens.  I  have  suggested  in  the  Index  that  this  '  Fons  Puellarum'  may 
be  the  '  Tobur  na  m-ban-naomh'  or  Fount  of  the  female  saints,  at  the  foot  of 
Slieve  League.  For  the  '  tres  puellae '  of  the  S  R  text,  M  T  substitutes  '  tres 
uiri  '.  and  Colgan  in  his  note  on  the  pas.=age  says  that  near  Killare  in  West 
Meath,  Aed*s  principal  church,  was  a  fountain  called  'Tobur  na  b-fear',  or  the 
Men's  fountain.  We  seem  to  have  here  an  interesting  case  of  a  legend  being 
told  in  two  different  forms  to  account  for  two  different  place-names.  Colgan, 
p.  423*",  notices  his  connexion  with  Slieve  League.  and  a  seventeenth-century 
note  in  R-  says  :  '  colitur  ac  apud  Sliab  Lieghe  celebratur  diuinis  sacrificiis  et 


xxviii  INTRODUCTION 

Mythologically  he  seems  to  shovv  traces,  not  perhaps  very  distinct, 
of  a  fire  or  solar  deity'  or  hero  (cf.  §  6,  and  S  §§  11,19,  22, 36,  42),  and 
it  is  not  out  of  harmony  with  this  that  he  appears  as  a  tamer  of 
animals  (§§  9,  22 ;  S  §  14),  a  healer  of  disease '  (§  13),  and  a  releaser 
of  captives  (§§  23,  25,  38  ;  S  §§  37,  49). 

In  the  historical  framework  of  the  lives  there  is  not  much  to  take 
exception  to.  Aed  himself  is  said  to  have  died  in  589.  He  is  made 
contemporary  with  Ciaran  of  Cluain,  +549 ;  Becc  mac  De,  ^553  or 
558 ;  Molaisse  of  Devenish,  ^564  or  571  ;  Diarmait  mac  Cerbaill,  ^565 
or  572  ;  Columba  +597  ;  and  Cainnech,  ^599  or  600.  Less  probable 
is  his  association  in  the  S  R  text  with  Brigit,  who  died  according  to 
F  M  in  525  ;  and  with  Rioc,  if  the  latter  was,  as  the  R  text  of  §  31 
and  other  authorities  assert,  a  nephew  of  St  Patrick  ^. 

Vita  Sancti  Albei  archiepiscopi  de  Imlech  *.  This  hfe  is  here 
printed  for  the  first  time  from  T,  f.  132''  collated  with  M,  f.  135''  bis. 
T  is  taken  as  the  basis  rather  than  M,  because  M  is  unfortunately 
mutilated  by  the  loss  of  a  leaf,  f.  137,  in  the  middle.  Two  other 
Latin  lives  of  Ailbe  exist  ;  one  in  S,  f.  90"  (C  S  cc.  235  ff.) ;  the  other 
in  R'',  f.  130''.     In  R'  this  life  has  been  lost,  owing  to  the  mutilation  of 

multifariis  graciarum  actionibus  decimo  die  mensis  Nouembris.'  Colgan  also 
says  on  §  I  that  his  birth  stone  with  the  cavity  still  existed  in  his  daj'  in  the 
churchyard  of  Killare,  and  was  visited  with  great  devotion. 

'  This  raay  have  been  helped  by  his  name,  aed  being  one  of  the  Irish  words 
for  fire. 

'  On  this  incident  and  the  quaint  explicit  of  R*  founded  on  it  see  above,  p.  xx, 
note  2.  This  side  of  his  character,  though  not  prominent  in  the  lives,  comes 
out  in  other  traditions  about  him.  In  a  fragmentary  life  of  Brigit  in  Rawl.  B.  512 
he  is  callcd  *  suiliag',  i.  e.  professor-Ieech,  or  mcdical  expert  (f.  33'^],  and  Brigit 
goes  to  him  to  cuie  her  headache.  And  Mi'.  Stokes,  in  a  note  on  the  parallel 
passage  in  thc  Lismore  Life  of  Brigit,  points  out  that  this  conception  of  him  is 
old,  for  in  a  charm  printed  by  Mone  from  an  eighth-century  MS.  ^Hj'mni  Mcdii 
Aeui,  iii.  181,  182)  the  following  lines  occur  :  — 

Aido  mech  Prich  beniuola  posco  pura  precamina, 
Ut  refrigerat  (sic)  flumina  mei  capitis  calida. 
Curat  capui  cum  renibus,  &c. 

And  again  :  'meum  caput  ut  hberat.'  (Lismore  Lives,  p.  324;  cf.  R.  C. 
xxi.  267  8.) 

'  Dr.  Todd,  however,  regards  this  relationship  as  a  later  fiction,  basing  his 
argument  largely  on  thc  chronology  of  the  lives  of  our  saint,  Liber  Hymnorum, 
pp.  114-16.  The  name  Acd  is  freguently  anglicized  into  Hugh,  and  the  trans- 
lator  of  the  Annals  of  Clonmacnois  notices  that  some  courageous  chronologers 
idcntified  our  saint  with  .St.  Hugh  of  Lincoln,  p.  91.  An  account  of  Aed's 
wouder-working  b.ichall  enclosed  in  a  metal  shrine  is  in  Mart.  Don.  p.  xli. 

'  Tliere  are  pedigrces  of  Ailbe  in  LL.  ^^g'^,  L  Br.  16°,  BB.  219"  ;  cf  ib.  232" 
ad  calccm,  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  s^"",  Laud  610  f.  38'',  Fel."  p.  206.  Ilis  day  in  the 
calendars  is  Scpt.  12,  but  Mart.  Tall.  gives  him  also  at  Sept.  10.  As  Mart.  Don. 
notes,  he  is  one  of  the  saints  celcl>tated  in  Cuimin  of  Connor's  poem  on  thc 
saints  of  Ireland,  I.  61  of  Stokes'  eciition,  Z.  C.  P.  i.  59  fT.  And.  as  Mart.  Don. 
also  notcs,  thcrc  is  a  metrical  rule  attributcd  to  him  beginning  'Abairdain  fri 
mac  Sarain  ',  i.  e.  tcll  for  mc  to  the  son  of  Saran  (cf.  also  Mart.  Don.  Mar.  15). 
This  has  bccn  printed  from  four  MSS.  by  Mr.  Joseph  0'NeiII,  ^riu,  iii.  92  fT. 


TIIE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xxix 

that  MS.  at  the  cnd '.  The  Bollandists  (A.  S.  Scpt.  iv.  26  ff.)  give 
an  historical  criticism  of  Ailbe's  liCe  ;  but  they  do  not  print  any  of  the 
above  texts '. 

The  three  recensions  M  T,  S,  R  all  clearly  go  back  to  a  common 
original.  S  is  certainly  nearest  to  that  original,  vvhich  M  T  and  R 
have  independently  edited,  R  being  of  the  two  much  thc  nearer  to  S. 
R,  however,  omits  many  interesting  details,  names  of  places  and 
persons,  and  also  whole  sections  (S  §§  35,  37,  40,  44,  50).  R  also 
makes  additions  to  the  text  of  S,  but  they  are  usually  of  the  nature  of 
ecclesiastical  padding',  scriptural  parallels,  and  the  like,  and  seldom 
increase  our  knowledge.  M  T  also  omits  whole  sections  of  S  (§§  23, 
26,  28,  38,  41,  44),  and  it  should  be  noted  that,  except  in  one  instance'', 
these  omissions  do  not  coincide  with  those  of  R.  M  T  also  omits 
many  interesting  points  in  S  " ;  and  both  of  the  later  recensions  show 
a  tendency  to  tone  down  or  omit  points  in  their  original  which  were 
likcly  to  give  offence  or  not  to  be  understood  ".  But  M  T,  like  R,  also 
makes  additions  of  its  own ',  somctimes  of  doubtful  value. 


'  This  life  a!so  exists  in  F,  p.  iii,  and  among  Ware's  Transcripts  (copied, 
like  F,  rrom  R»\  Cod.  Clar.  39  (  =  MS.  Add.  4788)  f.  72. 

^  They  knew  of  the  three  recensions  mentioned  above,  but  say  of  all  three  : 
*  non  sunt  nisi  quaedam  figmentorum  farrago,  quae  risum  pariter  ac  stomachum 
lectori  moueant.'  They  cite  a  letter  from  Hugh  Ward  saying  :  '  eius  vitara 
habeo  ex  duobus  diuersis  codicibus  Hibernicis  et  aliis  duobus  Latinis.  .  .  .  Vita 
quam  fecit  latinam  D.  Osullevanus  ex  codice  comitis  de  Birhaven  etiam  est  penes 
me.'  The  two  Latin  codices  contained  probably  two  out  of  our  three  lives. 
Whether  the  two  Irish  codices  contained  two  different  lives,  or  only  tvvo  copies 
of  the  same  Hfe  ;  whether  either  or  both  of  these  were  identical  with  the  life 
which  0'SuIIivan  translated  into  Latin,  and  with  the  Irish  life  mentioned  below, 
I  do  not  know.  The  BoIIandists  note  that  a  mass  for  St.  Ailbe'3  day  occurs  in 
the  Missal  of  Clement  XII  printed  at  Paris  1734. 

^  A  curlous  specimen  is  given  in  the  notes  to  §  47. 

*  The  omission  of  the  story  of  Conchobar  and  the  Crucifixion,  S  §  3.  But  as 
this  involves  an  anachronism  of  some  four  centuries,  this  instance  may  perhaps 
be  refiarded  as  an  interpolation  by  S  rather  than  as  an  omission  by  M  T  and  R. 

^  Apart  from  smaller  omissions,  such  as  proper  names,  compare  §§  32,  34, 
38,  42  with  S  §§  37,  40,  46,  50.  In  §  7  two  separate  miracles  of  S  R  (S  §§  7,  8) 
are  combined  into  a  single  narrative. 

^  Thus  in  §  4  both  tone  down  the  skinless  coracle  of  S  into  a  ship  in  bad 
repair ;  in  §  i8  M  T  inserts  words  making  the  sin  of  the  couple  against  the  saint 
detraction  ;  in  S  §  20  it  is  evidently  a  violation  of  the  se.x  taboo.  Compare  also 
§§  14,  19,  31  [where  the  obscure  Irish  word  diberc  is  omitted  also  by  R],  35, 
with  S  §§  16,  21,  36,  42.  Note  also  in  §  38  (=  S  §  46)  how  anxious  R  is  to 
explain  that  the  'inebriation'  caused  by  the  sainfs  breath  was  a  spiritual 
inebriation. 

'  Compare  e.  g.  §§  9,  13,  21,  22,  33  with  S  §§  10.  14,  15,  25,  29,  39.  Both 
in  M  T  and  R  Ihere  is  a  tendency  to  emphasize  the  inlluence  of  Rome  which  is 
less  prominent  in  S  ;  see  notes  to  §§  2,  22.  In  §  37  the  omission  of  the  reason 
of  the  niission  sent  by  Ailbe  to  Rome,  viz.  '  ut  nouum  ordinem  celebrandi  a  Roma 
deducerent',  may  be  due  to  a  wish  to  disguise  the  implication  that  the  Liturgy 
used  by  Ailbe  had  till  then  been  non-Roman. 


XXX  INTRODUCTION 

The  only  Irish  life  of  Ailbe  known  to  me  isone  contained  in  R.I.A. 
Stowe  MSS.  No.  9,  pp.  g^ff.,  and  Brussels  MS.  2324-40^  139  ff.  (an 
0'Clery  MS.),  both  seventeenth-century  transcripts  of  the  same  (lost) 
original.  This  is  cited  occasionally  in  the  notes  as  Ir.  The  refer- 
ences  are  to  the  pages  of  the  Stowe  MS. 

As  to  the  relation  of  Ir.  to  the  Latin  lives  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
It  is  an  abbreviated  translation  of  the  M  T  recension.  The  account 
of  Ailbe"s  birth  differssomewhat  from  §  i  of  M  T,  but  apart  from  this 
it  differs  as  a  rule  ^  only  by  abbreviation  and  omission  '. 

M}'thoIogicalIy  Ailbe  seems  to  have  attracted  to  himself  some  of 
the  characteristics  of  a  water  deitj'  (§§  3,  4,  16,  20,  27,  45),  and  some 
of  those  of  a  fire  or  solar  deity  (§§  6,  7,  10,  24,  40).  His  association 
with  the  wolves  (§§  i,  44)  is  quite  in  harmony  with  the  latter 
aspect '. 

Geographically  Ailbe  belongs  both  byorigin  and  work  to  Munster*, 
though  we  find  him  occasionally  in  Leinster  (§§  27,  28),  Connaught, 
(§§  35>  36)  and  (on  landing  in  Ireland  from  the  Continent)  in  Ulster 
(§§  20,  21). 

In  the  case  of  Ailbe,  as  in  the  case  of  one  or  two  othcr  saints,  we 
have  to  consider  the  obscure  question  of  pre-Patrician  Christianity  in 
Ireland  ^ ;  for  Ailbe  is  represented  as  active  in  the  evangelization 
of  Ireland  before  the  advent  of  St.  Patrick  (§  22).  The  chronology 
as  it  stands  is  frankly  impossible.  Three  dates  are  given  in  the 
Annals  for  Ailbe's  death,  527,  534,  542.  Even  if  we  take  the  earliest 
of  these,  it  is  impossible  that  a  man  who  died  in  527  could  have  been 
actively  preaching  in  Ireland  for  some  time  prior  to  432  '.  We  have 
therefore  to  consider  whether  Ailbe  is  really  an  early  saint  whose 
life  has  been  unduly  prolonged  forwards,  perhaps  in  order  to  bring 
him  up  to  the  Celtic  standard  of  longevity  ;  or  whether  he  is  a  later 
saint  whose  life  has  been  unduly  prolonged  backwards.  I  am 
inclined   to   think,    with    the    Bollandists,   that   the    latter    is    more 

'   It  diffcrs  somewhat  in  §  30 

2  It  oniits  altogether  §§  26,  36,  43,  45.  A  rendering  cited  in  the  notes  to  5  30 
shows  that  tlie  translalor  mistook  tlie  liniim  of  his  original  for  lignuni.  The 
translation  mnst  be  late,  as  is  proved  by  the  word  siolla  =  cella  §  28. 

'  From  this  point  of  vicw  it  is  intcrcsting  to  notc  that  Ailbe  is  the  name  of 
Macdath6's  famous  hoimd,  Ir.  T  i.  96  ;  Hib.  Min.  p.  41  ;  and  ihat  thc  father 
of  our  Ailbe  in  the  pedigrees  is  Olchii  [gen.  Olchon],  thc  great  hound,  or  wolf. 

*  He  appears  as  thc  patron  saint  of  Munster  in  some  verscs  LL.  367  lower 
margin. 

^  The  mcntion  in  §5  2,  3.  an<l  notes,  of  British  Christian  slaves,  no  doubt 
captivcs  like  Patrick  himself,  is  extremcly  intcresting  as  indicating  one  way  in 
which  thc  knowledge  of  Christianity  may  have  been  spread  in  Ircland. 

^  In  view  of  this  initial  impossibility  it  scems  hardly  worth  whilc  to  analyse 
minutcly  thc  chronolopy  of  the  vaiious  pcrsons  with  whom  Ailbc  is  s.iid  to  have 
come  inlo  relations.  Ilerc  again  the  Bollandists  call  in  thc  shadowy  Scn-Patraic 
to  bridge  the  chronological  chasm. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xxxi 

probable,  and  that  he  really  belongs  to  the  end  of  the  fifth  and  the 
beginning  of  the  sixth  centuries.  The  carrying  back  of  his  activity 
inay  be  due  to  one  of  tvvo  contradictory  motives.  It  may  be  the 
work  of  local  patriotism  and  local  struggles  for  ecclesiastical  indepen- 
dence,  anxious  to  givc  the  local  saint  priority  over  the  national 
apostle  ;  but  it  may  also  be  due  to  the  influence  of  Armagh,  anxious 
to  show  that  even  thc  niost  important  provincial  saints  had  been 
obliged  to  accept  their  commissions  from  St.  Patrick.  The  latter 
view  seems  to  me  more  probable ' ;  but  both  motives  may  have 
contributed. 

The  mysterious  voj'age  of  Ailbe  to  thc  Land  of  Promise  (§  46)  will 
be  discussed  later'-. 

Vita  Sancti  Barri  Episcopi  Corcagie^.  This  life  is  here  printed 
from  M,  f  132"^  collated  with  T,  f  109".  Another  life  is  contained  in 
R',  f.  118'',  R^,  f.  137'',  and  F,  p.  124.  The  latter  covers  much  the 
same  ground  as  the  former,  but  is  on  the  whole  later  and  less 
original.  It  contains,  however,  one  section,  given  in  the  notes  to  §  9, 
which  is  not  in  M  T.  This  is  the  famous  story  how  Bairre  rode 
across  from  Britain  to  Ireland  on  a  horse  lent  him  by  St.  David  *. 
It  is  a  question  whether  this  incident  was  inserted  by  R  from 
a  different  source,  or  whether  it  was  omitted  by  M  T  '  causa  euitandi 
scandali '.  The  former  is  more  probable.  This  incident  shows  that 
Bairre  has  annexed  some  of  the  attributes  of  a  marine  deity.  His 
full  name,  Findbarr  or  Barrfind ",  '  vvhite-crest,'  points  in  the  same 

'  See  especially  §  22  and  notes.  '  Infra,  p.  clxxxiii. 

^  There  are  pedigrees  of  Bairre  in  LL.  352.^,  L  Br.  20",  BB.  223*^  ^cf.  ib.  231"), 
Ravvl.  B.  502  f.  51  v",  Laud  610  fl.  38'',  40''.  His  day  is  Sept.  25,  at  vvhich  date 
the  Mart.  Don.  cites  11.  73-6  of  Cuimin  of  Connor"s  poem  on  the  saints  of  Ireland 
in  vvhich  he  is  celebrated.  It  also  cites  from  LL  370  the  table  of  paraliel  saints 
in  which  he  is  equatcd  vvith  '  Augustinus  episcopus  Anglorum  ' ;  and  the  Litany, 
ib.  373'',  in  which  the  very  first  invocation  is  :  '  secht  noeb  epscoip  dec  ar  secht 
celaib  di  aes  raith  in  chomded  i  Corcaig  m6ir  la  Barri  7  Nessan,'  i.  e.  the 
seventeen  holy  bishops  and  seven  hundred  men  of  the  grace  of  the  Lord  at 
Cork  vvith  Bairre  and  Nessan.  The  Mart.  raliaght,  LL.  363"  gives  him  an 
alternative  date  at  Sept  26,  whilo  in  the  Islc  of  Barra  his  festival  was  held  on 
the  27th,  Martin  Westcrn  Isles,  p.  99:  cf.  the  very  curious  account,  ib.  p.  92. 
His  cult  vvas  vvidely  diffused  in  Scotland,  and  the  Scotch  Hagiologists  have 
bodily  annexed  him,  making  liim  born  and  die  in  Caithness,  and  bishop  of  that 
district,  Forbes,  Calendars,  pp.  134,  240,  275.  The  Bollandists  (u.  s.^  make  the 
Scottisli  saint  a  different  person.  The  church  of  Fowey  in  Cornwall  is  dedi- 
cated  to  him.  The  Gospel  of  Bairre  is  mentioned  as  a  relic  GG.  p.  90.  His 
brother,  Modichu,  figures  in  a  story  in  Three  Fragments,  pp.  42-4.  The 
Bollandists  note  that  there  is  a  mass  for  our  saint  in  the  Paris  Missal  of  1734. 

'  This  incident  is  also  in  David's  life,  C.  B.  S.  pp  132-3,  according  to  which 
Bairre,  on  his  way  acrcss,  met  with  Brendan  on  his  vvhale.  In  Mart.  Don.  Jan.  2 
Bairre,  in  a  ship,  meets  with  Scuithin  walking  on  the  vvaves  ;  cf.  Bi-an,  i.  17  ff. 

'  This  is  the  form  given  in  tlie  Mart.  Tall.  u.  s.  Barrfind  is  the  name  of 
another  marine  saint  who  has  given  his  name  to  Kilbarron  (i.  e.  Cell  Bairrfind) 
near  Ballyshannon,  the  Barrinthus  of  the  Nauigatio  Brendani,  whose  maritime 
e.^cploits  stimulated  the  imagination  of  Brendan. 


xxxii  INTRODUCTION 

direction,  suggesting  the  white  tops  of  the  brcakers'.  Though  by 
descent  a  Connaught  man,  his  activity  seems  to  be  almost  entirely 
limited  to  Munster. 

The  Bollandists  (A.S.  Sept.  vii.  142 ff.)  had  three  Hves  of  this 
Saint :  one, '  ex  MS.  Hugonis  Varaei  [?  Vardaei,  Hugh  VVard]  Minoritae 
Hiberni ' ;  another  copied  by  Bernard  Mede  from  a  Corlc  Lectionary ; 
the  third  found  among  Henry  Fitzsimon's  papers.  Ward's  text  may 
have  been  either  M  or  R ;  the  other  two,  of  which  the  incipits  are 
given,  I  have  not  met  with.  The  Boilandists  considered  them  all  too 
fabulous  to  be  printed.  The  present  edition  is  not  limited  by  such 
considerations.  Both  the  M  T  and  the  R  text  were  printed  by 
R.  Caulfield  in  1864  (not  always  quite  accurately  -)  under  the  title 
'  Life  of  St.  Fin  Barre  '. 

There  is  an  Irish  life  of  Bairre  contained  in  the  Book  of  Fermoy 
f.  59*^  (imperfect) ;  in  Stowe  MS.  No.  9,  f.  i  (much  injured  at  the 
beginning);  and  in  Brussels  MS.  2324  x  2340  f.  122'.  This  covers 
much  the  same  ground  as  the  Latin  lives,  but  contains  verj'  intercsting 
topographical  details.  It  is  cited  in  the  critical  notes  as  Ir.  There  is 
also  a  later  Irish  life,  an  expanded  and  slightly  difierent  recension, 
contained  in  various  eighteenth  and  nineteenth-century  MSS.* 

The  chronological  data  contained  in  the  Latin  lives  are  slight. 
No  date  is  given  in  the  Annals  for  St.  Bairre  himself.  He  is  made 
a  younger  contemporary  of  Brendan  "'  (^577  or  583)  ;  he  is  brought 
into  relation  with  St.  David,  for  whose  death  the  traditional  date 
is6oi,  though  Mr.  E.  W.  B.  Nicholson  would  put  it  back  to  544"; 
with  St.  Gregory  (^604) ;  while  Fursa  (.'  ^649)  sur\'ived  him.  The 
Liber  of  §  13  may  be  Liber  of  Aghaboe  who  died  in  619'.  These 
indications  seem  to  point  to  the  second  half  of  the  sixth  century  as 
the  period  of  Bairre's  floruit. 


'  'Mane'  and  'hair'  are  frequent  kennings  in  Irish  poetry  for  the  crest  and 
spray  of  a  wave,  K.  Meyer,  Bran,  i.  8,  note  3. 

2  Some  of  the  mistakes  arc  due  to  tiie  editor*s  following  the  text  of  R^ 
instead  of  the  more  origina!  text  of  R'.  Caulfield's  estimate  of  the  date  of  M  T, 
c.  1200,  is  extravagantly  early. 

'  These  last  two  MSS.  are  cited  in  the  notes  as  Du.  and  Br.  respectively. 
Here  again  they  dilTer  a  good  deal,  though  copied  from  the  same  original  ;  see 
abore,  pp.  xxv  f.,  xxx.  CoIgan's  quotation  in  tlie  noticc  of  Talmach  at  March  14 
is  takcn  from  c.  10  of  the  Brussels  copy  ;  which  chapter  is  also  cited,  Mart.  Don. 
Sept.  24. 

*  e.  g.  R.  I.  A.  Hodges  and  Smith,  No.  la,  p.  506;  King's  Inns,  Dublin, 
No.  19. 

'  A  quatrain  printed  in  Fel.'  p.  132  associates  closely  together  Bairre, 
Brendan,  and  Cainnech. 

«  Z.  C.  P   vi.  451. 

■^  Moling,  suggested  in  one  place  on  the  margin  of  R'  as  an  alternative 
reading  for  Eoling  in  §  14,  and  adoptcd  into  the  text  of  R^,  is  chronologically 
inadmissible,  as  he  survivcd  tiU  697. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xxxiii 

Vita  Sancti  Berachi  abbatis  de  Cluain  Coirpthe '.  This  life  is 
printed  froin  R'  f.  58',  coUated  with  R-  f.  191''  -,  and  compared  with 
F,  p.  275.  It  was  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  340  ff. ;  evidently  froin 
F'.  The  Bollandists  reprintcd  it  from  Colgan  without  correction, 
A.  S.  Feb.  ii.  832  ff. 

This  is  the  only  Latin  life  of  Berach  that  I  know  of.  Like  almost 
all  the  lives  in  R  it  represents  a  late  recension.  This  is  shown 
especially  by  the  way  in  which  the  terms  Scoti,  Scotica  gens,  Scotia, 
are  used  to  signify  the  Scots  and  Scotland  in  the  modern  sense, 
instead  of  Ireland  and  the  Irish,  as  in  ancient  authorities. 

There  is  an  Irish  life  of  Berach*  in  the  Brussels  MS.  4190  x  4200  f. 
71,  which  is  much  fuller  and  more  original  than  this  degenerate 
Latin  text  of  R.  Colgan  has  given  some  extracts  from  it  translated 
into  Latin  as  an  appendix  to  his  edition.  And  this  also  is  reprinted 
by  the  Bollandists,  u.  s.  pp.  838-9.  The  Irish  life  is  occasionally  cited 
in  the  critical  notes  of  the  present  edition  under  the  symbol  Br. 

The  historical  data  of  the  life  are  slight.  The  chroniclers  do  not 
give  us  any  date  for  Berach  himself.  From  the  persons  with  whom 
he  is  brought  into  contact  he  would  seem  to  have  lived  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  sixth,  and  the  earlier  part  of  the  seventh,  century.  These 
are  Aedh  mac  Brenainn,  chief  of  Teffia  +589  or  595 ;  Aedan  mac 
Gabrain,  king  of  the  Dabriadic  Scots  t6o6;  and  (in  the  Irish  life) 
Aedh,  son  of  Eochaid  Tirmcarna,  king  of  Connaught  ^577.  The 
Finnian  and  Ultan  of  §  19  are  identified  by  Colgan  with  Finnian  of 
Movilla  +  579,  and  Ultan  of  Ardbrackan  +  657  or  663.  The  former 
identification  is  quite  possible  ;  the  latter  seems  unlikely.  Berach  is 
further  made  a  pupil  of  Coemgen"  of  Glendalough,  who  died  in  618 

•  There  are  pedigrees  of  Berach  in  LL.  347'',  LBr.  14'' ;  these  make  him  son 
of  Amargen,  son  of  Neman  ;  in  LL.  373^*  53  he  is  called  son  of  Nemall,  son  of 
Nemangen  ;  in  Fel.^  p.  74  son  of  Nemnann  son  of  Nemangen ;  in  the  Irish  life, 
c.  2.  son  of  Nemhnall  i'or  Nemhuall)  son  of  Nemargen,  and  so  on  the  margin 
of  R^  ;  in  Rawl.  B.  486  f.  39"  he  is  son  of  Nemargen  ;  while  Mart.  Don.,  treating 
of  his  sister  Midabair,  calls  them  children  of  Nemnann.  son  cf  Amargen.  His 
day  in  all  authorities  seems  to  be  Feb.  15.  Colgan  would  identify  him  with 
the  Berachus,  a  monk  of  Columba  mentioned  in  Adamnan's  life,  i.  19.  Reeves 
ad  loc.  thinks  the  evidence  very  insufficient,  and  so,  no  doubt,  it  is  ;  but  the 
identification  is  quite  possible,  and  he  has  given  his  name  to  Kilberry  in  Soutli 
Knapdale,  Argyllshire  ;  Forbes,  Calendars,  pp.  278-9. 

2  In  R-  there  is  ihere  only";  a  little  miniature  of  the  saint.  This  confirms  the 
view  of  the  connexion  of  R-  with  Saints'  Island  in  Lough  Ree.  Cluain  Coirpthe, 
novv  Kilbarry  [Cell  Beraigh]  in  the  parish  of  Termonbarry  [Termon  Beraigh], 
is  only  about  thirteen  English  miles  from  Saints'  Island,  and  the  scribe  may 
have  wished  to  do  honour  to  the  local  saint. 

^  Cf.  notes  to  §§  3,  7,  g,  12.  19,  25. 

'  The  notice  of  Berach  in  Mart.  Pon.  is  evidently  taken  from  this. 

^  The  Mochoem  associated  with  Berach  in  a  quatrain  printed  in  Fel.-  p.  74  is 
no  doubt  intended  for  Coemgen.  So  the  original  name  of  the  saint  commonly 
known  as  Mochoemoc  was  Coemgen  ;  see  his  life  §  6,  infra  ii.  166. 


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

or  622.     The  introduction  of  St.  Samthann  vvho  did  not  die  till  739 
must  in  any  case  be  a  mistake. 

The  life  does  not  seem  to  have  any  sahent  mythological  signi- 
ficance. 

Berach  seems  to  be  ahnost  entirely  a  Connaught  saint '. 

Vita  Sancti  Boecii  episcopi  de  Mainistir  Buite'.  This  hfe  is 
here  printed  for  the  first  time*  from  the  only  vellum  MS.,  R-  f.  154''. 
It  is  obviously  incomplete  at  the  end,  although  there  is  no  mutilation 
of  the  MS.  The  explanation  of  this  fact  has  been  given  in  Part  I  *. 
The  obvious  blunders  of  R-  have  been  corrected,  as  far  as  possible 
by  conjecture,  there  being  no  independent  evidence  for  the  text. 
Two  transcripts  of  this  life,  both  made  from  R',  exist ;  one  in  F, 
p.  178,  the  other  among  Sir  James  Ware's  papers  in  the  British  " 
Museum,  Cod.  Clar.  39  {=  Add.  4788),  f.  73  v»'.  Mutilated  as  the 
life  is,  enough  remains  to  show  that  it  is  a  combination  of  two  lives 
or  parts  of  two  lives.  The  first  ends  at  §  18  with  the  death  of  Buite 
on  Dec.  7,  and  his  prophecy  of  the  future  greatness  of  Columba, 
born  on  that  same  day.  With  §  19  begins  an  account  of  '  miracula 
Boecii  in  puericia',  what  would  be  called  in  the  secular  literature 
of  Ireland  his  '  macgnimartha',  or  youthful  exploits".     His  maturer 

'  Col.  Wood-Martin  notes  a  well  sacred  to  him  in  Dublin  Bay,  Traces  of 
Elder  Faiths,  ii.  98. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Buite  in  LL.  351^,  LBr.  19",  BB.  221'',  Rawl.  B. 
502  f.  51P,  Laud  610  ff.  38'',  42",  FeP  p.  256.  His  day  in  the  Calendars  is 
Dec.  7.  The  Mart.  Tall.  which  is  defective  for  Dec.  gives  him  a  festival  at 
May  16  ;  and  the  notes  to  the  Felire  for  that  day  give  as  the  reason  for  this 
'quia  in  hoc  die  suscitauit  Maelcaich  transiens  amnem  siccis  pedibus',  Fel.^ 
p.  132,  a  reference  to  tlie  incident  narrated  §  16,  cf.  §  28.  Again  at  Dec.  11 
the  notes  to  the  FeHre  (ed.- p.  258)  and  a  later  hand  in  the  Mart.  Don.  give 
a  festival  of  the  '  Eleuatio  Boeti ',  which  commemorates  the  incident  related 
in  §  17  ^Reeves'  cxplanation  in  Mart.  Don.  is  quite  wrong).  The  Mart.  Don. 
cites  from  LL.  370"  the  table  of  parallel  sainfs  in  which  Boetius  is  equated  with 
'  Beda  sapiens'.  It  also  copies  the  Felire  gloss  on  his  name  :  *  Buite  .i.  beo, 
no  buite  .i.  teine,'  i.  e.  living,  OT  fiie.  He  is  brought  into  curious  relation  with 
the  Ulster  cycle  of  traditions.  The  missile  ball  containing  the  brain  of  Mcsgegra, 
which  caused  the  death  of  Conchobar,  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  to  him  ;  he 
used  it  as  his  pillow  in  life,  and  it  lay  upon  his  grave  after  his  death  ;  '7  is 
nemedach  gach  aen  fora  racha  incind  Miscegra  ic  dol  fria  bas,  7  ata  briathar 
A  brcth  fodcs  a  Lagnib,  7  fortamlus  doib  iarsin,'  i.  e.  and  cvery  onc  is  sure  of 
heaven  on  whom  tiie  brain  of  Mesgegra  is  placed  at  the  time  of  his  dcath,  and 
thcre  is  a  prophccy  that  it  will  be  carried  south  into  Leinster,  and  will  give 
them  predominance,  Meyer,  Oiitc.  p.  10,  cf  ib  pp.  18-20;  M.  and  C.  ii.  107-8. 

^  §§  4-6  were  printed  by  Skene,  Chronicles  of  the  Picts  and  Scots, 
pp.  410-11. 

*  Above,  p.  xviii. 

^  Ware  copics  the  mistakes  of  R",  and  in  addition  has  a  lacuna  in  §  27, 
which  sliows  that  he  could  not  read  his  original ;  F  has  corrccted  the  majority 
of  R'"s  crrors  quitc  salisfactorily.  There  seems  to  be  anothcr  copy  in  Brussels 
MS.  No.  8967  '  cx  MS.  Hugonis  Vardaei '.  As  it  has  the  same  defect  as  R^,  it 
is  doublless  merely  derivcd  from  it. 

'  This  class  of  tale  is  rcprescnted  in  both  thc  great  Irish  cpic  cycles ;  thus 


THE   SEPARATE    LIVES  xxxv 

acts  seem  to  begin  again  with  §  23.  As  to  the  rclation  betvvcen  the 
two  parts,  §  28  forms  a  sequel  and  expressly  refers  to  an  incident 
in  the  former  part  of  §  16.  Section  30  (the  sojourn  in  the  monastery 
of  St.  Tiiianus  in  '  Italy ')  is  a  doublet  of  §  4  in  the  earher  part.  But 
this  is  the  only  point  in  which  the  two  parts,  as  we  have  ihem, 
overlap. 

The  question  of  this  visit  to  St.  Tilianus  is  a  very  interesting  one. 
It  has  been  pointed  out  very  acutely  by  Mr.  Nicholson,  the  librarian 
of  the  Bodleian,  that  the  'Italia'  of  this  story  is  almost  certainly 
a  mistaice  for  Walia,  and  that  the  Tilianus  is  none  other  than  the 
famous  Teilo  of  Llandaff,  whose  name  is  often  written  Telianus 
in  the  book  of  Llandaff '.  He  a!so  points  out  that  a  corrupt  reading 
in  the  life  of  St.  David  in  Acta  Sanctorum,  March  i,  points  to  a  place 
in  the  ncighbourhood  of  St.  David's  called  '  Llanerch  Beudy'  which 
he  would  interpret  as  the  plain  (or  clearing)  of  Boethius.  This  name 
has  not  survived,  but  there  is  close  to  St.  David's  a  Caer  Bwdy 
which  he  would  similarly  explain  as  Castrum  Boetii ;  and  St.  Teilo 
was  connected  with  St.  David's  as  vvell  as  with  Llandaff.  A  certain 
confirmation  is  given  to  this  hj^pothesis  by  the  statement  of  the  life 
(§§  30,  31  )>  ''lat  Boetius,  while  under  St.  Tilian,  had  the  care  of  bees, 
for  the  Irish  tradition  is  that  bces  were  introduced  into  Ireland  from 
Wales^  After  this  sojourn  with  'Tilianus'  the  former  part  of  the 
life  takes  him  to  the  '  fines  Pictorum",  where  he  is  said  to  have 
raised  the  king  Nechtan  from  the  dead,  and  to  have  received  from 

we  have  '  Macgnimartha  Conchulaind ',  or  'Ciichulainn's  youthful  feats ',  a 
section  of  the  chief  epic  '  Tain  bd  Cuailgne ',  and  also  '  Macgnimartha  Find  " ; 
cf.  D'Arbois,  Catalogue,  p.  174. 

'  Z.  C.  P.  vi.  447  ff.  A  marginal  note  in  F  suggests  a  different  solution  : 
'  Lege  Titi.ini,  qui  fuit  episcopus  Brixiensis'  i,Brescia>;  and  the  heading  of 
§  30  is  actually  altered  in  accordance  with  this  suggestion. 

*  By  St.  Modomnoc  of  Tibraghny;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  133-4;  Fel.'  pp.  74-5,  112, 
465;  Colgan.  A.  S.  p.  147''.  Solinus  says  of  the  Irish;  '  apes  non  habent,' 
M.  H.  B.  p.  x*.  I  cannot.  however,  follow  Mr.  Nicholson  in  bringing  the 
Pictish  king  down  to  South  Walcs,  and  regard  that  part  of  the  story  as  belonging 
to  the  northern  castrum  Boetii,  Carbuddo  or  Kirkbuddo  in  Forfarshire. 

*  I  regard  Mr.  Nichol5on's  conjecture  as  doing  away  with  Boetius'  continental 
sojourn  altogether  ;  nor  can  I  regard  the  'Germania'  of  §  4  as  any  more 
authentic  than  the  '  Italia'.  It  may  be  due  to  some  ignorant  scribe  who  thought 
that  •  germani  fratres'  meant  '  brothers  from  Germany '.  Or  it  may  be  the 
corruption  of  some  other  place-name.  Mr.  Nicholson  in  a  postscript  suggests 
that  we  should  read  '  uiri  de  sancti  Germani  monasterio  Ix,  quorum  decem 
fuerunt  [sancti]  Germani  fratres,  et  decem  uirgines  ',  i.  e.  monks  and  nuns  from 
LIancar\'an,  the  foundation  of  which  was  attributed  to  St.  Germanus.  This  is 
certainly  ingenious,  and  niay  be  right.  These  companions  of  Buite  are  invoked 
in  the  ancient  litany  cited  more  than  once  already,  LL,  ■^ij,'  49  :  '  Tri  1  fir  ailithir 
dar  muir  la  Buti  n-epscop,  7  x.  nacboga  corrath  De,'  i.  e.  the  thrice  fifty  true 
pilgrims  across  the  sea  with  Bishop  Buite,  and  ten  holy  virgins  with  tiie  grace 
of  God.  Here  the  number  of  the  virgins  agrees  with  the  life,  but  the  number 
of  ihe  male  pilgrims  is  thrice  fifty  as  against  thrice  tvventy. 


xxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

him  the  'castrum'  in  which  the  miracle  took  place,  §§  4,  5.  This 
king  is  Nechtan  Morbet,  who  reigned,  according  to  Mr.  Skene  ',  from 
about  457  to  481.  From  him  is  named  Dun  Nechtain,  i.  e.  the  Fort 
of  Nechtan,  now  Duinnichen,  near  Forfar.  Close  by  is  Kirkbuddo, 
the  Church  of  Boetius,  or  Carbuddo,  i.  e.  Castrum  Boetii,  perhaps  the 
'  castrum '  of  the  miracle. 

By  origin  Boetius  belongs  to  the  Cianachta  of  Bregh  ;  that  district 
seems  to  have  been  the  sphere  of  his  labours  after  his  return  to 
Ireland,  and  there  he  founded  his  principal  monastery,  called  after 
himself  Mainister  Buite,  the  monastery  of  Boetius,  now  Monaster- 
boice,  in  Co.  Louth.  But,  as  is  usual  in  the  lives  of  the  R  recension, 
very  few  names  of  places  have  survived. 

Nor  are  there  many  personages  mentioned  whereby  the  chronology 
of  the  Hfe  may  be  tested.  Tradition  may  probably  be  trusted  when 
it  asserts  that  Boetius'  death  synchronized  with  the  birth  of  Columba, 
and  this  in  no  way  conflicts  with  the  dates  assigned  to  Boetius' 
death  519  or  523'.  This  again  is  quite  compatible  with  the  dates 
assigned  above  to  Nechtan's  reign.  But  if  Teilo  was  really  an  elder 
contemporary  of  Boetius,  the  date  of  Teilo's  death,  which  is  placed 
about  563  X  566  by  Rees,  and  in  604  by  Ussher ',  would  have  to  be 
put  a  good  deal  earlier.  The  St.  Moduca  of  §  29  I  have  not  yet 
identified.  Mythologically  Boetius  shows  obvious  solar  affinities*, 
§§  3>  7>  i7>  ^9)  ^"'i  the  story  of  the  healing  of  the  wolf,  §§  13,  14, 
harmonizes  with  this.  And  from  this  and  other  points  of  view  the 
lifc  is  of  great  interest. 

Vita  Sancti  Brendani  abbatis  de  Cluainferta  ^  1.     This  life  is  here 

'  Celtic  Scotland,  i.  134-5.  Monboddo,  of  which  the  first  part  is  probably 
fiiom,  a  bog  or  moss,  is  in  the  adjoining  county  of  Kincardine. 

^  If  the  statement  cited  by  Reeves  i^Adamnan,  pp.  Ixviii  f.)  from  one  of  the 
Irish  lives  of  Cohimba,  that  in  the  year  of  the  latter's  birth  and  of  Boetius' 
death  Dec.  7  fell  on  a  Thursday,  could  bc  trustcd,  this  would  point  to  either 
517  or  523  ;  the  coincidcnce  of  the  latter  date  with  the  second  of  the  two  dates 
given  by  Ann.  Ult.  is  rather  striking.  The  probable  date  of  Columba"s  death 
is  597.  Bede  says  that  he  was  seventy-seven  when  he  died  \,H.  E.  iii.  4). 
This  would  make  him  born  in  520,  vvhich  agrees  very  fairly  with  the  above 
datcs. 

^  See  Dict.  Christ.  Biog.  s.v.  Teilo. 

*  Here  again  thc  name  may  have  helpcd  these  myths  to  crystallize  round 
him  ;  cf.  the  gloss  cited  above,  buite  .i.  teine.  that  hjire. 

'  There  are  pcdigrees  of  Brendan  LL.  349'',  LBr.  i5'',  BB.  218/  (cf.  ib.  232''), 
I.aud  610  ff.  38-^,  40'',  41",  Rawl.  B.  486  f.  35'',  Fcl.-  p.  132.  His  ordinary  day  in 
the  calendar  is  May  16.  A  calendar  printed  by  Forbes,  p.  85,  gives  liim  at 
May  15.  The  Mart.  Tall.  at  March  22  lias  '  Egrcssio  familie  Brendini';  and  at 
that  date  Colgan  has  givcn  somc  cxtracts  from  his  lives,  including  §§  12-16  of 
the  present  life.  Zimmer,  Z.  f.  dcutschcs  Alt.  xx.xiii.  296,  299.  understood  this 
'  egressio  '  to  refer  to  Brcndan  of  Birr,  on  the  ground  of  a  passage  in  the  voyage 
of  Maclduin,  R.  C.  x  72.  But  I  am  not  convinced  ;  and  cven  if  it  bc  so,  I  find  it 
ditGcult  to  belicve  that  the  whole  of  the  lcgcnd  of  Brendan,  the  navig.itor  of 
Clonfert,  has  been  dcvcloped  out  of  a  misundcrstanding  of  this  passage.     Why 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xxxvii 

printcd  for  the  first  time'  from  R'  f.  72'',  collated  with  R'  f.  loi^  It 
exists  aiso  in  F,  p.  50.  In  an  article  published  in  Zeitschrift  fiir 
Celtische  Philologie,  v.  124  ff ,  I  have  endeavourcd  to  point  out  the 
importance  of  this  R  text  in  the  development  of  the  Brendan  legend  ; 
and  to  that  article  I  would  refer  for  a  detailed  discussion  of  the 
mutual  relations  of  the  various  authorities,  Latin  and  Irish  -.  The 
chief  points  may  be  recapitulated  here.  The  main  characteristic  of 
R  is  that  it  is  a  conflation  of  a  Latin  Vita  Brendani  (V  B)  with  the 
ordinary  text  of  the  Nauigatio  Brendani  (N  B)'  which,  however, 
the  compiler  has  edited  after  his  fashion.  The  V  B  is  followed  to 
the  end  of  §  12 ;  then  the  N  B  is  taken  up  and  followed  to  the  end 
of§66^;  after  which  the  VB  is  resumed,  and  continued  to  the  end. 
The  conflation  is  crudely  done.  Thus  having  told  from  N  B  how 
Brendan,  in  a  single  skin-covered  coracle,  and  with  only  seventeen 
companions,  successfully  reached  the  Land  of  Promise,  the  compiler 
takes  up  the  V  B  narrative,  which  relates  how  Brendan,  with  ninety 

should  the  story  not  have  grovvn  up  round  the  true  Brendan  ?  I  also  think  that 
the  relation  of  the  Maelduin  and  Brendan  stories  requires  further  investigation. 
(The  two  Brendansare  associated  togetherin  our  text,  §  94,  in  the  life  of  Ciaran 
of  Saigir,  §§  30,  31,  in  a  story  in  Fel.'  p.  clxxiii,  and  in  the  Brendan  story  cited 
below  from  Egerton,  1781,  (S:c.)  The  Mart.  Don.  cites  in  reference  to  Brendan 
11.  37-40  of  Cuimin  of  Connor's  poem,  and  the  table  of  parallel  saints  LL.  370",  in 
which  he  is  equated  with  St.  Thomas  the  Apostle.  In  later  times  he  was  re- 
garded  as  a  special  foe  to  the  Scandinavian  invaders  ;  perhaps  he  disliked  tliem 
as  rival  navigators,  Three  Fragments,  pp.  262-6.  His  connexion  with  northern 
Britain  is  illustrated  by  a  storj-  in  Adamnan's  Columba,  iii.  17,  in  which  he,  with 
Comgall,  Cainnech,  and  Cormac  Ua  Liathain,  paid  a  visit  to  St.  Columba.  He 
has  many  dedications  in  Scotland,  Forbes'  Calendars,  p.  287.  Several  writers 
understand  the  allusions  to  Britannia  in  the  lives  as  referring  to  Brittany.  This 
is  carried  out  most  thoroughly  by  Messrs.  Baring  Gould  and  Fisher  in  their 
recent  '  Lives  of  British  Saints  '  i.  233  ff.  They  have  shown  that  the  cult  of 
Brendan  exists  in  Brittany  ;  but  to  maintain,  as  they  appear  to  do,  that  wherever 
a  dedication  or  festival  is  found  we  maj'  assume  a  visit  of  the  saint,  seems  to 
me  very  rash.  The  Brittany  view  is  taken  by  the  translator  of  the  Brussels 
Irish  life.  In  the  passage  corresponding  to  §  87  below  it  is  said  that  Brendan 
founded  a  church  :  '  dianid  ainm  Bleit  i  ccrich  Letha,'  i.  e.  the  name  of  which 
is  Bleit  in  the  region  of  Armorica.  Perhaps  there  is  some  confusion  between 
Tir  Etha,  Tiree,  and  Tir  Letha,  Armorica.  And  in  the  name  of  the  church,  said 
to  have  becn  founded  by  Brendan,  Bledach,  Bledua.  Bleit,  there  maybe  a  trace 
of  the  whale.  ble<i  in  Irish.  The  present  life,  §  99.  takes  Brendan  to  '  the  deserts 
of  Gaul '.  Nor  can  I  regard  as  more  than  fanciful  the  attempts  to  identify  the 
various  islands  visited  by  the  saint,  in  some  of  which  we  seem  to  hear  faint, 
far-otr  echoes  of  classical  myth  ;  Calypso's  cave  and  fountains  §60,  Odyss. 
V.  57  ff.) ;  the  isle  of  sheep  and  the  Cyclops  hurling  rocks  (§§  22,  58,  Odyss  ix)  ; 
thc  Laistrj-gones  (§§57-9,  Odyss.  x.  Ii5ff.\ 

'  The  Bollandists  do  not  print  any  life  of  Brendan,consideringthe  whole  story 
too  fabulous.     They  give  an  account  of  him,  May  iii.  599  ff. 

^  Subsequent  research  has  confirmed  and  strengthened  the  main  conclusions 
of  that  article,  though  it  requires  one  or  two  corrections  in  detail. 

'  Mart.  Dun.  p.  130  distinguishes  between  '  Muiridecht  Brenainn'  i,N  B)  and 
Betha  B.  (VBV 

'  See  the  critical  notes  at  these  points. 


xxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

companions  in  three  skin-clad  coracles,  failed  for  five  j'ears  to  find 
the  blessed  island,  because,  as  St.  Ita  told  him,  he  had  sought  it 
'  on  the  skins  of  dead  animals '.  He  therefore  returns  to  Ireland, 
builds  a  single  boat  of  wood,  and  with  sixtj'  companions,  after  two 
years'  further  search,  successfully  achieves  his  quest  ^  However,  to 
this  very  crudeness  of  conflation  we  owe  the  happy  fact  that  the 
R  text  preser\'es  such  a  large  amount  of  V  B  which  has  been  sacrificed 
in  the  work  of  more  skilful  compilers. 

The  next  Latin  text  to  be  considered  is  that  of  M  ;  which  letter 
also  serves  conveniently  to  indicate  Cardinal  Moran's  edition  of  this 
text,  printed  in  his  Acta  Brendani  (1872).  This  also  consists  of 
a  conflation  of  a  V  B,  in  a  recension  very  difterent  from  R,  witli 
the  ordinary  text  of  N  B.''  The  compiler  of  M  omits  all  the  travel 
incidents  of  V  B,  except  the  Judas  story,  and  the  island  supported 
on  four  feet',  no  doubt  considering  that  Brendan's  adventures  had 
been  sufficiently  dealt  with  in  the  text  of  N  B.  In  this  way  the 
glaring  inconsistencies  of  the  R  text  are  avoided,  but  mucli  interest- 
ing  matter  is  lost. 

The  Codex  Salmanticensis  contains  two  Latin  lives  of  Brendan, 
f  69''  and  f.  i8g"  (printed  edition  cc.  113  ff.,  759  ff.).  The  former  (S')  is 
also  a  conflation  of  VB  and  N  B,  but  of  a  very  simple  kind.  VB 
is  given  in  a  much  abbreviated  form  to  the  middle  of  §5^  where  a 
highly  unskilful  transition  is  made  to  N  B,  which  is  continued  to  the 
end  ;  the  death  of  Brendan  is  given  from  N  B,  and  no  return  is  made 
(as  in  R,  M,  and  Capgrave)  to  the  text  of  V  B  ''.  The  latter  text  (S-) 
is  extremely  interesting,  because  it  presents  us  with  an  edition  of 
V  B  not  only  unconflated  with,  but  wholly  uncontaminated  by,  N  B. 
Unfortunately  it  has  been  very  much  abbreviated,  to  make  it  more 
suitable  for  reading  in  church  or  refectory".  The  text  of  S-,  though 
much  shorter  than  R,  is  nearer  to  R  than  to  M ;  and  in  spite  of  its 


'  In  Bili's  life  of  S.  Macutus  (Malo),  c.  16,  the  companions  of  Brendan  and 
Malo  number  nine  hundred  and  five  in  a  single  ship,  where  pcrhaps  '  nongenti ' 
is  a  mistake  for  '  nonaginta  '. 

'  Unfortunately  as  I  think)  Moran  has  removed  the  N  B  narrative  from  the 
middle  of  thc  M  text.  and  printed  it  separately.  For  thc  points  at  wliich  and 
the  mode  in  which  the  compiler  of  the  M  text  makes  the  transition  from  V  B  to 
N  B  and  back  again,  see  the  critical  notes  to  §5  11,  66.  Whcrever  in  thecritical 
notes  M  is  cited  by  chapters,  this  refers  to  Moran's  text  of  V  B  (pp.  i-a6) ; 
where  M  is  cited  by  pages,  this  refcrs  to  Moran's  text  of  N  B  ,pp.  85-131I. 

^  cc.  25,  26.  *  In  Z.  C.  P.  V.  125,  note  i,  line  4,  for  N  B  read  V  B. 

■'  There  is  a  long  lacuna  in  S"s  text  of  N  B  at  thc  end  of  §  14.  This  is  not  due 
to  any  mutilation  of  the  existing  MS..  the  break  occurring  in  the  middle  of  a  line. 
Evidently  the  scribe's  '  Vorlage  '  had  lost  one  or  more  leaves  at  this  point,  which 
the  scribe  '  as  oltcn)  omitted  to  notice. 

'  '  lectionalis  modus  nuilta  cogit  nos  transilire,'  §17;  cf.  'multos  alios  eius 
actus,  compellcnte  breuitatis  angustia,  praeteriuimus",  §  12. 


THE    SEPARATE   LIVES  xxxix 

sliortness,  it  has  preserved  some  interesting  points  which  arc  not 
in  R'. 

The  last  Latin  text  to  be  dealt  with  is  Capgrave^  (Capg.).  This 
again  is  a  conflation  of  V  B  and  N  B,  made  with  considcrable  skill. 
Liice  all  Capgrave's  lives,  it  is  much  abbreviated.  The  tcxt  of  VB 
here  used  is  closely  akin  to  R.  That  of  N  B  differs  froni,  and  is 
in  some  respccts  supcrior  to,  the  ordinarj'  tcxt ;  but  it  is  not  taken 
from  R'. 

1  now  turn  to  the  Irish  sources.  Of  these  the  first  to  be  mentioned 
is  the  Life  or  Homiiy  published  by  Stokes  *  from  the  Book  of 
Lismore  (L),  a  MS.  in  the  possession  of  the  Duke  of  Devonshire. 
This  is  an  Irish  V  B,  unconflated  with,  but  not  uncontaminated*  by, 
N  B.  It  is  probabl}'  based  upon  a  Latin  original'',  though  it  contains 
some  things  whicli  are  not  in  any  of  our  existing  Latin  sources'. 
It  is  not  taken  directly  from  any  of  them.  In  some  points  it  shows 
an  affinity  with  M  ;  on  the  other  hand  it  has  many  of  the  travel 
incidcnts  of  R  which  M,  owing  to  its  mode  of  conflation,  has  omitted. 


'  See  critical  notes  to  §§  go,  io2,  ad  fin. ;  and  especially  the  beautiful  and 
toucbing  account  of  Brendan*s  death,  §  io2  note,  ad  init. 

-  ed.  Horslman,  Clarendon  Press,  1901,  i.  136  fl".  For  convenience  I  cite 
tliis  compilation  as  Capgrave,  though  Horstman  has  shown  that  it  is  really  the 
work  of  John  of  Tynemouth,  and  that  Capgrave  did  little  be}'ond  arranging  the 
lives  in  alphabetical  ordcr. 

'  This  is  proved  inter  alia>  by  the  fact  that  the  Judas  episode  occurs  at  the 
ordinary  place,  where,  in  R,  it  is  omitted ;  see  note  to  §  59. 

*  Lives  of  Saints  from  the  Book  of  Lismore  (^Anecdota  O.Koniensia,  1890), 
pp.  99  ff. 

'  Marks  of  contamination  are  seen  in  the  change  from  '  talam  derrit '  of 
1.  3561  (=  terra  secreta  VBl  to  the  '  tir  tairngire '  of  1.  3564  (=  terra  re- 
promissionis  sanctorum,  N  Bj  ;  from  the  five  years  of  unsuccessful  wandering 
in  1.  3954  ^V  B'  to  seven  years  in  11.  3609,  3717  (,N  B"i.  The  passage,  I.  3609, 
occurs  in  the  story  of  the  whale  ;  and  1  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  whale  does 
not  belong  to  the  original  V  B  text  at  all.  It  does  not  occur  in  S-,  the  purest 
V  B  text  which  we  have.  If  this  is  correct,  then  R  §  96  would  be  a  later 
addition. 

*  In  this  I  differ  from  Zimmer's  Essay,  Zeits.  f.  deutsches  Alterthum  xxxiii. 
129  fif. ,  257  ff.  This  Latin  original  is  possibly  alluded  to  in  1.  3740:  '  amal 
atberat  na  scribinn,'  i.  e.  as  writings  atfirm. 

'  One  small  addition  has  a  curious  explanation.  In  I.  3575,  speaking  of  B.'s 
first  embarkation  with  ninety  companions,  the  writer  says  :  •  nirbat  cleirig  uile  ' 
(they  were  not  all  clerksi.  If 'clerks'  means  secular  clerks  as  opposed  to 
monks,  this  is  an  understatement,  for  none  of  them  were  clerks  in  that  sense. 
If  it  means  ihat  they  were  not  all  clerks  in  the  general  sense  of  ecclesiastics,  it 
is  untrue.  The  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  ninth  line  of  the  little  poem 
which  follows  ; '  nochu  cleirchiu  luid  uile  '  (^ninety  clerks  in  all  they  went).  The 
prose  writer  has  mistaken  the  Irish  numeral  '  nochu  '  or  '  nocha  '  (ninety)  for 
the  Irish  negative  'nocha'.  Some  of  these  additions  may  come  from  Irish 
sources  ;  e.  g.  the  story  of  the  calming  the  whirlpool,  L  3617  fi".,  is  found  in  the 
Irish  Brendan  story  in  Egerton  1781  f.  152'',  on  which  see  below,  p.  xli.  The 
whale  might  also  come  from  this  source. 


xl  INTRODUCTION 

It  is  unfortunately  incomplete.  The  latter  part  as  printed  by  Stokes' 
(from  1.  3880  onvvards)  really  belongs  to  the  Fis  Adamndin,  or 
Vision  of  Adamnan.  Stokes  and  Zimmer  saw  this,  but  thcy  did  not 
see  the  explanation,  which  is  a  pureiy  mechanical  one.  In  the 
'  Vorlage  '  of  the  scribe  the  Ffs  Adamnain  foUowed  the  life  of  Brendan 
immediately;  owing  to  mutilation  the  end  of  the  Brendan  and  the 
beginning  of  the  Fis  werc  lost,  but  the  scribe  copied  on  contentedly, 
not  noticing  that  anything  was  amiss^ 

I  come  next  to  the  Irish  life  of  Brendan  contained  in  Brussels 
MS.  4190-420011".  224  ff.  (Br.).  This  is  an  extraordinarily  conflate 
work.  The  first  forty-seven  chapters  consist  of  alternate  slices  of 
a  life  identical  with  L  and  an  Irish  translation  of  NB'.  The  re- 
mainder  of  the  life  is  chiefly  made  up  of  matter  identical  with  that 
contained  in  the  latter  part  of  R  (§§  76-105) ;  but  in  this  are  inserted 
incidents  taken  from  other  sources,  such  as  the  tales  of  Brendan 
and  Dobarchu  (c.  53),  and  the  story  of  Brendan  and  the  bird  angel 
(c.  67J  which  are  found  separately  in  Irish  MSS.* 


'  And  also  as  found  in  the  Paris  MS.  and  in  Stowe  MSS.  No.  ix.  (For  the 
use  of  a  photograph  of  the  Paris  MS.  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the 
late  Mr.  Whitley  Stol^es.)  All  these  three  MSS.  therefore  go  back  to  a 
common  defective  '  Vorlagc  '. 

^  I  have  pointed  out,  p.  .xxxviii,  note  6,  a  similar  instance  in  the  text  of  S'; 
anotlier  occurs  in  R^  f.  50,  wlicre  mcdiaeval  and  modern  cataiog:uers  have  alike 
failed  to  notice  that,  owing  to  mutilation,  there  isa  sudden  transition  from  the  life 
of  Fursa  to  that  of  Moling.  If  this  explanation  is  correct,  it  upsets  all  the  argu- 
ments  which  Zimmer  has  based  on  the  supposition  that  the  conllation  of  the 
Brendan  and  the  Fis  was  intcntional.  That  it  is  correct  is  strongly  confirmed 
by  the  Brussels  Irish  life  to  be  mentioned  next.  The  first  part  of  this  is  taken 
largely  from  a  text  closely  resembling  L.  The  part  taken  from  this  source  cnds 
preciscly  at  the  point  of  junction  of  the  Brendan  and  tlie  Fis  in  L  ;  after  which 
comes  this  note  :  '  iste  fabule  sunt  plux  1  plus)  ad  (ab)  aho  libro,'  i.  c.  the  follow- 
ing  additional  stories  are  from  another  book.  Either,  then,  the  compiler  had 
a  MS.  mutilated  like  the  'Vorlage'  of  L  (perhaps  that  very  'Vorlage'),  and 
noticed  the  mutilation  ;  or,  if  he  had  a  text  like  L,  he  saw  correctly  that  the 
latter  part  had  no  real  connexion  with  the  Brendan  story. 

'  The  translation  was  made  by  some  one  who  kncw  little  of  the  topography  ; 
thus  'SaltusVirtutum',  which  is  the  N  B  equivalent  of 'CUiain  ferta'  (thc  mc.idow 
of  the  miracles  1,  is  retranslated  as  '  Leim  na  subaltaighe ',  i.  e.  the  Leap  of  the 
Vlrtues  ;  so  '  Mons  lapidis  '  in  N  B  rcpresents  '  Sliabh  Liacc  ',  i.  e.  Slieve  League 
in  Donegal.  Br.  retranslates  this  into  '  Sliabh  na  Cloiche'.  It  is  diHicuIt  to 
identify  the  text  of  N  B  uscd  in  Br.  On  the  one  hand  it  has  a  defect  corre- 
sponding  with  that  already  pointed  out  in  the  text  of  S'  after  §  14  ;  on  tlie  other 
it  has  the  intcrpolation  about  Machutus,  which  belongs  to  that  earlier  part  of 
N  B  for  which  S'  Iias  substituted  the  text  of  V  B.  It  is  just  possible  that  the 
compiler  of  Br.  and  the  scribe  of  S'  may  both  have  used  the  samc  mutilated  text 
of  N  B,  and  that  the  substilulion  of  the  beginning  of  V  B  for  that  of  N  B  may  be 
the  work  ot"  the  scribe  of  S'. 

*  Thc  former  is  printed  by  0'Grady  from  thc  Book  of  Lismorc  in  Melusine, 
iv.  298  ;  the  lattcr  by  Stokes  from  the  samc  MS.  in  Lismorc  Lives,  p.  xiii  ;  cf. 
Mart.  Don.  May  16;  it  cxists  also  in  Rawl.  B.  512  f.  142".  Other  chapters  in 
Br.  which  do  not  exist  in  R  are  cc.  50,  61  (=  S^  §  16),  66.     The  Judas  incidcnt 


THE  SEPARATE   LIVES  xU 

One  othcr  Irish  documcnt  niay  be  mentioned,  though  it  only 
contains  a  few  incidcnts  of  Brendan's  travels.  It  is  found  in  Egcrton 
MS.  1781  f.  152^;  in  the  Liber  Flauus  Fergusiorum  (R.  I.  A.) ;  and  in 
the  two  Brussels  MSS.  5100-4,  p.  13;  and  2324-40  f.  70''.  The  chief 
interest  of  this  piece  is  that  the  voyage  of  Brendan  is  motived  in 
an  cntirclj'  original  way.  The  twelve  apostles  of  Ireland  were 
with  Finnian  of  Clonard,  when  suddenly  a  wondrous  flower  appeared 
among  them  from  the  Land  of  Promise '.  They  all  wish  to  start  to 
discover  that  land  ;  they  cast  lots  who  shall  go,  the  lot  falls  on 
Brendan  of  Birr,  but  he  is  considered  too  old  for  the  quest,  and 
ultimately  the  younger  Brendan  sets  out  with  158  companions  in  a 
single  boat.  Only  a  few  adventures  are  given,  and  the  piece  closes 
with  the  Judas  incident. 

The  fame  of  Brendan  as  a  navigator  is  of  course  the  predominant 
note  in  all  these  stories^  He  has,  however,  annexed  also  part  of 
the  domain  of  the  solar  or  fire  god  (R  §§  i,  3-5,  83).  His  prophetic 
power  is  also  insisted  on  (§§  9,  15,  45-7,  102-3,  &c.). 

The  historical  setting  of  the  narrative,  both  in  the  parts  taken  from 
VB  and  in  those  belonging  to  N  B,  is  free  from  chronological  in- 
consistencies.  Of  the  persons  mentioned  who  can  be  dated  Brendan 
himself  died  in  577  or  583;  Brigit  died  525  (F.  M.),  Becc  mac  De,  who 

occurs  separately  in  Irish  in  the  Book  of  Fermoy,  f.  58".  Other  Brendan  stories 
which  occur  separately  are  the  story  of  his  birth,  LL.  371",  printed  by  Stokes, 
Lismore  Lives,  p.  349;  story  of  Brendan  going  to  fetch  his  niother's  soul  out 
of  hell,  Bibl.  Nat.  Fonds  Celt.  i  f.  29'^;  story  of  Brendan,  Brigit,  and  the  two 
sea  monsters,  Rennes  f.  74*  ;  Rawl.  B.  512  f.  36"  ;  cf.  Stokes,  Lismore  Lives, 
PP-  333.  353-  from  the  Franciscan  Liber  Hymnorum  (infra,  §  861.  Giraldus 
Cambrensis  gives  a  summary  of  the  Brendan  story,  evidently  from  N  B,  Opp.  v. 
127-8  ;  he  mentions  a  sanctuarj'  of  Brendan  between  Knock  Brandon  and  the 
sea,  ib.  125,  cf.  p.  24,  and  calls  the  Atlantic,  where  the  Shannon  enters  it, 
'mare  Brendanicum,'  ib.31.  A  far-offecho  of  the  Brendan  story  is  heard  in 
Espinosa"s  description  of  Teneriffe  (Hakluyt  Societj',  1907),  who  cites  from 
'the  Kalendar'  ;  '  Fortunatae  insulae  sex  numero  .  .  .  in  Oceano  Atlantico.  .  .  . 
Hic  Blandanus  (sic)  magnae  abstinentiae  uir  e.x  Scotia  pater  trium  millium 
monachorum  cum  beato  Maclonio  [lege  :  Maclouio]  has  insulas  septennis  per- 
lustrauit.  .  .  .  Maclonius  gigantem  mortuum  suscitat',  etc,  pp.  28-9.  The 
Lections  in  the  Aberdeen  Breviary  also  make  Brendan  seek  the  '  fortunatae 
insulae ',  Pars  Hiem.  Proprium  Sanctorum,  f.  98  v".  Otherwise  they  follovv 
the  N  B. 

'  Cf.  Ai!.  §  46,  and  infra,  pp.  clxxxii  f. 

-  The  view  of  Zimmer  that  the  original  V  B  contained  no  travel  incidents 
I  regard  as  wholly  improbable  in  \iew  of  the  agreement  of  R,  L,  M  (cc.  25,  a6), 
S'  (.§§  4,  5",  S-',  Capg.  in  giving  travel  incidents  not  derived  from  N  B.  But 
when  Zimmer  wrote,  much  of  this  evidence  was  not  available.  That  he  was  also 
wrong  in  saying  that  N  B  cannot  be  earlier  than  1050  has  likewise  been  subse- 
quently  demonstrated  by  the  acquisition  by  the  British  Museum  of  a  tenth- 
cenlury  MS.  of  NB  (Add.  36736;.  Moreover,  the  mistakes  in  this  MS.  le.  g. 
f.  169  r"  'Munensium'  for  •  Mumenensium ',  f.  175  r"  'bonis  fratribus  septem' 
for  'bis  fratribus  septem ' ;  cf.  f.  176  r»  'cum  quattuordecim  fratribus')  imply 
clearly  that  it  is  a  copy  of  a  yet  earlier  MS. 


xlii  INTRODUCTION 

foretold  his  future  greatness,  in  553  or  558 ;  his  namesake  Brendan 
ofBirrt57i  F.  M. ;  Colum  Cille  is  rightly  represented  as  surviving 
Brendan,  as  he  did  not  die  till  597.  Of  the  two  secular  princes 
mentioned,  Aed,  son  of  Eochaid  Tirmcarna,  King  of  Connaught,  died 
in  577,  and  Diarmait,  son  of  Cerball,  King  of  Ireland,  died  in  565  or 
572.  There  is  nothing  impossible  here.  The  only  point  in  which 
probability  is  strained  is  that  whereas  Brendan  is  said  to  have  been 
ninety-three  when  he  died,  he  is  made  the  foster  child  of  St.  Ita,  who 
survived  till  570  or  577.  In  that  case  she  must  have  been  well  over 
a  hundred  at  hcr  death. 

Vita  Brendani  II.  (Appendix.)  This  is  from  a  Bodleian  MS., 
e  Musaeo  iii,  and  I  know  no  other  copy.  The  MS.  is  a  large  folio, 
^Sh^  iiiin->  of  about  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  ;  it  belonged 
formerly  to  the  abbey  of  Valle  Crucis  in  Denbighshire'.  The  bulk 
of  the  volume  consists  of  commentaries  on  the  prophets,  but  at  the 
end  are  a  life  of  St.  Bernard,  mutilated  at  the  beginning,  and  this 
so-called  life  of  St.  Brendan.  The  latter  is  really  a  quite  pcculiar 
recension  of  the  '  Nauigatio  Brendani ',  and  has  never  been  printed 
before.  The  MS.  is  mentioned  in  Hardy's  Catalogue  (No.  4661,  but 
he  gives  no  description  of  it,  not  even  the  'incipit'  and  '  explicit ' 
being  cited.  In  the  above-mentioned  article  (pp.  138  ff)  I  enumerated 
the  chief  points  in  which  this  recension  differs  from  the  ordinary 
'Nauigatio',  and  indicated  the  great  importance  of  it,  as  being 
obviously  the  Latin  original  from  which  was  derived  the  Anglo- 
Norman  poem  on  Brendan  published  by  Suchier  in  B6hmer's 
Romanische  Studien  (1875),  i.  5558".,  and  by  Francisque  Michel  in 
1878 ;  and  the  consequent  error  of  Suchier  in  supposing  that  the 
points  in  which  that  poem  differs  from  the  ordinary  'Nauigatio'  were 
due  to  the  poefs  own  invention.  The  poem  was  composed  about 
1120  ;  the  composition  of  the  Latin  original  cannot  therefore  be  much 
later  than  1100,  and  it  may  be  earlier.  In  the  same  place  I  havc 
shown,  following  Suchier,  that  the  metrical  life  of  Brendan,  printcd 
by  Cardinal  Moran  in  his  Acta  S.  Brendani  (1872),  is  based  on  a  con- 
flation  of  the  Anglo-Norman  poem  with  the  ordinary  Latin  text  of 
the  '  Nauigatio '.  Ovving  to  the  fact  that  no  other  MS.  of  this  recension 
is  availablc,  I  have  had  to  resort  to  conjecture  for  the  correction  of 
the  crrors  of  the  scribe  -  of  the  Bodleian  MS.,  though  these  correc- 
tions  are  in  somc  cases  confirmcd  by  the  text  of  thc  Anglo-Norman 
pocm,  which  is  occasionally  cited  in  thc  critical  notes  under  the 
symbol  Fr.  (French). 

'  Libcr  Sanctc  Marie  de  ualle  Criicis. 

-  Onc  of  the  scribe's  peculiarities  is  that  whcn  a  word  begins  with  a  capilal 
letler  hc  frcquently  adds  the  corresponding  small  letter  as  wcll ;  thus  he  writes 
Eesse,  §  16  ;  Vuultu,  §  25  ;  Vululatus,  §  40,  &c. ;  another  is  a  tendency  to  writc 
sc-  ror  s,  scocius,  &c. 


TIIE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xliii 

To  this  second  life  of  Brendan  I  have  appended  from  MS.  Coll. 
Linc.  Oxon.  No.  27,  f.  2  v"  (a  MS.  which  also  contains  a  copy  of  the 
ordinary  '  Nauigatio '),  some  curious  satirical  verses,  in  which  the 
story  of  the  '  Nauigatio '  is  derided  as  not  merely  absurd,  but 
positively  heretical.  As  far  as  I  know,  these  also  have  never  been 
printed  bcfore.  They  have  been  crowded  into  wliat  was  apparently 
a  blank  page  of  the  MS.     There  is  no  title  to  them. 

Vita  sancti  Cainnici  abbatis  de  Achad  B6 '.  This  life  is  here 
printed  for  the  first  time  from  M,  f.  124".  In  T  it  has  been  lost  owing 
to  mutilation.  There  are  two  other  Latin  lives  of  Cainnech  :  one  in 
S,  f.  114''  (C  S  cc.  361  fl".) ;  the  other  in  R'  f.  i^S',  and  R-  f  143"  ;  which 
last  is  imperfect  owing  to  the  loss  of  a  leaf  at  the  end.  That  the  copy 
in  F,  p.  142,  does  not  show  this  defect  is  evidence  that  the  mutilation 
is  subsequent  to  the  date  of  that  transcript  (1627). 

Colgan  evidcndy  had  a  copy  of  M,  as  he  gives  §  15  from  this 
recension  in  his  account  of  St.  Liber,  A.  S.  p.  566.  The  Bollandists, 
A.  S.  Oct.  V.  642  ft".,  give  an  account  of  St.  Cainnech  mainly  made 
up  of  extracts  from  other  lives.  They  knew  the  S  life,  but  judged  it 
'prelo  prorsus  indignam '.  They  also  recognized  that  Colgan  had 
used  a  different  life,  though  they  knew  no  MS.  of  it.  The  S  text  of 
this  life  was  printed  separately  by  the  Marquess  of  Ormonde  in  1853  -. 

The  three  recensions,  S,  R,  and  M,  clearly  go  back  to  a  common 

1  There  are  pedigrees  of  Cainnecli  in  LL.  348*,  LBr.  16",  BB.  218° ;  ef.  ib. 
S32''.  Hisday  in  the  Calendars  is  Oct.  11.  The  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  quotes 
from  LL.  370"  the  table  of  parallel  saints,  in  vvhich  Cainnech  is  equated  vvith 
Philip ;  Cuimin  of  Connor's  poem,  11.  57-60,  and  also  a  poem  beginning  : 
'  A  Chainnigh  na  cana,'  of  which  I  have  not  yet  discovered  a  copy.  There  is 
an  office  for  his  day  in  the  Aberdeen  Breviary,  Proprium  Sanct.  Pars  Estiua, 
f.  c.\xv  ;  and  he  has  many  dedications  in  Scotland,  Forbes,  Calendars,  p.  297. 
There  is  also,  as  the  Bollandists  say,  a  special  mass  for  his  day  in  Clement  XILs 
Missal  (^Paris,  1734^ 

^  As  an  e.\tra  volume  of  the  Kilkenny  Arch.  Soc.  According  to  the  Brit. 
Mus.  Catalogue  only  tvventy-five  copies  vvere  printed.  Variants  from  M  are 
given  at  the  end.  The  editor  also  prints  a  fragment  from  Cod.  Clar.  39  f.  55, 
which  is  merely  Sir  James  Ware"s  e.\tracts  frora  R^.  In  T.  C.  D.  MSS.  iioo 
and  1059  are  transcripts  of  these  lives  by  Bishop  Reeves.  No.  iioo  contains 
copies  of  S  and  M,  the  former  made  from  the  Marquess  of  Ormonde's  edition, 
with  Index  and  one  or  tvvo  notes.  No.  1059  is  a  transcript  of  M  vvith  coUations 
from  S  and  many  marginal  notes,  some  of  which  have  proved  useful  in 
identifying  names  of  persons  and  places.  At  the  end  Reeves  rightly  pronounces 
the  text  of  S  '  much  superior '  to  that  of  M.  '  The  latter  is  evidently  doctored, 
soltened,  and  expurgated  ...  I  regard  the  former  as  a  most  curious  and  valuable 
composition.'  S  almost  certainly  goes  back  to  an  Irish  original ;  besides  the 
Irish  words  and  expressions  in  §5  12,  41,  45,  47,  52  we  have  place-names  with 
Irish  prepositions  and  Irish  terminations  :  o  Birraib,  §  35  ;  hi  MoUib,  §  48  ;  again 
the  '  alius  princeps  ', '  alia  ianua  '  of  §  47  are  literal  translations  of  the  Irish  araile 
which  means  both  aliiis  and  qiiidam,  the  latter  being  the  sense  here.  So  in  §  15 
the  original  scribe  wrote  '  alterius  laici ',  vvhich  the  corrector  altered  into '  unius '. 
In  §  17  the  scribe  began  to  write  the  Irish  word  bachall,  but  altered  it  into 
baculu}n. 


xliv  INTRODUCTION 

original.  It  is  no  less  clear  that  S  is  nearest  to  that  common  original, 
which  R  and  M  have  edited,  cach  in  its  ovvn  way.  Of  the  two  R  is 
much  nearer  than  M  to  S.  But  R  omits  much  which  S  has  pre- 
served,  names  of  places  and  persons,  and  also  two  whole  sections, 
S  §§38,  41,  while  inserting,  more  siio,  moral  reflexions  and  biblical 
parallels.  M,  while  retaining  more  than  R  in  the  way  of  details  of 
place  and  person,  omits  a  much  greatcr  number  of  sections,  viz.  S 
§§  15.  23.  34.  52,  55-9  ;  S  §§  36,  40  (  =  M  §§  29,  32),  are  also  very  much 
shortened.  Of  the  omitted  sections  S  §  52  may  have  been  cxcised  as 
being  probably  a  doublet  of  S§  18  (  =  M  §  14),  S  §  56  as  being  likely  to 
cause  scandal.  M  also  tones  down  the  narrative  of  S  in  places  ;  thus 
in  S  §  53  Cainnech  vomits  the  gold  which  Brendan  demands  of  him  ; 
whereas  in  M  §  43  he  turns  bread  into  gold  (compare  also  M  §  7  with 
S  §  10).  But  the  clearest  proof  that  M  and  R  are  both  derived  from 
a  text  akin  to  S  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  in  both  there  are 
passages  which  are  clearly  due  to  a  misunderstanding  of  the  text  of 
S.  Thus  in  S  §  44  it  is  told  how  a  robber  who  put  on  a  '  lucerna ' 
which  he  had  stolen  from  the  saint,  was  almost  consumed  by  fire. 
Here  '  lucerna'  either  means  the  same  as  '  lacerna ',  or  is  a  mistake 
for  it.  M  §  36  recasts  the  whole  sentence  on  the  supposition  that 
'  lucerna  '  means  a  lantern.  So  in  S  §  48  (  =  M  §  41)  R  alone  gives  a 
name  to  the  man  in  question,  viz.  Maeldub.  This  is  probably  due  to 
a  misunderstanding  of  the  place-name  phoneticallj^  written  MoIIib  ' 
in  S  (  =  Irish,  Magh  Laithimh,  now  Molahifle  in  Co.  Kerry).  In  M 
§39  (=8  §47)  the  reading  of  R  is  probably  due  to  the  false  reading 
of  S  'carius'  for  'verius'.  M,  however,  had  a  text  in  some  poinls 
superior  to  S.  In  S  §§  14,  54  are  omissions  (the  latter  due  to  homoio- 
teleuton)  which  can  be  supplied  from  M  "^.  M  has,  moreover,  one  or 
two  points  of  interest  peculiar  to  itself ;  the  addition  at  the  end  of 
§  24  of  an  incident  which  is  found  in  a  different  form  in  Adamnan's 
life  of  Columba,  ii.  14  ;  and  the  insertion  in  §  21  of  the  pretty  story  of 
the  tvvo  vvhite  sea-birds  hurrying  to  the  help  of  the  infant  Munnu, 
who  had  been  cast  into  the  wav'es.  It  seemed  therefore  vvell  vvorth 
while  to  print  the  M  text  for  purposes  of  comparison,  especially  as  it 
had  never  been  printed  before. 

I  do  not  know  of  any  Irish  life  of  Cainnech  '. 

'  Forbes,  Calendars,  p.  296,  treats  the  'hi  Mollib'  of  S  (where  lii  is  the  Irish 
preposition  meaning  iVii  as  a  man's  name.  The  fact  that  the  Irish  version  of 
this  tale  in  the  Book  of  Fcrmoy  f.  62"",  Book  of  Lismore  f.  68'  call  thc  man 
Cromdub  is  perhaps  a  littlc  against  thc  thcory  in  the  te.xt. 

'  I  have  already  pointed  out,  p.  xxii,  notc  4,  that  the  ^alklicrd  of  M  §  33  is 
right  as  against  ihe  gialclierd  of  3  §  41. 

'  And  the  only  separate  Irish  tale  rclating  to  him  that  I  knovv  is  the  onc 
already  cited  answering  to  §  41  below ;  in  the  notes  to  thc  Fehre  is  a  slory  of 
an  encounter  of  Cainnech  vvith  thc  devil,  Fcl.'  p.  222. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xlv 

Mytliologically  he  seems  to  have  attractcd  to  himself  many  of  the 
attributes  of  a  fire  and  solar  deity  (§§6,  16-18',  [S  §23],  23,  26-7, 
[S  §  35],  34)  36.  39»  44)-  This  mythological  element  was  no  doubt 
what  made  the  Bollandists  judge  the  life  to  be  not  worth  printing. 
For  us  it  constitutes  one  of  its  chief  elements  of  interest.  This 
aspect  of  our  saint  is  illustrated  by  his  association  with  othcr  solar 
saints,  Comgall,  Columba,  and  (to  some  extent)  Brendan  ^. 

The  birth  and  early  ministry  of  Cainnech  belong  to  the  North  of 
Ireland.  His  later  ministry  is  connected  with  the  South.  The  two 
are  separated  by  a  long  sojourn  in  North  Britain  and  the  Western 
Isles.  This  is  confirmed  not  only  by  Adamnan's  Life  of  Columba, 
(i.  4 ;  ii.  13,  14  ;  iii.  17),  but  also  b}'  the  nunierous  dedications  to  him  in 
Scotland  (Forbes'  Calendars,  p.  227  ;  Reeves,  Ad.  p.  417).  His  early 
training  was  under  St.  Cadoc  at  Llancarvan. 

In  the  historical  framework  of  the  life  there  is  nothing  to  object  to. 
Cainnech  himself  died  in  599  or  600.  The  other  saints  with  whom  he 
is  brought  into  contact  are  Eogan  of  Ardstraw,  +549  or  550  ;  Brendan 
of  Clonfert,  1 577  or  583 ;  Aed  mac  Bricc,  +  589  ;  Columba,  1 597  ; 
Baithine,  t^QSx  600;  Comgall,  t  602.  Fintan  Maeldub,  who  adminis- 
tered  the  last  sacraments  to  Cainnech,  survived  till  626  (F.  M.)  or 
630  (Chron.  Scot.),  while  Munnu  of  Taghmon,  whom  as  an  infant 
Cainnech  saved  from  drowning,  lived  till  635.  Of  the  secular  princes 
mentioned  the  three  who  can  be  dated  also  agree  with  this  chro- 
nology,  Colman  Bec,  son  of  Diarmait,  of  the  Southern  Hy  Neill,  t  587 
or  593;  Colman,  son  of  Feradach,  of  Ossory,  t6oi  F.  M.;  Brude, 
King  of  the  Picts,  ^584. 

Vita  Sancti  Carthagi  seu  Mochutu  episcopi  de  Rathen  et  Less 
Mor '.     This  life  is  here  printed  from  T  f  60'',  collated  with  M  f.  94''. 


'  Probably  in  §  19  the  fire  in  the  original  version  was  miraculously  kindled. 

'  These  four  saints  occur  together  in  Adamnan's  Columba,  iii.  17  ;  Comgall 
and  Cainnech  are  associated  with  Columba  also  in  poems  printed  in  Rs.  Ad. 
pp.  274,  288  ;  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  V.  38.  In  ihe  Bodleian  eopy  of  the  Amra  Coluim  CiUe 
is  a  poem  supposed  to  be  addressed  by  Columba  to  Cainnech,  R.  C.  xx,  146  ; 
and  the  poem  which  precedes  it  is  attributed  to  Cainnech  in  Laud  615,  p.  47. 

'  There  are  pedigreesof  Carthach  in  LL.  349",  LBr.  16'',  BB.  218-''  (cf.  ib.  232''), 
Rawl.  B  502  f.  52'',  Laud  610  ff.  40/41'' ;  LL.  and  BB.  (both  reff.)  call  his  father 
Finall  or  Findall  (^so  the  '  Indarba  Mochuda'  in  Br.  4190  f.  266  r»  :  Fel.'  and  Fel.' 
maUe  Findall  his  brother  ;  LBr.  and  our  life  call  him  Fingen,  the  pedigree  on 
Ihe  margin  of  M  calls  him  Finan.  Laud  610  f.  41''  calls  his  mother  Finmaeth, 
daiighter  of  Finguine.  So  possibly  the  Med  of  our  life  is  short  for  Finmaeth, 
and  not  a  mistake  for  Medb  as  I  have  assumed.  His  day  in  the  Calendars  is 
May  14.  The  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  cites  Cuimin  of  Connor's  poem,  II.  77-80. 
The  account  in  Mart.  Don.  seems  based  on  the  Indarba  Mochuda  u.  s.,  though 
the  number  of  the  community  at  Ralien  is  diflerently  given,  710  M.  D.  ;  while 
in  the  Indarba  it  is  '  seven,  and  seven  score,  and  seven  hundred ',  i.  e.  847 
(so  Irish  hfe,  and  S  §  15  ;  in  j§  20,  59  of  our  life  it  is  867J.  In  the  Litany 
LL.  373"  it  is  700  ;  '  Secht  cet  firmanach  ro  failgithe  i  r-Raithiun  re  techt  do 


xlvi  INTRODUCTION 

Both  MSS.  are  mutilatcd  ;  but  fortunately  they  nearly  supply  each 
other's  defects.  A  few  lines  in  §64  arc  supplied  from  the  Bollandist 
edition,  A.  S.  May  iii.  378ff.  (B) ;  vvhile  a  few  words  in  §§67-8  are 
supplied  mainly  by  retranslation  from  the  late  Irish  life  mentioned 
below.  There  is  another  Latin  Hfe  of  our  saint  in  S  f  192''  (C.  S.  cc. 
779  ff.).  This  is  a  very  meagre  recension'.  It  contains  only  nineteen 
sections,  as  against  sixty-nine  of  the  M  T  text;  and  almost  all  the 
interesting  details  are  obhterated.  Some  of  the  sections  are  'farced'; 
but  nothing  is  rcally  added  except  the  antiphon  at  the  end  (printed  in 
note  to  §  69).  Both  the  S  and  M  T  texts  are  given  by  the  BoUandists, 
u.s.  pp.  375  ff.,  378  ff.,  the  latter  'ex  antiquo  MS.  Hibernico'.  This 
edition  seems  to  be  based  chiefiy  on  M,  as  B  generally  agrees  with 
M  against  T  where  these  differ ' ;  but  T  must  also  have  been  used  for 
the  later  sections  which  are  not  in  M ;  and  B  omits  the  second  half  of 

Mchutii  reim  longsi  co  1-Lesmor,'  i.  e.  the  700  true  monks  who  were  struck 
down  (1)  in  Rahen,  before  Mochutu  went  on  his  course  of  exile  to  Lismore. 
There  is  a  good  deal  about  Cartiiach  or  Mochuda  in  the  Irish  iife  of  his  pupil 
Colman  mac  Luachain  !  Rennes  MS.  f.  75**,  for  the  use  of  a  photograph  of  which 
I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  late  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes").  Special  stress 
is  laid  on  Colman's  service  in  the  Leper  Hospitai  at  Lismore,  f.  77''  (cf.  our 
life,  §  59 ;  the  Leper  Hospital  at  Lismore  existed  iu  the  twelfth  century,  as  is 
shown  by  a  story  in  Tr.  Th.  p.  445''  ad  calcem).  But  perhaps  the  most 
interesting  passage  is  the  following,  f.  78''  ad  calcem  :  '  Dogniter  la  Colman  .  .  . 
Cell  Uird  .  .  .  hi  Feraib  Maigi.  7  is  aire  isberar  Cell  Uird  fria,  ar  is  inti  tosech 
tuarcgabad  an  t-ord  tuc  Molaisi  leis  o  Roim,  ar  roforaith  esium  ma  gabail  ind 
uird  sin  acht  co  toracht,"  i.  e.  Colman  built  Cell  Uird  in  (the  district  of)  Fcrmoy, 
and  the  reason  why  it  is  called  Cell  Uird  [Church  of  the  Order]  is  this,  that  in 
it  was  first  celebrated  the  order  which  Molaisse  brought  from  Roine,  for  he 
[Colmaii]  helped  the  adoption  of  this  order  as  soon  as  ever  it  arrived.  This 
seems  to  refer  to  the  adoption  of  the  Roman  Easter,  of  which  Molaisse  or 
Lasren  of  Leighlin  was  a  strong  partisan  (see  Munnu  §§  26,  27,  and  C.  S.  c.  794, 
where  his  visit  to  Rome  is  mentioned  ;  cf.  Bede,  ii.  113V  This  tradition  that 
Colman,  a  disciple  of  Mochuda,  was  a  partisan  of  the  Roman  Easter,  lends  some 
support  to  Bishop  Rceves'  view  that  the  cause  of  Mochuda's  expulsion  from 
Rahen  was  the  Paschal  controvcrsy.  There  is  nothing  of  this  in  the  Latin  or 
Irish  lives  ;  the  '  Indarba'  lays  stress  on  the  jealousy  of  Mochudas  ecclesiastical 
neighboufs,  while  our  liie  speaks  chiefly  of  tlie  secular  princes  concerned  ;§  53), 
and  of  disiikc  of  the  presence  of  a  Munsterman  in  Mealh  (§  58,  cf.  S  §  i6^. 
Reeves  argiied  froin  the  words  of  Tigernach  {R.  C.  x\'ii.  183^:  'Effugacio 
Ciirrlhaigh  .1.  Mochuto  maic  Find  0  Raithin  in  diebiis  Pascliae.'  ^Private  letter 
from  Bishop  Reeves  to  the  Hon.  and  Very  Rev.  H.  Brougham,  Dcan  of 
Lismore  ;  for  the  use  of  this  letter,  and  for  othcr  information  I  am  indebted  to 
the  kindncss  of  the  Dcan  ;  I  have  also  to  thank  Mr.  PoIIard,  Vcrger  of  the 
Cathcdral,  for  much  kind  help.)  On  the  Crozierof  Lismore  see  Miss  Stokes' 
Christian  Art  in  Irclaiid,  pp.  103-4. 

'  Tlie  writer  conlcsses  as  much,  §  5 :  '  pre  multitudine  multa  pretcriens, 
pauca  perstringens  .  ,  .  descrpsi '  ;  and  thc  antiphon  appcnded  shows  that  the 
epitome  was  madc  for  liturgical  purposcs,  Usshcr,  Wurks,  vi.  475,  after  citing 
part  of  §  59  from  our  lifc,  goes  on  to  quole  '  ab  alio  uitae  eiusdem  scriptore  ', 
a  passage  agreeing  with  S  §§  15,  16.  He  tiien  cites  'alius  (scriptor) ',  whom 
I  cannot  identify. 

^  See  thc  ciitical  notes. 


THE   SEPARATE    LIVES  xlvii 

§67  which  is  mutilated  in  T  '.  In  T.  C.  D.  No.  iioi  is  a  transcript  of 
the  B  text  by  Reeves,  vvith  collations  from  M  and  T.  The  Bishop 
justly  condemns  the  B  text  as  '  very  depraved,  especiaily  in  proper 
names  ' ",  though  the  life  itself  is,  as  he  says,  '  most  valuable.'  The 
topographical  and  other  details  are  extremely  interesting.  The 
chronological  data  of  the  life  are  abundant,  and  for  the  most  part 
consistent  and  correct.  The  annals  place  the  expulsion  of  St.  Car- 
thach  from  Rathen  in  636  and  his  death  in  637'.  In  the  life  he  is 
made  a  younger  contemporary  of  Ita  (^570  or  577),  Brendan  of 
Clonfert  (t  577  or  583),  and  of  Comgall  of  Bangor  (t6o2  Chron.  Scot.). 
The  other  ecclesiastics  with  vvhom  he  is  brought  into  contact  are  St. 
Columba  (t  597),  Molua  of  Clonfertmulloe  (t  609),  Colman  Ela  (t6ii), 
and  Lachtin,  abbot  of  Freshford  (t622  F.  M.).  One  of  the  chief 
ecclesiastical  agents  in  the  expulsion  of  Carthach  from  Rathen  is  said 
to  have  been  Colman,  abbot  of  Clonard  (t  654),  while  the  chief  secular 
princes  mentioned  in  that  connexion  are  Blathmacc  and  Diarmait, 
sons  of  Aed  Slane,  who  reigned  jointly  as  Kings  of  Ireland  from  643 
to  665  or  668.  If  the  date  given  above  for  the  expulsion  of  Carthach 
is  correct,  the  life  is  wrong  in  representing  Blathmacc  as  already 
King  of  Tara  at  the  time  * ;  and  it  is  clearly  wrong  in  implying  that 
Diarmait  succeeded  his  brother  Blathmacc  ',  for  they  reigned  jointly 
and  dicd  of  the  plague  in  the  same  year.  The  other  secular  princes 
mentioned  in  the  iife  and  in  the  annalists  are  Cairbre,  son  of  Crim- 
than,  of  Munster,  571  F.  M. ;  Cathal,  son  of  Aed,  of  Munster,  a  son 
of  whom  died  in  665 ;  Maelochtraigh,  chief  of  the  Deisi,  a  son  of 
whom  died  in  671 ;  Failbe  Flann  of  Munster  (^637),  Maelduin,  son  of 
Aed  Bennan,  of  West  Munster  (t  641) ;  and  Cuana,  son  of  Celcan, 
chief  of  Fermoy  (t  641  F  M). 


*  The  fact  that  B  has  §  64  complete,  whereas  part  of  it  is  twic>  missing  both 
in  M  and  T  might  only  mean  that  the  mutilation  of  one  or  other  of  these  MSS. 
vvas  subsequent  to  Fitzsimon's  time.  The  fact,  hovvever,  that  the  text  of  the 
earlier  part  of  this  section  in  B  varies  somevvhat  considerably  from  that  of  M 
makes  it  probable  that  the  editor  had  some  other  souice  than  transcripts  of 
M  and  T.  In  §  40  aiso  B  diverges  rather  widely  from  M  T.  Colgan  prints 
§§  9>  34>  39  of  our  life,  A.  S.  pp.  475",  631",  apparently  from  M 

^  e.  g.  Guel/orGuoc,  §  I  ;  Glain/orTuaim,  §  g  ;  Httus  Leamhnae/or  Litus  Li 
(Irish,  Traigh  Li,  Tralee  1,  §  13  ;  Mainne  /or  Muchinne,  §  32  ;  Farth  /or  Feich, 
§  40. 

^  This  leaves  very  little  room  for  the  founding  of  Lismore.  The  life,  how- 
ever,  seems  to  imply  tliat  he  died  before  the  building  of  the  great  monastery  on 
the  site  of  the  present  castle  was  completed,  §§  68  9. 

*  The  Irish  sources  agree,  however,  in  this  ;  and  it  is  possible  that  the 
annalists  have  placed  his  expulsion  and  dcath  too  early.  In  the  Irish  sources 
Ihe  expulsion  of  Carthach  is  reckoned  as  one  of  the  three  crooked  counsels  of 
Erin,  the  other  tvvo  being  the  exile  of  Columba,  and  the  cutting  shoit  of  the  life 
of  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois  ;  see  e.  g.  V.  Tr.  p.  556. 

'  The  Irish  sources  avoid  this  raistake. 


xlviii  INTRODUCTION 

The  mythological  element  is  not  very  prominent.  What  there  is 
seems  to  point  in  the  direction  of  a  fire  myth  (§§  4,  8,  27,  28,  49). 

The  reference  to  the  rivalry  between  nionks  and  clerks  (§  20  ad  fin.) 
points  obviously  to  the  controversies  of  a  later  date. 

The  writer  speaks  of  his  hero  as  '  noster  patronus  '  (§§  45,  68,  69), 
and  '  noster  senex '  (§  59).  He  thcrefore  evidently  belonged  to  one 
of  Carthach's  ecclesiastical  foundations.  As  between  Rathen  and 
Lismore  we  can  have  no  hesitation  in  deciding  in  favour  of  the  latter. 
While  the  topographical  notices  of  Munster,  and  especially  of  the 
neighbourhood  of  Lismore ',  are  abundant  and  precise,  no  such  detailed 
knowledge  is  shown  in  the  description  of  Rathen. 

The  writer  is  also  much  better  acquainted  with  the  Southern  than 
with  the  Northern  princes  of  Ireland,  as  the  list  given  above 
sufficiently  shows. 

By  origin  Carthach  belongs  to  Kerrj',  and  with  that  district  his 
early  life  is  associated.  The  central  period  of  his  life  was  spent  at 
his  monastery  of  Rathen  in  the  kingdom  of  Meath.  But  on  his 
expulsion  therefrom  he  returned  to  Munster  and  founded  Lismore  in 
the  country  of  the  Deisi. 

There  is  an  Irish  life  of  St.  Carthach  in  R.  I.  A.,  Stowe  MSS.  ix, 
pp.  18  fl'.,  and  Brussels  2324  x  2340  ff.  151  ff.,  both  of  which  are  copied 
from  the  same  MS.  This  life  covers  a  good  deal  of  the  same  ground 
as  the  M  T  text,  but  is  shorter,  though  not  so  abbreviated  as  the  S 
recension.  Into  it  the  compiler  has  inserted  (very  unskilfully)  the 
Irish  account  of  the  expulsion  from  Rathen,  which  exists  as  a 
separate  tract  with  the  title  'Indarba  Mochuda  a  Raithin'  (Brussels 
4190x4200,^.266;  imperfect  copies,  Book  of  Fermoy,  f.  34'';  Rawl. 
B.  512'';  Ashmole  1763,  f.  58).  In  the  Brussels  copy  two  detached 
stories  about  Mochuda  are  appended,'  which  occur  also  in  Rawl.  B. 
512,  f.  142'"',  from  which  one  of  them  has  been  printed  by  Kuno 
Meyer,  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  32-3.  The  Irish  life  contained  in  R.  I.  A.,  Hodges 
and  Smith,  No.  150,  and  King's  Inns  Librar}',  Dublin,  No.  19,  is  a  mere 
late  translation  of  the  M  T  recension.  For  this  very  reason  it  has 
been  useful  in  supplying  the  defects  of  the  Latin  MSS. 

Vita  Sancti  Ciarani  abbatis  de  Cluain  meic  Nois*.     This  life  of 

'  See  especially  §§  64-9;  and  Index  Locorum,  s.  v.  Ath  Medoin. 

^  Whence  printed  by  Stokcs,  Fel."  pp.  92  IT. 

^  These  are  followcd  by  an  account  '  do  mhacuibh  ua  Suanach ',  which  also 
contains  a  good  deal  about  Mochuda  and  his  pupil  Colnian  mac  Luachain  (v.  s.). 
A  part  of  Ihis  occurs  Ki  1  '  pp.  Ixxxvii  f.  Thcre  is  a  rule  attributcd  to  Mochuda 
in  L15r.  261%  also  in  Y.  B.  L.  col.  sai,  and  T.  C.  D.  No.  1285,  H.  i.  n  f.  125''. 
It  was  printed,  with  translation,  in  thc  Irish  Ecclesiaslical  Record,  vol.  i. 

*  Therc  are  pedigrees  of  Ciaran  LL.  348'',  LBr.  16".  BB.  218"  (cf  ib.  232''), 
Laud  610,  f.  38'',  Fci.-  p.  204  ;  cf.  LS.  p.  1 18.  Herc  also  thcre  is  extreme  dis- 
crepancy  as  to  tlie  name  of  the  saint's  father,  Bcodan,  Bconaed,  Bcoaed,  Beoan, 
Boctan.     His  day  in  the  Calcndars  is  Scpt.  9,  at  which  datc  Mart.  Don.  cites 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  xlix 

St.  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois  is  taken  from  M  f.  ^^^''ff.  It  probably 
existed  originally  in  T,  but  has  been  lost  owing  to  the  mutilation  of 
that  MS.  It  has  never  been  printed  bcfore.  Two  other  Latin  lives 
of  Ciaran  are  known  to  me  ;  one  in  S  f  ■]■]''  (C.  S.  cc.  155  ff.),  and  the 
other  in  R  (R^fgi^^ff.,  R' f  127' ff.).  The  liie  in  S  is  obviously 
incomplete,  though  the  scribe  has  written  '  finit,  Amen  '  at  the  end 
of  §14.  As  far  as  it  goes,  it  covers  nearly  the  same  ground  as  M, 
though  the  order  is  slightly  different,  and  it  contains  a  section  (§  14) 
which  is  not  in  M.  R  has  much  that  is  peculiar  to  itself ;  and  these 
sections  are  given  in  the  notes.  Where  R  coincides  with  M,  it 
furnishes  a  greatly  abbreviated  text,  and  it  omits  §  7  altogether ; 
though  it  adds,  tnore  siio,  scriptural  references  and  moral  reflexions. 
There  is  an  Irish  life  of  Ciaran,  which  has  been  printed  by  Stokes 
from  the  Book  of  Lismore,  compared  with  one  of  the  0'Clery  MSS. 
at  Brussels '.  This  is  probably  based  on  a  Latin  original  *.  That 
original,  however,  did  not  correspond  with  any  one  of  our  three  texts, 
for  the  Irish  life  embodies  points  which  are  peculiar  to  each  of  them, 
and  further  contains  much  of  great  interest  which  is  pecuiiar  to  itself. 
Possibly  the  composer  of  the  Irish  Hfe  was  an  eclectic,  and  took  his 
materials  from  various  sources '.    The  Irish  life  is  further  useful  for 


11.  25-8  of  Cuimin  of  Connor's  poem,  and  the  table  of  parallel  saints,  LL.  370, 
in  which  he  is  equated  vvith  St.  John  the  Evangelist ;  the  Mart.  Don.  also 
compares  him  with  Christ  because  of  the  age  at  which  he  died,  and  the  trade 
of  his  father.  The  late  tale,  Imthecht  na  Tromdaime,  Oss.  Soc.  v.  84,  makes 
Ciaran  himself  a  famous  wright  or  smith.  The  story  of  his  baptism,  §  r,  is  given 
in  Irish  in  Fel.^  p.  128  (cf.  V.  Tr.  pp.  104,  305,  318) ;  the  story  of  his  successor, 
Oenu  or  Aengus,  §  26,  in  Fel.-  p.  48  cf.  C.  S.  c.  898;,  where  also  he  is  brought  into 
close  relations  with  St.  Fechin.  For  other  stories  of  Ciaran  and  Oenu  v.  ib. 
c.  460  ;  R.  C.  XV.  491.  For  §§  15,  17  cf.  Fel.^  p.  202.  He  has  many  dedications 
in  Scotland,  Forbes,  Calendars,  p.  496. 

'  Lismore  Lives,  pp.  117  ff.,  with  translation  and  notes. 

'  This  seems  to  be  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  contains  the  sentence  (M  §  i  ad 
finem)  about  Ciaran"s  baptism  by  the  deacon  Justus  ('congruum  erat,  ut  iustus 
a  lusto  baptizaretur  '),  though  the  play  of  vvords  is  entirely  lost  in  the  Irish. 

'  Lines  4361  ff.  of  the  Irish  life  (L.  S.  p.  130)  are  eited  in  Mart.  Don.  Jan.  7. 
There  are  separate  Irish  stories  relating  to  Ciaran,  contained  inT.  C.  D.  N0.1319. 
H.  ii.  17,  p.  239  icf.  V.  Tr.  p.  556,  Fel.^  pp.  202-4') ;  another,  printed  by  Stokes 
from  Brussels  5100  in  R.  C.  xxvi.  368.  and  by  0"Donovan  in  Journal  of  Kilkenny 
Arch.  Soc.  1858,  p.  453  from  Egerton  92  f.  30",  is  also  in  B.  of  Fermoy  f.  51" 
and  B.  of  Lismore  f.  45'  ;  the  story  of  the  man  whose  head  fell  oiT  at  the  fair  of 
Telltovvn  for  svvearing  falsely  by  Ciaran,  is  printed  in  Silva  Gad.  i.  416  from 
LL.  274"  9  lalso  in  Ravvl.  B.  512  f.  140"  ;  Liber  Flauus  Fergusiorum,  Pt.  l.  A. 
f.  10''  and  ib.  D.  f.  6'' ;  Dublin  Franciscans  A.  9  (31,  p.  32'')  ;  it  is  also  alluded 
to  by  Tigernach,  ut  infra.  A  metrical  ■  Riagul  Ciarain  '  was  printed  by  the  late 
Prof.  Strachan  in  Eriu,  ii.  227-8  from  R.  L  A.  23  P.  3.  The  attribution  was 
probably  intended  for  our  Ciaran,  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  rule  itself  to  prove 
this.  There  seems  to  be  a  good  deal  relating  to  Ciaran  in  the  tale  called  Echtra 
Leithin  in  R.  L  A.  23  G.  20,  p.  378,  but  I  have  not  examined  it.  The  MSS. 
seem  all  to  be  late  :  0"HanIon,  ix.  200.  220 ;  Olden,  Church  of  Irelaud,  p.  115. 
There  is  a  curious  story  of  Ciaran  and  Colman  mac  Luachain  in  the  life  of  the 

PLUMMKR  U 


1  INTRODUCTION 

the  criticism  of  the  Latin  text,  and  is  occasionaily  cited  in  the  notes 
under  the  symbol  L  (Lismore).  Many  incidents  in  the  life  are  of  a 
conventional  type,  but  on  the  whole  it  is  of  great  interest.  The 
account  of  Ciaran's  death,  §  32,  rests  probably  on  genuine  tradition. 
It  is  httle  in  the  taste  of  later  times,  with  its  discouragement  of  relic 
worship,  its  human  shrinlcing  from  death  :  '  Leave  my  remains,'  he 
said  to  his  monks,  '  hke  the  dry  bones  of  a  stag  upon  the  mountains. 
Better  for  j'ou  to  share  the  life  of  my  spirit  in  heaven,  than  to  hve  a 
life  of  offence  near  my  bones  on  earth.'  And  as  death  approached, 
he  asked  to  be  carried  into  the  open  air,  and  gazing  at  the  sky  spoke 
of  the  dread  upward  path  on  which  his  soul  must  speed  ;  which 
recalls  the  'need-fare'  of  the  dying  Bede '.  How  Httle  likely  these 
things  were  to  be  invented  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  author  of  the 
R  recension  omitted  them,  doubtless  because  he  considered  them 
unworthy  of  a  saint. 

The  historical  setting  of  the  life,  so  far  as  it  can  be  tested,  is  not 
inconsistent  with  knowii  facts.  Ciaran  is  niade  a  pupil  of  Finnian  of 
Clonard,  who  died  in  the  same  year  as  himself,  549,  but  this  is  quite 
possible,  as  Ciaran  died  at  the  early  age  of  thirty-three^.  The  other 
saints  with  whom  he  is  brought  into  contact,  Enda  and  Senan ',  do  not 
afford  any  criteria,  as  their  own  chronology  is  unsettled.  That  he 
was  a  contemporary  with  Coemgen  of  Glendalough  who  died  in  618 
or  622  is  unlikely.  But  the  whole  story  (§  32  ad  fin.)  is  probably  a 
later  insertion  *.  In  §  31  we  seem  to  have  a  conflation  of  two 
divergent  accounts ''.    The  only  secular  ruler  mentioned  in  the  life 


latter,  Rennes  MS.  f.  86''.  For  the  fulfilment  of  an  alleged  curse  of  Ciaran,  v. 
F.  M.  ii.  1096.  He  and  Cainnech  are  brought  into  relation  with  Columba, 
Z.  C.  P.  V.  38.  In  Mart.  Don.  at  May  10  is  a  reference  to  a  lile  of  Ciaran  which 
1  have  not  yet  identified. 

'  See  my  Bede,  I.  Ixxix,  clxi ;  cf.  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  446,  748,  Bro. 

^  Tigernach  says,  in  his  thirty-first  year,  and  in  the  seventh  year  after  the 
foundation  of  Clonmacnois,  R.  C.  xvii.  138-9.  In  Fcl.-  p.  204  is  an  extraordinary 
legend  that  Ciarans  life  was  cut  short  by  the  intercession  of  the  saints  of  Ireland, 
who  wcre  jealous  of  his  power  ;  this  was  one  of  the  '  three  crooked  counsels ' 
alludcd  to  abovc,  p.  xlvii,  note  4.  The  story  may  have  grown  out  of  the  words 
attributed  to  Cohimba  in  §  33.  It  was  witli  relerence  to  this  that  Ciaran  is  said 
to  have  composed  llie  poem  beginning — '  Au  frim,  a  ri  richid  rain,'  which  is  pre- 
served  in  LL.  374'"  19.  and  Brussels  2324  f  84,  and  citcd  by  Mart.  Don.  Sept.  9  : 
cf.  Cormac,  Trausl.  p.  48.  Another  quatrain  attributed  to  Ciaran  is  cited  by 
Tigernach  u.  s.  and  Fcl.-  p.  202.  Of  the  hyinn  which  Columba  is  said  to  have 
composed  in  his  honour,  §  33,  some  fragmcnts  arc  prescn.'cd  at  the  bcginning 
of  the  Irish  life,  and  are  put  together  by  Stokes,  L.  S.  p.  355  ;  cf.  Colgan  Tr. 
Th.  p.  472".  This  visit  of  Columba  to  Clonmacnois  cannot  have  becn  imme- 
diatcly  after  thc  dealh  of  Ciaran,  as  the  lifc  seems  to  imply,  for  lona,  to  which 
Columba  is  reprcsented  as  returning,  was  not  founded  bcfore  565  ;  it  may  be 
the  visit  recorded  by  Adamnan,  i.  3. 

^  Cf.  Enda,  5  26;  L.  S.  p.  71.  *  It  is  found  also  Coem.  §  28. 

'  Sec  iiotcs  ad  loc. 


THE  SEPARATE   LIVES  li 

who  can  be  identified  certainly  is  Tuathal  Maelgarbh,  vvho  died  in 
543  oi"  549.  which  is  quite  consistent.  The  tale  called  '  Baile 
Mongain'  synchronizes  the  death  of  Ciaran,  the  slaying  of  Tuathal 
and  the  accession  of  Diarmait '.  This,  if  correct,  would  fix  Tuathal's 
death  to  549  as  against  543  ^. 

Ciaran  was  born  in  Connaught,  though  his  father  belonged  to 
Meath,  according  to  M,  being  obliged  to  migrate  owing  to  the 
oppressive  taxation '.  Connaught  was  also  the  chief  sphere  of  his 
labours  till  he  settlcd  at  Clonmacnois,  which  is  just  within  the  borders 
of  Meath,  and  he  is  the  patron  saint  of  Connaught  'without  any 
division '  according  to  some  lines  preserved  in  LL.  367  lower  margin, 
and  Rawl.  B.  486  f.  44*. 

The  mythological  element  in  these  lives  is  comparatively  slight, 
and  we  may  therefore  infer  perhaps  a  larger  historical  element  than 
in  some  other  cascs. 

Vita  Sancti  Ciarani  episcopi  de  Saigir*.  This  life  is  here  printed 
from  M  f.  io6''.     In  T   httle  more  than  the  two   first  sections  are 


'  Bran,  !.  56. 

2  The  Annals  of  Ulster  give  both  dates,  542.  548  (=  543,  549,  their  chronology 
being  a  year  behind  the  true  chronology).  Ciaran  and  Tuathal  are  brought  into 
connexion  in  anothcr  story,  R.  C.  xxiii.  430.  I  cannot  identify  with  any  certainty 
either  the  Ainmire  (mac  Colgan)  ofTara,  §  i,  or  the  Crimthann  of  Connaught, 
§§  I,  2. 

'  According  to  R  his  father  belonged  to  Dal  n-Araide.  A  third  version  is 
given  in  a  note  appended  to  the  pedigree  in  LL.,  LBr.,  and  BB.  The  text  in 
LL.  349"  is  as  follows  :  '  ro  bai  ar  tiis  a  athair  i  n-daere  i  m-Bretnaib ;  tanic 
iartain  i  n-Herind  co  cenel  Conaill  asside  ar  imgabail  cisa  truim  Cornach 
[MS.  Cornac ;  in  BB.  this  is  still  further  corrupted,  in  LBr.  it^  is  omitted 
altogether]  co  ro  genair  Ciaran  ic  Raith  Chrimthaind  i  m-Maig  Ae,'  i.  e.  his 
father  vvas  at  first  in  ser\'itude  in  Britain,  and  came  thence  aftei-\vards  to  Erin, 
to  Cinel  Conaill,  to  avoid  the  heavy.tribute  of  the  Cornish,  so  that  Ciaran  was 
born  at  Raith  Crimthaind  in  Magh  Ai.  My  correction  involves  the  verj-  slight 
assumption  that  the  mark  of  contraction  is  a  mistake  for  the  mark  of  aspiration, 
and  if  accepted  might  raise  the  question  whether  some  at  least  of  the  Cornish 
dedications  to  St.  Pieran  may  not  belong  really  to  this  Ciaran,  and  not,  as  is 
generally  assumed,  to  his  namesake  of  Saigir. 

*  There  are  pedigrees  of  Ciaran  in  LL.  352'',  LBr.  20"^,  BB.  223/  (cf.  ib.  232"), 
Rawl.  B.  502  f.  51''.  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  Mar.  5,  though  one  calendar 
(Forbes,  p.  83)  gives  him  at  Mar.  6.  The  account  in  Mart.  Don.  cites  the 
parallel  table  of  saints  LL.  370",  in  which  Ciaran  is  eq.iated  with  St.  Clement. 
For  the  rest  the  account  is  taken  from  the  Brussels  Irish  life  of  Ciaran  men- 
tioned  below.  AU  the  references  tally  vvith  the  numbers  of  the  chapters  of  that 
Hfe.  One  instance  may  sufEce  :  '  Do  athain  Ciaran  a  choimtionol  do  Dia  7  do 
Carthach.  Betha  Ciarain  cap.  34,'  i.  e.  Ciaran  commended  his  convent  to  God 
and  to  Carthach,  Life  of  Ciaran,  c.  34.  In  c.  34  of  the  Brussels  life  Ciaran's 
dying  vvords  to  his  monks  are :  'aithnighim  do  Dhia  7  do  Charrtach  .  .  .  sibh,' 
i.e.  I  commend  you  to  God  and  to  Carthach.  This  Carthach  ^§§  13, 15,  24,  29) 
is  celebrated  at  the  same  date  as  Ciaran  in  the  Calendars,  they  occur  together 
LL.  367'',  Fel,-  p.  86,  and  are  treated  together  in  the  A.  S.  u.  s. ;  c.  25  of  this 
life  is  also  cited,  Mart.  Don.  July  7,  and  this  is  a  chapter  vvhich  is  not  in  any  of 
the  Latin  lives  of  Ciaran,     For  the  birth  and  baptism  of  Ciaran  cf.  F^l.-  pp.  86-8, 

d2 


lii  INTRODUCTION 

extant,  the  remainder  being  lost  owing  to  the  mutilation  of  the  MS. 
This  life  was  printed  by  Colgan  A.  S.  pp.  458  ff.,  probably  from  M. 
There  is  another  Latin  life  in  S  f  197"  (C.  S.  cc.  805  flf.).  In  R'  this  life 
has  been  lost,  ovving  to  the  mutilation  of  the  MS.  at  the  end.  But 
it  exists  in  R'  f.  199''.  The  text  of  R  is  identical  with  that  of  S, 
agreeing  sometimes  even  in  obvious  blunders.  Occasionallj*  R  yields 
a  better  reading  than  S  ;  but  it  also  has  mistakes  of  its  own.  The 
only  important  point  in  which  R  differs  from  S  is  that  at  the  very 
end  of  the  life,  after  the  final  Amen,  it  adds  a  section  corresponding 
to  M  §  15  which  is  not  in  S.  Colgan  also  printed  the  S  version, 
u.  s.  pp.  467-9,  with  the  title  'Alia  Vita  seu  lectiones  officii  eius', 
dividing  the  text  into  twelve  lections.  He  mentions  the  Codex 
Insulensis,  p.  463'',  but  does  not  use  it,  and  in  F,  pp.  237-44,  the  life 
is  neither  annotated  nor  divided  into  chapters.  The  BoIIandists, 
A.  S.  March  i.  389  ff ,  give  the  S  text  with  an  appendix  of  extracts 
from  M,  which  are  merely  reprinted  from  Colgan.  The  SR  text 
is  much  shorter  than  that  in  M,  omitting  much  that  is  interesting, 
and  adding  hardly  anj-thing.  We  have  in  addition  the  life  of 
Piranus  in  the  Noua  Legenda  Anglie,  who  is  merely  Ciaran  of  Saigir 
in  a  British  dress '.  This  is  cited  as  Capgrave  from  Horstman's 
edition,  ii.  320  ff.  Like  all  lives  in  that  collection,  it  is  much  ab- 
breviated,  and  some  of  the  Irish  names  are  hopelessly  bungled^ 
But  in  spite  of  these  drawbacks,  the  text  is  of  great  interest ;  as  it 
was  evidently  epitomized  from  a  text  which  contained  a  great  deal 
more  than  any  of  the  other  Latin  lives';  the  arrangement  of  the 
matter  also  differs  considerably. 

Three  Irish  lives  of  Ciaran  of  Saigir  are  known  to  me.  Thc 
first  is  at  Brussels  among  the  0'Clery  MSS.  4190  x  4200  f.  144.    This 

Misc.  Celtic  Soc.  pp.  18-22,  from  the  notes  to  which  it  appears  that  his  cult  still 
survives  in  the  island  of  his  birth,  Cape  Clear. 

A  note  in  Fel.^  p.  90  mentions  a  work  by  Cairnech  Moel,  called  *Imirce 
Ciarain ',  i.  e.  Ciaran's  journey  or  pilgrimage,  as  e.\isting  at  Saigir  in  the 
writer's  time.  It  has  probably  long  since  perished.  Ciaran  is  invoked  in  the 
Litany  LL.  373'*  63  :  '  in  cuic  fir  dec  lotar  la  Ciaran  Saigre,'  i.  e.  the  fifteen  men 
wlio  went  with  Ciaran  of  Saigir.  I  have  not  identified  thc  incident  referred  to. 
It  might  be  tlie  journey  to  or  from  Italy  in  §  3. 

'  According  to  tlie  usual  interchange  of />  and  c  (qv)  in  Brythonic  and  Goidelic. 
There  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  naraes.  Whether  the  writer  is 
justified  in  identifying  Ciaran  of  Saigir  with  tiie  Pieran  wlio  gives  Iiis  name  to 
Perranzabuloe  and  other  places  in  Cornwall  (D.  C.  B.  s.  v.  Piranus,  Baring-Gould 
and  Fisher,  ii.  135-8")  is  much  morc  doubtful.  This  life  tal<es  the  saint  from 
Ireland  to  Cornwall  bcfore  his  death  and  buries  him  at  Pcrranzabuloe.  Of  this 
there  is  no  trace  in  thc  Irish  sources,  which  do  not  record  cven  a  temporary 
sqiourn  in  Brilain.  I  have  suggcsted  above,  p.  li,  note  3,  that  possibly  thcse 
dedications  bclong  to  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois. 

^  e.  g.  Cohingus  tbr  Aengus,  Cota  for  Cocha,  Bruneta  for  Brunecha. 

'  The  most  interesting  addition  is  perhaps  the  story  of  the  king  who  has  the 
power  of  slaying  with  a  look,  §  23  note.     Cf.  Balor  of  the  Evil  Eye. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  liii 

is  also  the  most  interesting.  Both  in  arrangement  and  in  the  addi- 
tional  matter  inserted  it  has  a  very  close  affinity  with  Capgrave's 
text ;  it  cannot  hovvever  be  taken  from  that  text,  as  it  contains  some 
things  which  are  not  in  Capgrave'.  The  inference  therefore  seems 
justified  that  it  is  translated  from  the  same  text  which  Capgrave 
epitomized'.  The  second  Irish  life  is  in  the  Stowe  MSS.  (R.  I.A.) 
ix.  222  tf.  This  for  the  most  part  covers  the  same  ground  as  M, 
but  is  shorter,  and  has  some  points  of  difference.  The  life  printed 
by  0'Grady,  Silva  Gadelica,  i.  i  ff. '  is  a  mere  eighteenth-century 
translation  of  the  M  text,  and  is  of  no  independent  value  whatever. 
The  first  and  second  of  these  lives  are  cited  in  the  critical  notes  as 
Br.  and  Du.  (Dublin)  respectively. 

In  the  case  of  Ciaran  of  Saigir  we  are  once  more  brought  face  to 
face  with  theobscurequestion  of  pre-Patrician  Christianity  in  Ireland. 
The  three  other  saints  whom  popular  tradition  regards  as  anterior 
to  Patrick,  Ailbe,  Declan,  Ibar,  are  all  brought  into  the  story.  The 
King  of  Munster,  with  whom  Ciaran  has  most  to  do,  is  Aengus  mac 
Nadfraich  *,  whom  Patrick  is  said  to  have  baptized.  On  the  other 
hand  Ciaran  is  brought  into  relation  with  a  number  of  saints  of  much 
later  date,  with  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois  and  Finnian  of  Clonard  (both 
t549),  with  Brendan  of  Birr  (^571  FM)  and  Brendan  of  Clonfert 
(r  577  or  583).  It  may  be  from  a  vague  sense  of  these  chronological 
difticulties  that  the  biographers  of  St.  Ciaran  give  him  a  span  of  life 
varying  from  200  to  400  years^.  But  the  question  arises,  here  and 
elsewhere ",  was  the  life  of  a  post-Patrician  saint  prolonged  backwards 
by  local  patriotism  and  desire  for  ecclesiastical  independence '  in 
order  to  make  him  anterior  to  the  great  national  apostle  ?  or  was  the 
life  of  a  pre-Patrician  saint  prolonged  forwards  in  order  to  bring 

'  cc.  25.  30,  31  have  no  parallels  in  any  of  the  Latin  lives ;  cc.  2",  19",  20, 
22-4,  29  only  in  Capgrave. 

^  The  translation  is  late,  as  is  shown  by  the  occurrence  of  such  vvords  as 
seipflj  chapel  ;  seirbis,  (divine)  service  ;  sttipcr,  supper.  It  is  not  impossible 
that  the  Latin  original  may  yet  be  found.  For  a  ludicrous  mistake  of  the 
translator  see  notes  to  §  6. 

'  From  Egerton  ii3  f.  513;  it  exists  also  in  other  eighteenth  and  nineteenth- 
centurj'  MSS. 

*  Another  king  of  Munster,  Ailill  is  mentioned,  who  is  apparently  the  son 
and  successor  of  Aengus  ;  for  Carthagus,  who  in  §§  13,  15  is  called  'nepos'  of 
Aengus,  is  in  §  29  called  '  filius  regis  Cassyl '.  This  title  shows  that  it  is  not 
any  Munster  under-king  that  is  meant.  But  I  cannot  find  an  Aihll,  King  of 
Munster,  at  this  time  either  in  the  annals  or  in  the  Hsts  of  kings.  Mart.  Don. 
makes  Carthach  the  son,  not  the  nepos,  of  Aengus.  On  the  battles  of  §  16 
cf.  F.  M.  ann.  478,  489,  and  notes. 

*  Over  200  Capg. ;  nearly  300  S  and  R  ;  300  M  ;  400  Br.  So  in  the  so-called 
life  of  St.  Maignenn  (a  quo  Kilmainham),  Silva  Gad.  i.  37  ff.,  that  saint  is  raade 
to  converse  with  persons  vvhose  obits  vary  in  date  from  549  to  787. 

'  See  pp.  XXX  f.,  Ixi.     On  Patrick  and  Ciaran  cf.  V.  Tr.  p.  76. 
'  In  Fei.^  p.  86  Ciaran  is  called  '  episcopus  episcoporum '. 


liv  INTRODUCTION 

him  into  relation  with  some  of  the  later  famous  saints  of  Ireland? 
In  the  present  casc  the  latter  view  seems  to  me  more  probable. 
The  fact  that  the  title  '  first-born  of  the  saints  of  Erin '  attached  itself 
to  Ciaran  seems  to  me  to  have  weight  in  this  connexion ',  though 
homage  is  done  to  the  Armagh  tradition  by  malcing  Ciaran  not  only 
submit  to  Patrick  on  his  arrival,  but  also  receive  authority  from  him 
in  Italy  prior  to  his  arrival  in  Ireland.  On  the  other  hand,  the  story 
that  Ciaran  in  extreme  old  age  put  himself  to  school  under  St. 
Finnian  of  Clonard,  seems  an  obvious  device  adopted  in  order  to 
include  Ciaran  among  the  pupils  of  that  famous  teachcr.  On  the 
whole,  therefore,  I  am  inclined  to  regard  Ciaran  of  Saigir  as  being 
really  a  fifth-century  saint. 

But  if  the  historical  relations  of  the  saint  are  obscure,  his  mytho- 
logical  affinities  are  clear  and  important.  He  is  unquestionably  the 
hagiological  representative  of  a  solar  and  fire  deity  or  hcro  (§§  8-11, 
19,  24  and  note,  25,  29,  32,  33).  With  this,  as  in  other  mythologies, 
is  combined  the  character  of  the  deity  that  protects  and  is  the  patron 
of  wild  animals  (§§  2,  5-7) ' ;  and  the  description  of  the  saint's  first 
monks,  '  brother  fox,'  the  badger,  the  wolf,  and  the  doe,  reads  like 
a  page  from  a  mediaeval  'Jungle  Book'^ 

In  locality  Ciaran  is  the  patron  saint  of  the  Osraighi';  they  form 
his  'parochia';  and  to  this  day  the  boundaries  of  that  ancicnt  tribe 
form  the  limits  of  the  diocese  of  Ossoi-y  (§§  16,  28). 

Vita  Sancti  Coenigeni  abbatis  de  Glenn  da  Loch''.  This  life 
is  here  printed  from  M  f.  64''.  In  T  this  life  is  wanting  owing  to  the 
mutilation  of  the  MS.  There  is  another  Latin  life  of  Coemgen 
in  S  f.203'',  (C.  S.  cc.  835  fi".),  and  in  R=  f.  ii6<=.     In  R'  the  life  has 

'  A  collect  for  his  office  cited  A.  S.  Mar.  i.  390"  begins  :  '  Deus,  qui  B.  Kie- 
ranum  pontificem  ante  alios  sanctos  in  Hibernie  insulam  misisti.' 

*  He  was  also  a  great  keeper  of  cattle  according  to  Fcl.-  p.  88;  cf.  §§  10, 

II,   21. 

'  The  attempt  of  the  authors  of  the  Lives  of  British  Saints  (ii.  124)  to 
cuhemerize  these  charming  '  jungle-folk '  scems  to  me  as  unscientific  as  it 
is  prosaic  ;  and  this  detect  runs  more  or  less  through  all  thc  work. 

*  Cf.  Three  Fragm.  p.  190:  '  ro  chuattur  Osraigiie  i  muinigin  naoimh  Ciarain 
Saighre  ma  buaidh  .  .  .  do  bhreilh  do  Laighnibh,"  i.  e.  the  men  of  Ossory  put 
their  trust  in  Ciaran  for  winning  victory  over  thc  Leinstermen  (,who  on  their 
side  rclicd  on  Brigit). 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Coemgen  in  LL  351',  LBr.  19«',  BB.  221»  (cf.  ib. 
232"),  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  51P,  Laud  610  flf.  38',  40'',  41''.  His  day  in  tlie  Calendars  is 
Junc  3.  The  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  citcs  Cuimin  of  Connor's  pocm,  11.  49-52, 
and  the  table  of  parallel  saints  LL.  370,  in  which  he  is  equated  with  Paul  the 
Hcrmit,  no  doubt  on  account  of  his  asceticism.  At  the  same  date  is  commemo- 
rated  his  convert,  the  robber  Glunsalach  (lit.  Foul-knee,  a  name  perhaps  given 
to  him,  as  Reeves  suggests,  MS.  T.  C.D.  1098,  from  hisdevotion  after  his  conver- 
sion.  There  is  a  curious  story  connccting  Coemgen  [Cheuin]  and  Glunsalach 
[Glunclach]  in  Capgr.  ii.  201-4'.  Coenigen  is  invoked  in  the  Litany,  LL.  373'', 
where  Glunsalach  also  occurs,  and  in  the  hymn  bcginning  '  A  Brigit  bennach 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Iv 

been  lost  owing  to  the  mutilation  of  thc  MS.  at  the  end.  S  and  R 
arc  identical,  agreeing  sometimes  cven  in  obvious  niistai:es ;  some- 
times  S  has  thc  bctter  reading,  sometimes  R.  The  S  R  recension 
is  very  much  shorter  than  M,  containing  only  sixteen  sections  as 
against  forty-eight.  It  has,  however,  one  incident  which  is  not  in 
M  (§  8  in  S  ;  given  in  a  note  to  §  8),  and  has  preserved  the  name  of 
the  pricst  in  §  5  (=  S  §  4)  which  M  has  omitted.  The  Bollandists 
printed  this  life,  A.  S.  June  i.  310  flf.  (B),  from  a  MS.  furnished  by 
Hugh  Ward,  probably  a  transcript  of  M.'  They  used  however  three 
other  'compendia' :  — («)  'unum  permodum  minoris  elogii';  (b)  'pro- 
lixius  ex  MS.  commodato  nobis  a  R.  P.  Henrico  Fitzsimon  ;  .  .  . 
cuius  auctor  ad  conquirendas  fabulas  uidetur  fuisse  studiosior' ;  (c)  '  ex 
Codice  Sahiianticensi.'  Of  {a)  and  (b)  I  have  found  no  trace.  An 
extract  from  (b)  is  given  in  the  notes  to  §  i  on  the  authority  of  B'. 

Three  Irish  iives  of  Coemgen  are  lcnown  to  me,  (ij  a  prose  life 
contained  in  Brussels  MS.  2324  f  274,  and  occasionally  cited  in  the 
notes  as  Br.  It  is  clearly  imperfect  at  the  end,  and  Michael  0'Clery 
in  his  colophon  spealts  of  it  as  '  this  little  fragment '.  This  is  an 
exaggeration  of  its  defects,  as  it  contains  eighteen  sections ;  (ii) 
a  metrical  life  contained  in  the  same  MS.  f.  278';  (iii)  a  life  partly 
in  prose  and  partly  in  verse.  Of  this  I  have  found  two  MSS.  : 
T.  C.  D.  No.  1346,  written  by  Hugh  0'Daly  in  1725 ;  the  other,  R.  I.  A. 
24  M  38,  written  by  Laurence  Mac  Anallaigh  (?)  in  1765*.  Liiie  other 
Irish  lives  it  has  been  interpolated  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the 

ar  set',  I-L.  308''  8  (cf.  Moling,  5  19  sub  fin.l,  and  also  in  Broccan's  Hymn  to 
Brigit,  LH.2  i.  115.  His  education  by  Bp.  Eogan  is  mentioned  in  the  life  of  the 
latter,  C.S.  c.916;  the  apparition  of  Patricli,  §  22,  is  in  LH.'  i.  6;  cf.  Col.  E.  §  25. 
The  allusion  to  the  Dublin  Danes  in  §  29  may  be  noted  as  a  mark  of  lateness. 
For  Scottish  dedications  to  Coemgen  see  Forbes.  Calendars,  p.  302. 

*  In  T.  C.  D.  1098  is  a  transcript  of  B  by  Bishop  Reeves,  with  collations 
from  M.  There  are  a  fevv  notes,  almost  all  taken  from  B.  At  the  end  is  a  shoit 
sketch  of  Coemgen's  life,  containing  some  interesting  topographical  information. 

-  {b'i  also  contained  a  collect  for  the  saint's  day,  cited  u.s.  p.  311';  the  life 
was  therefore  probably  intended  to  be  used  as  lections. 

'  0'CIery,  in  a  colophon  (ib.  f.  286),  expresses  a  very  unfavourable  opinion 
of  it  :  '  These  poems,  which  are  called  a  Life  of  Coemgen,  I  copied  from  a  book 
written  for  Fiacha  0'TooIe,  and  from  another  old  book  belonging  to  Domnall, 
son  of  Donnchadh  0'CuiIemhain  ;  and  it  is  plain  to  all  who  read  them  that  they 
are  disgusting  (go  snlac/i,  lit.  filth^-),  though  for  my  part  I  am  ashamed  to  confess 
it.'  I  do  not  quite  know  why  O  Clery  should  be  so  vehement  in  his  denuncia- 
tion  of  this  life.  It  contains  m  the  main  the  same  incidents  as  the  other  lives, 
neither  more  nor  less  legendary.  It  is  poor  poetry  no  doubt,  but  the  same  is 
true  of  most  compositions  of  the  kind.  He  e.xpresses  himself  even  more  strongly 
about  the  metrical  life  of  Caimin  of  Inis  Celtra  :  '  very  disgusting,  lying,  too 
short  in  some  places  and  too  long  in  others,  and  a  great  deal  of  it  utter  nonsense. 
But  I  make  my  excuse  that  it  was  enjoincd  on  me  to  follow  exactly  the  old 
book,'  ib.  f.  273.     This  last  life  I  have  not  read. 

'  The  order  of  the  chapters  in  this  MS.  is  somewhat  different,  and  the  language 
has  been  modernized. 


Ivi  INTRODUCTION 

privileges  and  securing  the  property  of  the  community  concerned. 
Both  (ii)  and  (iii)  purport  to  be  the  work  of  a  monk  of  Coemgen 
named  Solam  or  Solomon.  The  two  lives  are  very  closely  connected. 
They  cover  much  the  same  ground,  and  the  incidents  follow  each 
other  in  the  same  order,  even  where  that  order  is  clearly  wrong. 
Several  of  the  stanzas  of  (ii)  are  quoted  in  (iii) ;  and  this  no  doubt 
accounts  for  their  being  attributed  to  the  same  author.  Therefore  iii  its 
present form  (iii)  is  later  than  (ii).  But  I  do  not  think  that  this  is  their 
original  relation.  The  prose  narrative  of  (iii)  could  not  have  been  de- 
veloped  out  of  (ii).  Rather  (ii)  is  a  metrical  summary  of  the  narrative 
of  (iii) ;  then  some  later  editor  of  the  prose  life  inserted  stanzas  from 
(ii),  and  with  the  stanzas  transferred  also  the  name  of  their  supposed 
author.  There  are  many  points  of  considerable  interest  in  (iii),  and 
it  is  very  greatly  to  be  wished  that  some  earlier  MS.  of  it  could  be 
found.  It  is  cited  sometimes  in  the  notes  as  Du.  I  cannot  see  that 
either  (ii)  or  (iii)  have  any  direct  relation  with  either  of  the  Latin 
lives ;  and  (i)  has  sonie  sections  which  have  nothing  corresponding 
to  them  in  the  latter^. 

In  the  historical  setting  of  the  life  there  is  nothing  to  object  to. 
Coemgen  himself  died  in  6i8  or  622,  at  the  age,  according  to  the 
lives,  of  120  or  130;  which  probably  indicates  that  he  did  live  to 
a  considerable  age.  He  is  made  contemporary  with  Berchan,  who 
is  probably  the  Berchan  alias  Mobhi  Clarainech,  t  545;  with  Ciaran 
of  Clonmacnois,  t  549;  with  Colman,  son  of  Carbri,  chief  of  part  of 
North  Leinster  (^576  F.  M.,  where  he  is  wrongly  called  King  of 
Leinster) ;  while  Faelan,  the  son  of  this  Colman,  Coemgen's  pupil,  is 
mentioned  in  the  annals  at  6a8,  and  died  apparently  in  678".  Others 
with  whom  he  is  brought  into  relations  are  Columba,  '^597;  Aed,  son 
of  Ainmire,  King  of  Ireland,  +  598;  Cainnech,  +  599  or  600 ;  Comgall, 
+  602  (Chron.  Scot.) ;  Brandub,  King  of  Leinster,  +605;  and  Munnu 
of  Tech  Munnu  or  Taghmon,  1635.  Berchan  and  Ciaran  died  rather 
early  to  be  contemporaries  of  a  man  who  survived  to  618  or  later ; 
but  even  here  there  is  no  actual  impossibility.  The  life  is,  however, 
very  legendary.  In  his  mythological  aspect  Coemgen  scems  to  be 
m^jinly  a  protcctor  of  animals,  both  wild  and  domestic  (§§  3,  7,  9,  16, 
19,  24,  27,  32) ;  and  one  or  two  miracles  which  are  generally  asso- 
ciated  with  solar  or  fire  deities  have  also  become  attached  to  him 
(§§  5,  18  note,  35),  a  not  unusual  combination.  He  seems  to  be 
exclusively  a  South  Leinster  saint. 


'  In  the  Mart.  Don.  p.  144  an  Irish  life  of  Coemgcn  is  mentioned  as  being  in 
the  possession  of  Domnall  Carrach  of  Annaghmore  in  Wexford.  I  cannot  say 
which  liic  this  may  have  becn. 

'  Three  Fragmcnts,  p.  86. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ivii 

Vita  Sancti  Colmani  abbatis  de  Land  EloK  This  life  is  liere 
printcd  for  the  first  time  from  M  f.  129'",  collated  with  T  f.  106'. 
There  are  two  other  Latin  lives  of  Cohnan  Ela,  one  in  S  f.  123'' 
(C.  S.  cc.  415  ff.),  the  other  in  R'  f.  135",  R=  f.  139'',  and  F,  p.  130.  R'  is 
imperfect  at  the  beginning,  and  R^  in  the  middle^  All  three  recen- 
sions  are  sufficiently  aliice  to  malie  it  certain  that  they  have  some 
common  source  or  sources.  S  is  the  fullest,  and,  on  the  whole,  the 
most  original ;  but  it  is  possible  that  some  of  the  sections  peculiar 
to  S  have  been  transferred  from  lives  of  other  saints  to  vvhom  they 
refer'.  R  is  much  nearer  to  S  than  to  M  T,  but  is  shorter.  Its 
omissions  as  compared  vvith  S  sometimes  coincide  vvith  those  of  MT, 
and  sometimes  not*.  MT  has,  however,  some  original  points,  and 
as  this  text  has  never  been  printed,  it  seemed  worth  while  to  give 
it  for  purposes  of  comparison.  The  Irish  life  (so-called)  in  the 
Brussels  MS.  2324x2340  f  219  is  a  very  curious  composition,  but 
stands  in  no  relation  to  any  of  the  Latin  lives. 

In  thc  historical  framework  of  the  Latin  lives  there  is  nothing 
impossible.  Colman  himself  died  in  611.  He  is  made  contemporary 
with  Columba,  1 597  ;  Aed,  son  of  Ainmire,  1 598 ;  Cainnech,  t  599  or 
600 ;  Brendan,  son  of  Cairbre  ^,  Chief  of  Hy  Many,  t  601  ;  Aed 
Slane,  t  604  ;  Gregory  the  Great,  t  604  ;  Molua  of  Clonfertmulloe, 
t6o9;  Mochuda,  t  637 ;  while  Dimma  Dub,  t  659,  vvas  his  pupil. 
It  is,  however,  impossible  that  Colman  should  have  been  the  pupil 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Colman  in  LL.  352/,  LBr.  21",  BB.  223''  ad  calcem 
(cf.  ib.  232"),  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  52''.  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  Sept.  26,  which  is 
the  day  of  his  death  according  to  §  360^ this  life.  Mart.  Tall.  gives  him  in  addition 
at  Oct.  3  i  '  Colman  Ela  nat.'  ^natus,  or  natale,  or  natiuitas).  The  account  of  his 
parentage  in  Mart.  Don.  Sept.  26  is  taken  from  the  Irish  life  mentioned  below. 
His  association  with  Columba  is  borne  out  by  Adamnan's  life,  i.  5,  ii.  15,  and 
by  the  dedications  in  Scotland  to  Colman  (  Forbes,  Calendars,  p.  3051.  In  the 
life  of  his  namesake,  Colman  mac  Luachain,  he  and  the  latter  and  Colman 
Comraire  ^Sept.  25 1  are  associated  together  as  the  three  Colmans,  Rennes  MS. 
ff.  79*^,  80'',  86"  ;  so  Book  of  Lecan,  f.  183''.  To  Colman  Ela  is  ascribed  the 
authorship  of  the  tract  '  Aibgitir  in  Chrabaid,  or  Alphabet  of  Devotion,  printed 
by  K.  Meyer  frora  four  MSS.,  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  447  ff.,  cf.  ib.  i.  496  ;  §  10  of  this  occurs 
separatcly  with  the  title  Cosc  Mocolmoc,  LS.  p.  135;  §  11  occurs  separately, 
Brussels  5100,  p.  i,  2324  (.  67",  under  the  title  '  De  uitiis  latentibus  umbra 
bonorum  operum  '.  The  Felire  compares  him  to  St.  John,  '  ara  ecna  y  ara  oge,* 
for  his  knowledge  and  purity,  Fel.^  pp.  196,  212  (cf.  our  life  §  15  and  note) ; 
and  in  the  life  of  Mochua,  §§  2-4,  infra  ii.  184-5,  's  a  curious  story  how,  as 
a  punishment  for  his  pride  of  learning,  he  was  aiBicted  with  total  loss  of  memory 
until  restored  by  Mochua. 

'  The  fact  that  F  does  not  show  this  defect  proves  that  this  mutilation  must 
be  subsequent  to  1627. 

'  e.  g.  -S  §§  12.  25,  28,  38 ;  the  exploit  narrated  in  S  §§  39,  40  is  attributed  to 
his  namesake,  Colman  of  Droraore,  in  the  life  of  the  latter,  C.  S.  cc.  481-2. 

*  M  T  omits  S  §§  10,  12,  13,  24,  25,  28,  35,  37-40,  42;  R  omits  S  §§  24-6, 
31.37,  4I-3-  46. 

'  So  S,  probably  rightly;  M  T  with  less  likelihood  connects  the  incident  with 
Brendan's  father. 


Iviii  INTRODUCTION 

of  Finnian  of  Clonard,  t  549,  if  Colman  was  only  in  his  fifty-sixth 
year'  when  he  died,  as  Tigernach  states^.  The  anachronism  is  due 
to  the  tendency  to  make  all  the  famous  saints  of  Ireland  proceed 
from  the  school  of  Finnian. 

The  action  of  the  life  begins  in  Ulster,  then  centres  in  North 
Leinster,  especially  Leix,  with  excursions  latterly  into  Connaught. 

In  the  M  T  text  there  is  little  or  nothing  of  special  mj-thological 
significance ;  but  in  some  of  the  sections  of  the  S  recension  charac- 
teristics  of  a  fire  or  solar  god  or  hero  are  traccable  (S  §§  24,  37-9 ; 
cf  §  24  of  our  life). 

Vita  Sancti  Comgalli  abbatis  de  Bennchor'.  This  life  is  from 
M  f  90'",  collated  with  T  f  57''.  It  was  printed  from  M  in  FIeming's 
Collectanea  Sacra,  pp.  303  ff.*  It  was  reprinted  in  A.  S.  Maii,  ii. 
582  ff".,  from  Fleming's  edition  compared  with  '  MS.  antiquum '.  This 
MS.  must  have  been  a  good  one  ;  for  many  of  Fleming's  mistakes 
are  corrected,  though  other  mistakes  are  made.  and  liberties  taken 
with  the  text.  There  is  another  Latin  life  of  Comgall  in  S  f  191*^ 
(C.  S.  cc.  773  flr.)  and  R'  f  153^  R^  f  100«,  F  p.  46.  The  text  of  R  is 
practically  identical  with  that  of  S.  The  latter  is,  however,  imperfect, 
owing  to  the  loss  of  a  leaf  in  the  middle  ^    The  S  R  recension  is 

'  The  Mart.  Don.  says  that  he  was  only  fifty-two  when  he  died. 

2  R.  C.  xvii.  169. 

s  There  are  pedigrees  of  Comgall  in  LL.  348'',  LBr.  is',  BB.  218»  (cf.  ib. 
232''),  Laud  610  fT.  38'',  iio'',  Fel.-  p.  130.  His  usual  day  in  the  Calcndar  is 
May  10,  though  the  Aberdeen  Breviary  givcs  him  at  May  12  (Forbes,  Calendars, 
pp.  116,  308).  The  Mart.  Don.  at  May  10  cites  lines  17-20  of  Cuimin  of  Connor's 
poem,  and  also  the  table  of  parallel  saints  LL.  370",  in  which  Comgall  is  cquated 
with  '  lacobus  apostolus'  i,it  is  not  slated  whicli  ;  the  other  '  lacobus  apostolus  ' 
is  coupled  vvith  Finnian  of  Movillal.  He  is  mentioned  in  the  litany  LL.  373*" 
43  ;  '  Cetheora  mili  manach  co  rath  De  fo  mam  Comgaill  Bennchuir,"  i.  e.  4,000 
monks  (^the  life,  §  13,  says  3,000)  with  the  grace  of  God  under  the  yoke  of 
Comgall  of  Bangor.  A  metrical  rule  attributed  to  him  has  bcen  printcd  by 
btrachan  from  four  MSS.,  Eriu,  i.  191  IV.  ;  a  quatrain  said  to  be  by  him  is  in 
Fcl.'  p.  I.x.s.w.  The  rule  of  Bangor  is  celcbrated  in  a  hymn  in  the  Bangor 
antiphonary  (ed.  Warren,  ii.  28) ;  in  another,  Comgall  is  enumeratcd  first  among 
the  abbots  of  Bangor  (\h.  33^  while  a  third  is  dcvoted  entirely  to  his  praisc  (ib. 
16-19;  cf.  ib.  55-7,  69-71,  81-2.  I.  ix,  x).  A  writing  attributed  to  Comgall 
seems  to  be  cilcd  in  Magnus  0'Donncirs  Irish  life  of  Columba,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  64. 
H's  association  with  Columba  is  borne  out  by  Adamnan,  i.  49,  iii.  13,  17  (with 
Reeves'  notes  ;  cf.  V.  Tr.  p.  58) ;  and  he  has  dedications  in  Scotland,  Forbes, 
u.  s.,  p.  310.  (The  lections  in  the  Aberdcen  Breviary  relate  only  to  ComgalPs 
birth  and  childliood.)  A  dispute  between  Columba  and  Comgall  is  alluded  to 
in  the  Amra,  R.  C.  xx.  254,  434.  Kcating  cites  a  life  of  Comgall,  i.  52  ;  but 
I  cannot  say  which  it  is. 

*  That  M  was  Fleming's  MS.  was  conclusively  proved  by  Reeves  ;  sec  notes 
to  §  17.     Extracts  from  the  S  version  are  given  in  Flcming's  notes. 

"  The  S  R  recension  is  also  printed  in  A.  S.  u.  s.  pp.  580-2  from  S  and  two 
other  MS.  furnished,  one  by  Henry  Fitzsimon,  the  other  by  Hugh  Ward. 
From  the  extracts  given  in  the  notcs  the  lormer  secms  to  have  becn  nearcr  to  S, 
the  lattcr  ncarer  to  R.  The  part  ol  thc  A.  S.  tcxt  which  does  not  come  from  S 
closely  rcsemblcs  R. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  lix 

very  much  shorter  than  the  text  of  M  T'.  It  contains,  however,  some 
sections  peculiar  to  itself,  and  of  these  such  as  are  wanting  in  S  are 
given  in  the  notes  to  the  present  edition  ^  Of  the  great  interest 
of  the  life  from  the  mythological  point  of  vicw  as  bcaring  on  the 
cult  of  the  Ccltic  Sun-God^,  something  will  be  said  later. 

In  the  historical  setting  of  the  life  there  is  not  much  to  criticize. 
Comgall  died  in  602  (Chron.  Scot.),  at  the  age  of  eighty,  according  to 
S  R,  or  ninety  according  to  Mart.  Don,,  which  comes  from  Tigernach, 
R.  C.  xvii.  163.  He  is  made  contemporary  with  St.  Finnian  (here  called 
Findbarr)  of  Movilla,  t  579 ;  with  Brudeus,  who  is  probably  Bede's 
'Bridius  filius  Meilochon',  King  of  the  Picts,  ^584;  Columba,  ^597; 
Cainnech,  1 599  x  600 ;  Sinell  of  Movilla,  t  603 ;  Fachna,  son  of  Baetan, 
King  of  (Jlidia,  t  626.  The  bishop,  Lugaid,  who  ordained  Comgall, 
§§  II,  13  (cf.  §  19  note),  was  probably  not  Lugaid  or  Molua  of  Clonfert- 
mulloe  ;  for  the  latter  was  a  younger  contemporary,  534-609,  and  in 
his  own  life  is  made  a  pupil,  of  Comgall  *.  That  Comgall  was  a  pupil 
of  Fintan  of  Clonenagh,  who  died  in  603,  is  unlikely ;  as  in  that  case 
Fintan  must  have  been  over  a  hundred  whenhedied^  It  may  be 
a  mistake  for  Finnian  of  Clonard,  t  549. 

I  know  no  Irish  life  of  Comgall,  though  §  21  seems  to  postulate  an 
Irish  original ;  and  an  Irish  version  of  §  46  is  known  (v.  note  ad  loc). 
Comgall  seems  to  belong  entirely  to  Dal  n-Araide,  and  he  is  celebrated 
as  the  patron  of  that  district  in  the  verses,  previously  alluded  to, 
which  occur  LL.  367  lower  margin,  and  Rawl.  B.  486  f.  44''. 

Vita  Sancti  Cronani  abbatis  de  Ros  Cree  ^.     This  life  is  from 

'  That  it  is  a  mere  summary  appears  from  S  §  6 :  '  aliaque  perplurima  .  .  . 
fecit  mirabilia." 

'  Hardy,  Cat.  i.  191,  cites  Harl.  6576  ff.  337  ff.  as  a  life  of  Comgall.  It  is  in 
reality  a  copy  of  the  shorter  recension  of  the  Visio  Tungalli  or  Tundali.  In  the 
Index  to  the  volume  Tungallus  is  miswritten  Cungallus,  and  Hardy  (without 
e.xamination)  has  taken  this  to  be  Comgall. 

^  §5  5.  7.  8,  10,  II,  13,  15,  17  note,  19  and  note.  39,  43,  44,  46;  cf.  the  read- 
ing  of  Fitzsimon's  MS.  in  I5  :  '  sole  clariorem  filium  pariet,  qui  huius  orbis 
tenebras  suo  fulgore  fugabit '  {A.  S.  u.  s.  p.  582"). 

*  Lug.  §§  15-24.  In  Fel.^  pp.  180-2  is  a  story  how  MoKia,  though  Comgairs 
pupil,  became  his  confessor;  but  it  is  a  stronger  measure  to  make  hira  ordain 
his  master.  Lanigan's  suggestion  i^ii.  65-6)  of  Lugaid  of  Connor,  who  died, 
according  to  F.  M.,  in  537,  would  not  be  quite  impossible  if  Comgall  was  really 
ninety  when  he  died.  A  Lugaid  bishop  of  Lismore  in  Scotland  died  in  592, 
Ann.  Ult.  ;  Reeves,  Adamn.  p.  371.  On  the  mythological  significance  of  the 
association  with  Lugaid  see  below. 

^  This  would  be  no  difficultj'  to  the  scholiast  on  the  Felire,  who  gives  Fintan 
an  age  of  a  hundred  and  thirt}--five  at  his  death,  Fel.2  p.  ■76.  If  Comgall  was 
really  ninety  in  602  it  is  not  impossible,  as  Reeves  thought  (Eccl.  Ant.  p.  269), 
that  he  should  have  been  baptized  by  bishop  Macnisse  of  Connor,  vvho  died 
in  514- 

«  There  are  pedigrees  of  Cronan  in  Laud  610  f.  39",  Rawl.  B.  486  f.  35".  I 
give  that  of  Laud  with  readings  from  the  pedigree  on  the  margin  of  M  ;  '  Cronan 
Rosa  Cre  mac  Odrain  [Obrain  M],  m.  Domargein  [Domaingein  M],  m.  Fuiric 


Ix  INTRODUCTION 

M  f.  88^,  collated  with  T  f.  55-.  There  is  a  transcript  of  it  by  Bishop 
Reeves  in  T.  C.  D.  No.  1096.  It  has  not  been  printed  before.  There 
is  another  Latin  Hfe  in  S  f.  174''  (C.  S.  cc.  541  ff.).  This  is  obviously 
imperfect  at  the  end,though  there  is  no  lacuna  in  the  MS.  The  hfe 
printed  in  A.  S.  Apr.  iii.  580  ff.  is  the  S  text ;  but  it  has  the  last  three 
sections,  which  are  wanting  in  S,  in  a  text  practically  identical  with  M. 
The  editor  obtained  them  from  Father  Thomas  0'Sheerin,  the 
editor  of  Fleming's  Collectanea  Sacra.  In  the  introduction  he  notes 
that  Ussher  cites  a  difierent  hfe  of  Cronan  ',  but  expressly  says  that 
he  had  never  seen  this. 

The  two  recensions,  MT  and  S,  are  clearly  derived  from  a  common 
source,  and  equally  clearly  MT  is  nearer  the  original.  S  not  only 
omits  whole  sections,  but  obliterates  names  of  places  and  persons. 
I  have  not  met  with  any  Irish  life  of  Cronan. 

Thc  annalists,  so  far  as  I  know,  do  not  give  us  any  data  for  fixing 
the  chronology  of  Cronan's  life  ;  nor  are  there  niany  indications  in 
the  life  itself.  He  is  made  contemporary  with  Finghin,  King  of 
Munster,  +619  (v.  F.  M.  i.  253  note),  with  Fursa,  ^649  (?),  and  with 
Mochoemog,  ^656.  He  probably  lived,  therefore,  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  sixth  and  the  earlier  part  of  the  seventh  century.  By  birth  and 
labours  Cronan  belongs  to  Munster,  and  especially  to  Eile,  though 
he  began  his  ecclesiastical  career  in  Connaught.  There  does  not 
seem  to  be  any  special  mythological  element  in  the  life. 

Vita  Sancti  Declani  episcopi  de  Ard  Mor  -.  This  life  is  here 
printed  from  T  f.  66''  collated  with  M  f.  101".  The  former  MS.  is 
slightly,  the  latter  more  seriously,  mutilated  at  the  beginning.  The 
probable  reason  for  this  mutilation  and  the  means  by  which  it  has 
been  made  good  are  stated  in  a  note  ad  loc.  The  life  has  been 
printed  by  the  Bollandists,  A.  S.  July  v.  590  ff.     The  editor  says  that 

[PhurigM],  m.  Olchon,  m.  Imraith  [AmraidhM],  m.  Eoluirg.  [m.  DergMarfrf], 
m.  Eirc,  m.  Abannaig  [Sabarrnaig  M],  m.  Findchaim,  m.  Feic,  m.  Imchada 
Uallaig  [Finncada  M],  m.  Conla,  m.  Taidg,  m.  Cein,  m.  AilcUa  Oluim.'  His  day 
in  the  Calendar  is  April  28.  Mart.  Tall.  says ;  '  Cronan  .  .  .  qui  prius  Mochua 
dicius  est.'  But  Mocluia  is  tlic  later  hypocoristic  name,  as  in  tlie  casc  of  his 
namcsake  of  Clondalkin  :  '  Mochua, .  .  .  qui  Cronan  prius  dictus  cst,'  Fcl.-'  p.  182. 
Fcr  another  casc  of  thc  intcrciiange  of  these  names  v.  Maed.  §  34. 

'  Ussher,  Works,  vi.  541,  cites  parts  of  §§  i5,  17.  With  §  17  cf.  a  diflerent 
version  in  Car.  §  61.  Cronan  is  mentioned  also  in  Lug.  §  52.  For  the  Book  of 
Dimma,  to  which  the  legend  in  §9  refers,  see  Miss  Stokes,  Early  Christian  Art, 
pp.  23-4  ;  Christian  Inscriptions,  ii.  100-2. 

2  There  are  pedigrees  of  Declan  in  LL.  348«,  LBr.  15'',  BB.  218'"  (cf.  ib.  231''), 
F^l.*  170,  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  52''.  They  differ  considerably  as  to  the  name  of 
Declan's  father.  Fcl.,  BB.  231'',  lil<e  the  life,  call  him  Erc  ;  LBr.  calls  him 
Koss  or  Russ  ;  LL.  and  BB.  218'' call  him  Ernbrand  [cf.  Icel.  Jarnbrandr]  ; 
while  Rawl.  gives  a  conflate  form  Ercbrand.  Dcclan's  day  in  the  Calendar  is 
July  24.  The  account  in  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  is  based  on  the  Irish  version 
of  his  life.  According  to  a  note  in  F6\.-  p.  112  (April  7)  Dcclan  was  the  first  to 
introduce  rye,  'segal'  (=  sccale),  into  Ireland. 


THE    SEPARATE    LIVES  Ixi 

he  got  the  text  from  thc  Irish  Franciscans  at  Louvain,  '  ubi  etiam 
nunc  seruatur,  iitteris  llibernicis  exarata,  ut  illam  ex  antiquissimo 
codice  desumpsit.  .  .  .  frater  iile  Michael  Clery  .  .  .  Apographum 
nostrum  . . .  quoniam  errata  multa  et  plures  habebat  lacunas  conferri 
Romae  curauimus  cum  alio  exemplari  integro,  quod  erat  in  Collegio 
Sti  Isidori  cum  ibi  degeret  Franciscus  Haroldus  .  .  .  qui  nobis  haec 
Acta  per  se  .  .  .  emendata  .  .  .  restituit  anno  i679qualia  nunc  edimus.' 
At  first  I  was  inclined  to  identify  this  Louvain  MS.  with  the  MS.  of 
the  Irish  life  of  Declan,  now  Brussels  4190x4200  f.  171'.  This  is 
written  by  Michael  0'Clery,  who  says  (f.  193)  that  he  copied  it  from 
'an  old  book '  (seinleabhar)  belonging  to  Eochaidh  lii  Ifernain  (Eochy 
Heffernan)  ;  though  as  the  date  of  this  latter  was  only  1582,  the 
'  antiquissimus '  of  the  Bollandist  editor  would  be  an  exaggeration. 
As  this  Irish  life  is  an  almost  exact  translation  of  the  Latin  life  here 
printed,  it  niight  very  well  have  been  used  for  the  Bollandist  text. 
It  is,  however,  against  this  view  that  the  BoUandists  state  that  the 
Irish  verses  in  §  21  were  not  in  their  '  apographum  ',  but  were  taken 
from  the  St.  Isidore  Codex  ;  whereas  they  are  in  the  Irish  life.  The 
St.  Isidore  MS.  I  have  not  traced.  The  MSS.  relating  to  Ireland, 
formerly  in  the  Franciscan  College  of  St.  Isidore  at  Rome,  are  now  in 
the  Convent  of  that  order  on  the  Merchants'  Quay  at  Dublin.  But 
I  have  found  no  life  of  Declan  among  them.  The  Bollandist  text 
is  occasionally  cited  as  B.  Where  M  and  T  differ,  B  is  nearer  to  M 
than  T.  In  T.  C.  D.  No.  1098  there  is  a  transcript  of  B  by  Reeves, 
with  collations  from  M  and  T,  and  some  topographical  notes  which 
have  been  useful  in  identifying  one  or  two  of  the  places  mentioned  in 
the  life.  Dr.  Reeves  speaks  not  unjustly  of '  the  wretched  text  of  the 
Acta  Sanctorum',  and  of  the  life  itself  as  '  inestimable '.  It  is  indeed 
of  great  interest. 

Here  again  the  question  of  pre-Patrician  Christianity  meets  us,  and 
much  of  what  has  been  said  in  the  introductions  to  the  lives  of  Ailbe 
and  Ciaran  of  Saigir  applies  also  here.  Declan,  like  Ciaran,  not 
merely  submits  (after  a  struggle)  to  Patrick  on  the  Iatter's  arrival, 
but  takes  directions  from  him  in  Italy  as  to  his  own  place  of  settle- 
ment.  The  absence  of  any  reference  to  later  saints  inclines  me 
to  think  that  Declan  really  is  a  saint  of  early  date. 

St.  Declan  is  exclusively  a  saint  of  the  Munster  Deisi,  and  his 
labours  are  mainly  confined  to  them  and  the  adjacent  parts  of 
Munster.  Once  he  is  taken  to  Meath  (§  26),  but  only  that  he  may  visit 
the  ancestral  home  of  his  race,  the  Deisi  of  Tara. 

The  topographical  notices  of  Ardmore  are  of  great  interest.  To 
those  who  have  visited  the  spot  the  tradition  that  the  promontory 

'  It  is  found  also  in  three  laterMSS.  :  R.  I.  A.  0'Daly,  No.  25,  f.  22;  Hodges 
and  Smith,  No.  150,  p.  109  ;  King's  Inns,  Dublin,  No.  ig. 


Ixii  INTRODUCTION 

was  once  an  island  (§  i6)  will  not  seem  incredible,  for  the  land  to  the 
North  and  West  hes  low,  and  a  very  slight  depression  would  bring 
the  sea  over  it  again.  The  site  of  the  '  little  hermitage'  (desertulum) 
of  Declan  (§  38)  is  marl^ed  by  the  ruins  of  a  later  church  still  called 
Teampul  an  Diseirt,  i.  e.  thc  Church  of  the  Hermitage,  or  Dysert 
Church,  near  which  is  St.  Declan's  Well.  And  the  cultus  of  the 
saint  is  still  a  living  one  to-day.  The  tradition  of  a  special  connexion 
betvveen  Ardmore  and  St.  David's  (§  15)  probably  rests  on  fact,  for 
the  latitude  of  the  two  places  is  almost  exactly  the  same. 

The  journeys  to  Rome  (though  the  writer  modestly  restricts 
himself  to  three,  ib.)  '  to  learn  ecclesiastical  manners'  (§9)  bear 
obviously  the  mark  of  a  later  age,  while  §  36  seems  to  reflect  the 
period  of  the  Danish  invasionsS  though  some  piratical  attack  from 
the  opposite  coasts  of  Britain  is  by  no  means  impossible. 

1  know  of  no  other  lives  of  Declan  beside  this  Latin  life  and 
the  Irish  translation  of  which  enough  has  been  said  already.  It 
is  cited  in  the  notes  as  Ir. 

The  mythological  element  is  not  very  prominent  in  this  life. 
Where  it  does  appear  it  seems  to  point  decidedly  to  a  water  deity 
(§§  II,  15,  16).  This  is  interesting,  as  the  same  characteristic,  as  we 
have  seen,  is  strongly  marked  in  a  saint  of  a  neighbouring  district, 
Abban  of  Moyarney  in  County  Wexford. 

The  introductory  matter  is  imported  bodily  from  Irish  secular 
legends,  chiefly  from  the  stories  of  the  '  Expulsion  of  the  Deisi ', 
'The  Death  of  Medb',  and  '  Medb's  Three  Husbands'  (see  notes  to 
§§  I,  2).  It  is  curious  that  the  horrible  story  of  the  birth  of  Lugaid 
Sriab  n-derg  should  have  been  chosen  as  the  proem  of  a  work 
obviously  intendcd  for  homiletic  purposes  (§§  i,  20,  38)''. 

Vita  sancti  Endei  abbatis  de  Arann'.  This  life  is  taken  from 
Ri  f  103",  collated  with  R^  f  90",  and  compared  with   F  p.  291. 

'  Another  clearmark  of  lateness  is  the  mention  of  '  canonici '  in  §  26.  But 
the  life  seems  based  on  an  earlier  one,  of  which  it  is  an  abbreviation  ;  cf.  5  38, 
'omittentes  plurima.'  Such  as  it  is,  however,  it  is  the  only  life  wc  have. 
There  is  no  trace  of  a  hfe  of  Declan  either  in  S  or  in  R. 

2  Both  the  namc  and  epithct,  Lugaid  of  the  red  stripes,  show  that  we  have 
to  do  wilh  a  solar  myth.  The  name  Lugaid  is  a  derlvative  of  Lug,  the  name 
of  the  Celtic  Sun-God  ;  and  tlie  red  stripes  ^'  tres  rubri  circuli ',  5  i)  which  he 
bore  are  no  less  obviously  solar  in  origin. 

3  There  are  pedigrees  of  Enda  in  LL.  347'',  LBr.  i^",  BB.  217"  (cf.  ib.  231°), 
Rawl.  B.  486  f.  35'',  but  they  are  all  sopliisticaled  in  the  way  e.xplained  below. 
His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  March  21.  At  that  date  Mart.  Don.  cilcs  hnes  93-6 
of  Cuimin's  poem,  and  gives  a  very  mythical  anecdote,  the  source  of  which 
I  havc  not  traced.  Gigniat,  the  hero  of  it,  is  evidently  the  Gigncus  of  our 
life,  §28.  In  Fel.''  pp.  70,  112  Enda  is  one  of  the  thrcc  'athlaich'  lit.  e.\- 
warriurs,  i.e.  warriors  turned  monks  of  Ireland.  Enda  is  introduced  into 
Magnus  0'Donnell's  life  of  Columba  (Z.  C.  P.  v.  82-6),  but  chronological  con- 
siderations  make  this  practically  impossiblc. 


THE  SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixiii 

From  F  it  was  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  704  ff. ;  and  from  Colgan 
by  the  Bollandists,  March  iii.  269  ff.'  I  know  no  other  lifc  of  Enda 
either  in  Latin  or  in  Irish. 

Like  almost  all  the  lives  in  R  it  represents  a  very  late  recension  ; 
and  is  clearly  conflated  from  difterent  sources.  Thus  the  story 
narrated  in  §§  20-3  is  expressly  given  as  an  'aliter'  version  of 
§  19.  Even  Colgan  distinguishes  it  by  italic  type  ',  and  characterizes 
it  as  '  minus  authenticam,  ne  dicam  plane  apochrypham '.  The 
Bollandists  omit  it  altogether '.    Moreover  §  32  is  clearly  a  doublet 

'  The  critical  notes  furnish  abimdant  proofs  of  the  statements  in  the  text. 
For  a  possible  explanation  of  tlie  fact  that  Colgan's  edition  of  this  life  is  im- 
perfect  at  the  beginning  see  above,  p.  xix,  note  i.  The  edition  in  the  A.  S.  does 
not  exhibit  this  defect.  The  editors  note  that  CoIgan's  edition  is  'acephala', 
and  state  that  they  obtained  their  own  copy  of  the  life  from  Hugh  Ward. 
Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  710",  says  that  a  life  of  Enda  was  in  the  possession  of  Dr.  David 
Routh  ^or  Rothe),  R.  C.  Bishop  of  Ossory,  and  that  an  otfice  for  his  festival  was 
in  use  in  the  county  of  Galway  ;  but  he  had  not  seen  either  of  them.  In  R' 
§§  1-16  are  divided  for  reading  on  a  festival  of  nine  lections.  Lections  are  also 
marked  in  R-,  but  differently. 

*  In  F  it  is  underlined  throughout. 

'  In  Laud,  6io  f.  40",  there  is  a  short  Irish  version  of  this  story,  though  it 
differs  from  our  text  in  making  Pupeus  go  to  Aran,  as  it  would  seem,  only  after 
£nda's  death  :  '  Faelchu,  qui  nominatur  Pupu  Airni,  mac  Faelchair,  mic  Fadalaig  ; 
7  ba  ri  Osraigi  Faelchar  mac  Fadalaig  ;  7  is  uad  Sil  Faelchair  la  hOsraighib. 
Ocus  is  ime  atberar  do  Pupu  .i.  Papa,  o  rogab  abdaine  Roma  tareis  Grigoir  Roma  ; 
7  foragaibsium  a  abdaine,  7  dochuaid  a  n-diaigh  taisi  a  maigistrech  co  hAraind 
iarthair  Eorpa.  Conad  hi  an  tres  relig  angel  Airne,  reileig  teglaig  Pupu  mic 
Faclchair  mic  Fadalaig,'  i.  e.  Faelchu,  who  is  called  Pupu  of  Aran,  son  of 
Faelchar,  son  of  Fadalach  ;  and  Faelchar  was  king  of  Ossory,  and  from  him  are 
the  Sil  Faelchair  (seed  of  F.)  in  Ossory.  And  this  is  why  he  is  called  Pupu, 
that  is  Papa,  because  he  took  the  abbacy  of  Rome  in  succession  to  Gregory  of 
Rome.  And  he  resigned  his  abbacy,  and  followed  the  relics  of  his  master  to 
Aran  of  the  West  of  Europe  (i.  e.  Ireland).  So  that  one  of  the  three  angel 
cemeteries  of  Aran  is  the  cemetery  of  the  household  (i.  e.  monastery)  of  Pupu, 
son  of  Faelchar,  son  of  Fadalach.  But  according  to  a  note  in  LL.  373,  lower 
margin,  Pupu's  original  name  was  Nem  mac  hiii  Bim,  and  he  was  also  called 
Cailbe  ;  so  Fel."  p.  150,  where  he  is  further  said  to  have  been  a  brother  of 
Ciaran  of  Saigir.  (In  the  life  of  Maignenn,  Silva  Gad.  i.  40,  he  is  called  m6r- 
Phopa  papa.  i.  e.  Great  Popa  the  Pope !)  The  Northmen  called  the  Irish 
anchorites  whom  they  found  in  the  Islands  '  popes '  (see  the  Cleasby-Vigfusson 
Dict.  s.  V.  papi),  and  it  is  possible  that  the  whole  story  may  be  the  invention  of 
some  one  who  only  knew  the  vvord  Pope  as  tlie  title  of  the  head  of  the  Roman 
Church.  There  is  a  reference  to  Enda  in  LL.  349"  :  '  Domma  Droma  Ddthe  .  .  . 
ise  congab  Disert  n-Ennae  iar  techt  do  Enna  dar  muir'  ;  '  Domma  of  Druim 
Dothe  .  .  .  it  is  he  who  occupied  Disert  Enda  after  Enda  had  gone  across  the 
sea.'  This  need  not  imply  more  than  Ihe  visit  of  Enda  to  Rosnat  or  Whitern, 
which  is  common  to  both  the  original  and  the  interpolated  parts  of  the  text, 
though  in  the  former  the  abbot  of  Rosnat  is  called  Maucennus  and  in  the  latter 
Wonend  i_i.  e.  My  Nennius).  This  again  indicates  the  diBerence  of  the  sources 
used,  but  thc  person  meant  is  the  same  ;  cf.  Cod.  Sal.  c.  915 :  '  uir  sapiens 
Nennyo  qui  Maucennus  dicitur.'  (On  the  attempt  to  identify  Nynias  of  Whitem 
with  an  Irish  Moinenn  or  Monend  see  Bede,  ii.  128.)  The  statement  of  the  life 
that  Enda  visited  Rorae  and  brought  back  foreign  disciples,  §§  7,  8,  28,  derives 
some  confirmation  from  an  early  sepulchral  inscription  found   in  Aranmore  : 


Ixiv  INTRODUCTION 

of  §  26',  though  the  compiler  disguises  this  by  attaching  the  incident 
to  a  supposed  later  visit  of  Ciaran  to  Aran.  In  considering  the  chrono- 
logical  framework  of  the  lifewe  may  neglect  these  later  insertions. 

It  is  curious  that  though  Enda  was  such  a  popular  saint,  the 
chroniclers  give  us  no  dates  in  connexion  with  him.  The  evidence  of 
the  life  points  to  the  latter  part  of  the  fifth  and  the  earlier  part  of 
the  sixth  century  as  his  period.  The  grant  of  Aran  is  said  to  have 
been  made  by  Aengus  mac  Nadfraich,  King  of  Munster,  who  was 
killed  in  490  or  491  -.  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois,  +  549,  is  his  pupil,  while 
Darerca  or  Moninna,  the  abbess  of  Killevy,  +  517  or  519,  is  a  friend  of 
his  sister.  So  far  all  is  consistent.  He  is,  however,  made  a  son 
of  Conall  Derc  (or  the  Red),  chief  of  Oriel,  who  died  in  609.  Zimmer 
has  with  great  acuteness  pointed  out '  the  origin  of  this  mistake, 
which  is  common  to  all  the  later  authorities  on  Enda.  It  is  due  to 
an  ignorant  attempt  to  identify  Saint  Enda  with  Enda,  son  of  Conall 
Derc,  one  of  the  three  Ui  Corra  in  the  tale  '  Imram  Curaig  hua 
Corra'<.  The  oldest  authority,  the  Martyrology  of  Tallaght,  gives 
Enda's  father  as  Ainmire,  son  of  Ronan  of  the  Cremthanns  (a  district 
in  Meath),  whom  the  later  authorities  make  his  maternal  grand- 
father  ''■. 

By  his  false  pedigree,  therefore,  Enda  belongs  to  Oriel,  but  by  his 
true  pedigree  to  Meath.  His  work,  however,  is  almost  exclusively 
associated  with  the  Aran  Islands. 

There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  special  mythological  significance 
in  the  life  as  we  have  it. 

Vita   Sancti   Fechini   Abbatis   de    Fauoria''.      This  life  is  here 

'vii  Romani,'  Petrie,  Round  Towers,  p.  139  ;  Christian  Inscriptions.  ii.  ai.  On 
the  topographical  data  of  the  hfe  of  Enda  there  are  some  intercsting  notes  in 
0'Flaherty's  lar-Connaught,  ed.  Hardiman,  pp.  79  fi". ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  714-15. 

'  Yet  another  version,  Ci.  C.  §  21. 

2  There  is  a  different  version  of  this  incident,  Ail.  §  25,  the  motive  of  which 
may  have  been  to  assert  tlie  ccclesiastical  jurisdiction  of  Munster  over  the  Aran 
Isles,  as  the  grant  by  Acngus  asserted  the  socular  jurisdiction  of  Munstcr. 
Later  thcy  werc  subjcct  civilly  to  Connaught,  and  ecclesiastically  to  Tuam. 

'  Keltischc  Beitr.  ii.  206  ft'.  There  is  a  Conallus  Rubeus  (Conall  Derg"»  in 
tl-e  lifc  of  Molaissc  of  Devenish,  5  14.  Whether  this  is  intendcd  to  be  the  chief 
of  Oriel  who  died  in  609  I  cannot  saj'.  As  Molaisse  died  at  the  latest  in  571 
the  identification,  though  not  impossiblc,  is  unlikely ;  see  p.  Ixxiv,  note  6. 

*   Printed  by  Stokes,  R.  C.  xiv.  22  ff. 

'  LL.  372''  25  (on  which  Mart.  Don.  scems  to  bc  basedl  makcs  Ainmire  chief 
of  the  Ards,  co.  Down  ;  while  Fcl,-  p.  100,  and  a  pcdigree  insertcd  in  F,  make 
liim  chief  of  Fcrrard,  co.  Louth.  LL.  and  M.  D.  call  Enda's  mothcr  Acbfind, 
while  the  pedigrce  in  F  (likc  the  life^  calls  her  Brig.  F  howcver  makcs  Conall, 
Enda's  alleged  father,  bclong  to  thc  Cremthanns.  Colgan,  p.  711",  would  correct 
thc  Mart.  Tall.,  and  read  :  'Ennae  .  .  .  m  ac)  [Brige  ingine)]  Ainmire,'  &c. 
The  Martyrology  of  Gorman  calls  Enda's  father  Conall  of  Cloghcr. 

»  Thcrc  are  pedigrees  of  Fcchin  in  LL.  352",  LBr.  21",  BB.  223'^,  Fel.'  p.  48, 
Rawl.  B.  503  f.  51",  Laud.  610  (T.  38'',  39'',  39',  41'' ;  in  the  last  citcd  passagc  he  is 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixv 

printcd  from  R'  f.  iii'',  collatcd  with  R^  f.  178',  and  compared  vvith 
F  p.  220.  This  life  was  printed  by  Colgan  in  his  Acta  Sanctorum, 
pp.  130  ff. ;  and  by  the  Bollandists,  A.  S.  Jan.  ii.  329  ff.  Reference  to 
the  critical  notes  will  show  that  Colgan  certainly  took  his  text  from 
F,  though  he  has  numerous  independent  mistakes  of  his  own.  Many 
of  these  are  corrected  in  thc  Bollandist  text  (Bi,  for  which  two  MSS. 
were  used ;  one  derived  from  Hugh  Ward,  the  other  from  Henry 
Fitzsimon.  The  former  was  either  F  or  a  copy  of  it ;  the  latter, 
which  has  disappeared,  had  marked  peculiarities  of  its  own,  e.  g.  the 
omission  of  §§  7-9,  and  the  unexpurgated  recension  of  the  story  in 
§  13'.     I  know  of  no  other  Latin  life  of  Fechin. 

The  life  is  clearly  an  abbreviation  of  a  longer  work,  and  seems  to 
announce  itself  as  such  in  §  i.  It  is  also  no  less  clearly  incomplete' 
(there  is  no  account  given  of  Fechin's  death),  though  a  false  appear- 
ance  of  completeness  is  given  bj'  appending  to  the  last  prose  section 
(21)  a  short  poem  on  his  miracles  and  two  hj-mns'.  It  is  to  be  noticed 
that  neithcr  the  poem  nor  the  hymns  are  based  on  the  R  text  which 
they  supplement. 

The  poem  alludes  to  a  story  of  the  release  of  a  captive  which  is  not 
in  R,  though  parallels  to  it  are  found  in  both  the  Irish  lives,  §§  24, 
41-2  ;  while  the  second  hymn  contains  a  similar  incident  taken  from 
the  first  Irish  life,  §  21,  but  not  in  R.  Both  the  poem  and  the  second 
hymn  have  the  miracle  of  the  raising  of  the  Queen  of  Leinster, 
while  the  hymn  has  another  incident,  the  healing  of  a  blind  man, 
neither  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  R.  or  in  either  of  the  Irish  lives, 
though  thej'  occur  in  the  conflate  life  which  Colgan  compiled  from 
three  different  Irish  sources  and  translated  into  Latin  *  (§§  45,  30). 

These  three  lives  are  described  by  Colgan  as  follows :  '  unam 
fusam  ex  Codice  Imaciensi  [i.  e.  of  the  monastery  of  Omey  in  the 

called  by  the  hypocoristic  name  Moecca  [Mo-fhecca],  cf.  Mochoem.  5  29  ;  Fel.'^ 
u.  s.  These,  like  the  hfe,  make  him  son  of  Caelcharna  ;  but  the  metrical  Naem- 
senchus,  BB.  231"  ad  calcem,  calls  him  '  mac  Cillin  '.  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is 
Jan.  20.  The  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  cite.=;  II.  21-4  of  Cuimin  ofConnor^a  poem, 
and  also  alludes  to  the  Naemsenchus  u.  s.,  and  to  the  LL.  table  of  parallel  saints 
in  which  Fechin  is  equated  vvith  Anthony  the  monk  ^1.  e.  the  Egyptian  '  founder  of 
Asceticism ').  For  some  interesting  notices  of  places  connected  with  St.  Fechin 
see  0'FIaherty's  lar  Connaught,  pp.  106,  112-15,  120-1,  279  f, ;  Petrie.  Round 
Towers.  pp.  4246".  His  'bed'  is  mentioncd  in  a  poem  cited  by  0'Curry, 
Jlanners,  ii.  119  f.  Fintan  Maeldub.  ('  cf  Cain.  §  45)  is  said  to  have  been  his 
disciple,  Fel.'  p.  224.  He  appears  as  Vigean  in  Scolland,  Forbes,  Calendars, 
pp.  456-8. 

'  See  notes  ad  loc. 

'  Colgan  rightly  calls  it  :  '  breuis  et  mutila  actorum  eius  epitome,'  A.  S. 
p.  140''. 

''  The  statement,  ii.  84  note,  that  the  BoUandists  do  not  give  the  two  hymns, 
is  true  as  regards  their  text  of  the  life  :  they  give  them,  however,  in  their 
introductorj-  remarks,  a  fact  which  I  ought  to  have  noted. 

*  A.  s.  pp.  133  fr. 


Ixvi  INTRODUCTION 

island  of  that  name'  (Ir.  Imaid  Feichin)  in  thc  extrcme  west  of 
Galway,  oft'  Achris  Point],  quam  eiiis  compilator  .  .  .  indicat  .  .  . 
desumptam  esse  ex  alia  latina ;  .  .  .  aliam  habemus  stylo  plane  uetusto 
et  magnae  fidei,  sed  principio  et  fine  carentem  ;  tertiam  uero  uetusto 
et  cleganti  metro  Ixxiv  distichis  constante'  (pp.  139,  140). 

In  Rev.  Celt.  xii.  318 ff.  the  late  Mr.  Whitley  Stoiies  printed  an  Irish 
hfe  of  Fechin  from  the  unique  copy  in  MS.  Phillipps,  9194  ff.  i  ff. 
This  life  is  really  made  up  of  two  lives'^,  the  first  cOmprising  §§  1-28, 
the  second  §§  29-49.  The  tvvo  parts  are  clearly  separated  by  a  scribal 
note  stating  that  the  preceding  life  was  translated  from  the  Latin  by 
Nicolas  the  younger,  son  of  the  abbot  of  Cong,  and  that  it  was  tran- 
scribed  by  0'Duffy  in  the  year  1329'.  The  second  life  is  imperfect 
at  the  end,  and  has  no  real  beginning.  though  a  homiletic  addrcss  is 
prefixed  to  conceal  the  defect.  Both  iives  contain  poems  which  Mr. 
Stolces  has  omitted  *. 

I  am  inclined  to  see  in  these  two  lives  the  two  first  of  Colgaas 
enumeration.  The  double  coincidence  that  the  first  is  expressly 
stated  to  be  translated  from  Latin  ^,  and  that  the  second  should  be 
imperfect  both  at  beginning  and  end,  is  too  striking  to  be  accidental. 
Both  lives  contain  a  good  deal  that  is  not  in  R.  And  they  have  not 
very  much  in  common.  The  foundation  of  Fore  (§9=  §§32-3)  and 
the  niission  to  Omey  (§  i7  =  §  35)  are  almost  the  only  points  at  which 
they  overlap.  But  the  incomplete  character  of  the  second  life  nialces 
it  impossible  to  argue  safely  as  to  their  mutual  relations. 

But  after  we  have  deducted  from  Colgan's  conflate  life  all  to  which 
parallels  can  be  found  either  in  R  or  in  the  two  Irish  iives,  there  still 
remain  several  sections  (8,  14-21,  24,  29-30,  38-42,  45-7)  which  have 
nothing  corresponding  to  theni  in  our  existing  litcraturc,  and  must 
therefore  be  supposed  to  have  come  from  Colgan's  third  source,  the 

'  'ex  qua  (insula)  accepimus  codicem  Hibernicum  uitae  S.  Fechini,'  A.S. 
p.  141". 

'  Called  above  the  first  and  second  Irish  lives  respectively. 

'  Cong,  north  of  Loiigh  Corrib,  called  Conga  Feieliin  in  Irish,  was  founded 
by  St.  Feciiin.  Who  Niciiolas  the  younger,  son  of  tlic  abbot,  was.  I  do  not 
know.  An  0'DufTy  (Diibthach  ui  Dubthaigh)  died  as  abbot  i.f  Cong  in  1223,  F.  M. 
Other  entries  connecting  the  same  family  witli  Cong  will  be  lound  at  1150 
and  1168. 

*  Tliis  is  to  be  regretted.  Tiresonie  as  these  poems  are,  they  sometimes 
contain  phrases  which  throw  liKht  on  the  corresponding  passages  of  prose. 
See  some  of  the  phrases  cited  p.  c.\l,  note  4  ;  tlK)Ugh  thc  scribe  of  the  life 
of  Molaisse  of  Devenish,  printcd  in  Silva  Gad.  i.  17  H'.,  omits  one  poem  on 
grounds  similar  to  those  urgcd  by  Mr.  Stokes  :  '  we  omit  the  rest  of  the  poem, 
bccause  there  is  nothing  in  it  but  what  has  been  already  given  ;  and  it  is 
better  as  it  stands  (^i.  e.  in  prose)  than  in  such  bad  poctry.'  For  the  original 
Irish  sec  ib.  32  note. 

'  Tliis  lost  Latin  original  may  have  bcen  thc  same  life  as  that  from  which 
Ihe  R  text  was  abbreviated. 


TIIE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixvii 

metrical  life.  Of  this,  so  far,  I  have  discovered  no  trace,  unless 
fragmcnts  of  it  are  containcd  in  the  omitted  poems  of  the  Irish  lives  '. 

Both  in  R  (§  12)  and  in  thc  second  Irish  life  (§  29)  the  authority  of 
Aileran  or  Aireran  the  Wise,  who  died,  like  St.  Fechin  himself,  in  the 
grcat  plague  of  thc  latter  part  of  the  seventh  century,  is  citcd  as  an 
authority  for  the  hfe  of  Fechin  -.  I  know  no  other  evidence  that 
Aileran  wrote  any  such  Hfe,  and  certainly  no  trace  of  it  exists.  In  its 
present  shape  R  is  vexy  late,  for  it  contains  miracles  vvhich  are  said 
to  have  occurred  after  the  coming  of  the  English  (§§  18,  19). 

The  historical  franievvork  in  R  is  sHght.  Fechin's  ovvn  death  of 
the  plague  in  665  or  668  seems  vvell  established  ;  though  none  of  the 
lives,  as  we  have  them,  give  the  extraordinary  story  found  in  the  life 
of  St.  Gerald  (§  12),  how  that  plague  was  brought  about  by  his  prayers'. 
He  is  made  contemporarj'  vvith  Diarmait,  son  of  Aed  Slaine,  joint 
King  of  Ireland,  vvho  died  in  the  same  plague,  and  vvith  Guaire  Aidne, 
the  hospitable  King  of  Connaught,  vvho  died  in  663  or  666  ;  vvith 
Caeman  Brec,  abbot  of  Russagh,  ^615;  vvhile  Columba,  ^597,  fore- 
told  his  birth  thirty  years  before.  In  the  Irish  lives  more  persons 
are  mentioned,  but  I  am  not  concerned  vvith  their  accuracy  now. 

The  mj^thological  affinities  of  Fechin  are  clear.  He  has  undoubt- 
edly  taken  on  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  solar  hero  (§  i,  mother's 
name  Lasair,  i.  e.  flame  ;  §§  4,  7,  13,  17,  20  ;  cf  Ir.  §§  5,  15,  21,  41  (?), 
46).  There  is  nothing  in  the  uaine  Fechin,  which  is  a  diminutive  of 
fiach,  a  raven  *,  to  account  for  this  accretion,  vvhich  must  be  due  to 
some  other  cause. 

Geographically  Fechin  seems  to  belong  partlj'  to  Connaught  and 
partly  to  Meath. 

The  miracle  of  piercing  the  hill  between  Lough  Leane  and  the 
monastic  mill,  vvhich  is  here  (§  4)  ascribed  to  Fechin,  is  in  the  Irish 
life  of  Mochua  of  Balla  attributed  to  that  saint'. 

Vita  sancti  Finani  abbatis  de  Cenn  Etigh".      This  life  is  here 

'  This  is  quite  possible.  \Ve  have  seen  in  the  case  of  Coemgen  (above, 
p.  Ivi)  that  an  earlier  prose  life  may  be  interpolated  from  a  metrical  life  which 
is  merely  an  epitome  of  itself. 

'  The  Irish  life  calls  Aileran's  work  a  compendium.  In  Colgan"s  conflate 
life,  §  47,  Adamnan's  authority  is  cited  for  a  rairacle  of  which  it  is  alleged  that 
he  was  an  eye-witness.     Adamnan  died  in  704,  forty  ycars  after  Fechin. 

^  Indeed  j  29  of  Colgan"s  conflate  life  seems  rather  to  contradict  it.  For 
other  instances  of  Fechin's  cruel  prayers  or  curses  see  Irish  Life,  ii.  §§  30,  43. 
Colgan  omits  these,  but  gives  others,  §§  16,  17. 

<  See  Fel.5  p.  48. 

'  L.  S.  11.  4679  flf.  It  is  mentioned  by  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Opp.  v.  134,  who 
says  that  no  woman  was  allowed  to  enter  either  the  mill  or  the  church  of 
Fore. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Finan  in  LL.  350"  (cf.  ib.  353"  35),  LBr.  iS** 
(cf.  ib  21''  ,  BB.  221"  (,cf.  ib.  231'').  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  April  7.  The 
story  of  his  birth,  which  in  the  lives  is  toned  down  to  a  vision,  is  given  in 

e  2 


Ixviii  INTRODUCTION 

printed  for  the  first  time  from  M  f.  84''  collated  with  T  f.  51''.  Two 
other  Latin  lives  of  Finan  exist  ;  one  in  S  f.  103''  (C.  S.  cc.  305  ff.)  ; 
the  other  in  R'  f.  142'',  R=  f  205'',  and  F  p.  257.  The  Bollandists  had 
the  S  text  before  them,  but  judged  it  too  doubtful  to  be  pubHshed, 
'donec  plus  lucis  effulgeat'.'  Colgan  prints  §24  of  the  M  text  in  his 
account  of  St.  Mochellog  at  March  26  (A.S.  p.  749),  and  promised  to 
give  the  whole  hfe  at  April  7.  So  he  would  probablj'  have  printed 
the  M  text  -,  though  he  had  also  the  R  recension  in  F. 

The  three  recensions  S,  R,  and  M  all  go  back  to  some  common 
original.  S  is  certainly  the  nearest  to  that  common  original,  vvliich  R 
and  M  have  independently  edited  and  abbreviated,  R  being  niuch 
the  nearer  to  S  of  the  two.  R  omits  many  interesting  details  which 
S  has  preserved,  especially  names  of  places,  &c.,  and  leaves  out 
wholly  §§  6,  16,  19,  33  of  S.  On  the  other  hand  R  '  farces'  the  text, 
more  suo,  with  much  ecclesiastical  padding,  biblical  parallels,  and 
such  like.  The  omissions  of  M  are  more  numerous,  §§3,  12,  15,  17, 
19,  22,  25,  31  of  the  S  text  being  all  excised,  while  for  §  35  a  diflerent 
incident  is  substituted.  The  greater  originality  of  S  may  be  seen  by 
comparing  S  §§16,21,35  with  M  §§13,  16,  26  respectively '.  The 
comparison  afibrds  an  interesting  study  of  the  way  in  which  primitive 
ideas  or  customs  which  gave  offence,  or  were  not  understood  in  later 
times,  were  graduallj'  obliterated  in  successive  editions  of  thcse  lives. 

Two  Irish  lives  of  Finan  of  Cenn  Etigh  (Kinnity)  are  known  to  me. 
The  first  (Ir.')  is  found  in  R.  I.  A.  Stovve  MS.  ix.  53^.,  and  in  Brussels 
2324-40  f.  135  (an  0'Clery  MS.),  both  of  which  are  copied  from  the 
same  original.  This  life  is  clearly  a  translation  from  the  M  text. 
Not  only  docs  it  contain  exactly  the  same  matter  in  the  same  order, 
not  only  does  it  retain  at  least  in  one  placc  Latin  words  *  taken  from 
the  text  of  M,  but  in  more  than  one  case  the  text  of  Ir.'  can  only  be 
explained  as  a  mistranslation  of  M  °. 

a  much  cruder  and  more  primitive  form  in  Fi\.^  p.  112,  where  also  the  origin  of 
his  nickname  of  'Camm  ',  i.  e.  the  crooked-eyed,  or  squinting,  is  traced.  He  is 
said  to  have  been  the  first  to  introduce  wheat  into  Ireland,  ib.  Nine  Icctions 
are  marked  on  tlie  margin  of  R^. 

>  A.  S.  Apr.  i.  656". 

'  We  have  sccn  how,  in  the  case  of  Aed  mac  Bricc,  Colgan  prcferred  the 
expurgated  and  less  original  text  of  M,  above,  p.  xxvii,  note  i. 

'  On  the  first  of  these  incidents,  the  sending  forth  of  souls  in  slcep  to  visit 
distant  places,  which  in  M  is  toned  down  to  a  vision.  whilc  R  omits  it  altogether, 
see  below,  Part  V,  p.  clxxii  infra.  Convcrsely  in  S  §  ai  the  '  water  of  cursing' 
in  S  is  toned  down  in  R,  whilc  M  §  i6  omits  it  altogether;  sce  notes  ad  loc. 

*  In  ^  7  it  has  '  do  choimcd  tabernam  panum '  = '  custodiebat  .  .  .  tab.  panum  '. 
M  is  the  only  Latin  text  which  has  this  phrase. 

'  A  striking  instancc  of  this  occurs  in  M  §  17.  This  rclates  how  Finan's 
brother  came  to  him  in  grcat  trouble  bccause  he  would  forfeit  his  land,  '  nisi 
precium  septcm  ancillaruni  .  .  .  redderet,'  i.  e.  the  price  of  seven  fcmale  slaves 
(Ir.  cumal),  a  well-known  unit  of  value  in  Irish  law,  a  'cumal'  being  equal  to 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixix 

The  other  Irish  hfe  (Ir.^)  has  bcen  printed  by  Mr.  Stewart 
Macahster  in  Zeitsch.  fiir  Celt.  Philologie,  ii.  550  iW,  from  a  MS.  in 
private  hands '.  It  is  later  than  Ir.' ;  and  is  clearly  based  on  a  text 
closely  akin  to  R.  Of  thc  eight  or  nine  sections  of  the  S  text,  which 
are  omitted  by  M,  Ir.''  retains  all  but  one,  which  is  omitted  by  R  also. 
On  the  other  hand  it  omits  the  same  four  sections  of  S  which  are 
omitted  by  R,  and  one  additional  one  (S  §  4) ;  but,  what  is  most  con- 
clusive,  it  agrees  with  R  in  points  where  R  diflers  both  from  S  and 
M  ;  thus  in  M  §  16  (  =  S  §  21)  it  has  R's  toned  down  version  of  '  the 
water  of  cursing"',  and  in  M  §17  it  gives  the  distance  between 
Kinnity  and  Corcaguiny'. 

Mythologically  Finan  seems  to  have  attracted  to  himself  features  ot 
the  sun  and  fire  divinity  (§§  i,  2,  4,  5,  7,  18  f  (S  §31),  24  (S  §35) ;  and 
his  connexion  with  Loeh  Lugdech  iCurrane  Lough),  Lug  being  the 
Celtic  Sun-God,  is  possibly  significant. 

Geographically  Finan  seems  exclusively  a  Munster  saint.  His 
chief  monastery  is  Kinnity  on  the  borders  of  Munster  and  Meath. 
But  he  is  also  closely  associated  with  his  native  land  of  Corcaguiny,  of 
which  he  is  the  special  patron  (§  16).  But  throughout  the  south-west 
of  Ireland  there  seems  to  be  considerable  confusion  between  our  saint 
and  his  namesake,  Finan  Lobar,  or  the  Leper.  Thus  the  connexion 
of  our  saint  with  Lough  Currane  *  makes  it  probable  that  to  him 
belong  the  church  and  monastery  of  St.  Finan  on  Church  Island  in 
that  lake.  Yet  the  festival  of  St.  Finan  is  kept  in  that  neighbourhood, 
as  I  was  informed,  on  March  16,  which  is  the  day  of  the  Leper  saint, 
our  saint's  commemoration  being  on  April  7.  So  the  monastery  of 
St.  Finan  on  Inishfallen,  Killarney,  is  popularly  assigned  to  the  Leper, 
but  may  belong  to  his  namesake.  On  the  other  hand,  of  course,  the 
acts  of  two  St.  Finans  may  have  got  combined  in  the  lives. 

The  chronological  data  are  slight.  The  annals  give  no  year  for 
Finan's  death.  Not  many  persons  are  mentioned  in  the  lives,  and  of 
them  almost  the  only  tvvo  that  can  be  dated  are  his  much  older  con- 
temporary,  Brendan  of  Clonfert,  who  prophesied  his  future  greatness 

three  cows.  The  translator  misunderstands  this  phrase  as  meaning  '  the  wages 
due  to  work  people',  and  recasts  the  whole  incident  in  accordance  with  this 
idea.  The  mistake  could  not  have  originated  in  the  text  of  S  or  R,  which  have 
simply  '  vii  ancillas  '  for  •  precium  vii  anc' 

'  It  is  found  also  in  Brit.  Mus.  Egerton  iia  f.  510;  R.  I.  A.  Hodges  and 
Smith.  Nos.  12  and  150 ;  King's  Inns  Library,  Dublin,  MS.  19 ;  all  late  MSS. 

2  See  above,  p.  Ixviii,  note  3. 

'  The  only  point  in  which  Ir.-difTers  (except  by  way  of  abbreviation"!  from  R 
is  in  M  §  10,  where  for  Loch  Leyn  (Killarney)  Ir,-  has  Loch  Luidheach 
(Currane).  The  S  text  has  the  latter  name  lower  dovvn  in  the  same  section, 
where  R  omits  it.  Ir."  may  be  taken  from  a  MS.  intermediate  between  S  and 
R,  but  much  nearer  the  latter. 

'  In  Ir.-  he  is  called  Finan  of  Loch  Laoi  (  =  L.  Lugdech) ;  in  Mart.  Don.  he  is 
called  'of  Kinuity  and  Slieve  Bloom',  Apr.  7. 


Ixx  INTRODUCTION 

('^'577  o""  5S3) ;  3""^  Falbe  Fland,  King  of  Munster,  who  died  637.  If 
these  indications  may  be  trusted,  he  would  secin  to  have  flourished 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixth  and  earlier  part  of  the  seventh  centuries. 
He  is  referred  to  in  the  Hfe  of  Brendan,  i.  §  5,  a  reference  which  bears 
out  his  solar  character. 

Vita  Fintani  abbatis  de  Cluain  Ednech*.  This  life  is  taken  from 
M  f  74".  It  probably  existed  in  T,  but  has  been  lost  owing  to  the 
mutilation  of  that  MS.  There  are  two  other  lives  of  Fintan,  S  f  99° 
(C.  S.  co!s.  289  ff.),  and  R'  f.  148",  R=  f.  194%  F  p.  285.  M  and  S 
cover  much  the  same  ground,  S  being  perhaps  rather  nearer  to  the 
common  source.  M  has,  however,  points  of  interest  pecuhar  to  itself. 
R  is  nearer  to  S  than  to  M,  and  follovvs  S  rather  closely,  though  it 
omits  and  abbreviates  according  to  its  wont.  The  M  text  was  printed 
by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  349  fi".  He  promised  to  give  the  R  text  at  Nov. 
15''.  The  text  in  A.  S.  Feb.  iii.  17 ff.  is  taken  from  Colgan,  and 
repeats  his  most  obvious  blunders.  The  editor  has,  moreover,  intcr- 
polated  passages  from  S.  The  result  is  a  conflate  text  which  is 
critically  worthless.     I  know  of  no  Irish  life  of  Fintan. 

Fintan  died  in  603''.     The  saints  with  whom  he  is  brought  into 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Fintan  in  LL.  347",  BB.  231",  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  51"', 
Laud  6io  f.  38.'^,  Fel.^  p.  74.  The  pedigrees  make  liim  son  of  Gabren,  while 
the  hves  call  his  father  Crimthann  ;  see  ii.  96  note.  His  sister,  Dicnait, 
is  mentioned  LL.  350,  lovver  margin.  He  is  brought  into  relation  with 
his  namesake,  Fintan  or  Munnu  of  Taghmon,  in  Fdl.^  p.  226.  His  day  in 
the  Calendar  is  Feb.  17.  The  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  cites  thc  LL.  parallel 
table  of  saints  in  which  he  is  equated  with  St,  Benedict,  and  also  a  vcrse  from 
the  notes  to  the  Fehre  at  the  same  date.  The  stone  on  which  he  was  baptized, 
if  turned  thrice,  ensured  a  safe  return,  Fel.'  p,  76  !  sec,  however,  p.  clvii,  note  6;  ; 
cf.  Fel.'  p.  lii,  where  it  is  stated  that  in  old  books  he  was  called  Uindunus.  He 
has  a  dedication  in  Scotland,  Forbes,  Calcndars,  p.  349.  There  is  a  vcry 
interesting  reference  to  him  in  the  often-quoted  Litanj-  in  LL.  373"^  39  :  '  Monaig 
Fintain  meic  hiia  Echach,  ni  chathitis  acht  lossa  in  talman  7  usci  ;  ni  thalla  an 
arim  fria  lin;  viii  Fintain  dib,'  i.  e.  Thc  monUs  of  Fintan,  great  grandson  of 
Eochaid,  who  ate  nothing  but  herbs  of  the  earth  with  water  ;  there  is  not  room 
to  enumerate  them  by  reason  of  their  number.  There  were  eight  Fintans  among 
them.  This  agrees  wilh  the  statements  of  our  lives  as  to  the  extreme  rigour  of 
Fintan's  monastic  rule,  §§  4,  5,  19,  aa  ;  cf.  especially  §  7  :  '  cocus  nichil  habebat 
parare  fratribus,  nisi  olera  agrestia,  sicnl  firqiieitlcr.' 

2  *  Eius  praecipuum  festum,  quod  est  forte  translationis,  celebratur  Nov.  15,* 
p.  355'' ;  '  quo  aliud  eius  celebratur  festum,'  p.  353''.  I  have  not,  however,  found 
him  at  that  date  in  any  calendar,  except  the  draft  calcndar  drawn  up  probably, 
as  we  have  seen,  p,  x,  note  3  supra,  with  a  ^-iew  to  Colgan's  later  volumes, 
which  never  saw  the  light. 

'  'Quies  Finntain  filii  nepotis  Eehdach,'  Ann.  Ult.  602  (-  603);  '  Quies 
Finntain  Cliiana  h-Eidhneach,  filii  nepotis  Eachach,'  Tig,  in  R.  C.  xvii.  164. 
Fintan  is  said  in  the  S  Ufe,  §§  i,  3,  to  be  '  genere  Maccu  Edagh ',  '  maccu 
Echtach  ',  and  Eochaid  is  his  great  grandfathcr  in  the  pedigrccs.  He  is  also 
called  Maccu  Echdach  in  the  Litany  cited  above,  and  in  the  life  of  Columba  of 
Tir  da  Glass,  C.  S.  cc.  451-3,  which  contains  an  account  of  his  settlement  at 
Clonenagh  parallel  to  §5  3,  4  of  our  lifc.  Colgan  prints  this  account,  pp.  356-7, 
but  his  text  does  not  agree  cxactly  cithcr  with  S  or  R. 


TIIE   SEPARATE    LIVES  Ixxi 

contact  are  Columba,  t  597  ;  Cainnech,  t  599  or  600  ;  Colman  Ela,  1 61 1 
(if  Colgan  and  Reeves  are  riglit  in  identilying  the  Columbanus  of  §  21 
vvith  him).  His  master,  Columba  of  Tir  da  Glass,  died  in  549,  while  his 
successor,  Fintan  Maeldub ',  dled  626  according  to  the  F.  M.  The 
secular  princes  mentioned  in  the  life  do  not  seem  to  furnish  any 
chronological  tests '^. 

Tlie  sphere  of  Fintan's  influcnce  seems  to  be  exclusively  Leinster. 

There  appear  to  be  touches  of  the  solar  hero  about  Fintan  (§§  6,  16, 
21,  and  perhaps  also  §  17). 

Vita  Sancti  Geraldi  abbatis  de  Magh  Eo'.  This  life  is  here 
printed  froni  R'  f.  108'',  collated  vvith  R-  f.  203'',  and  compared  vvith  F. 
p.  251.  This  hfe  was  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  599  fif.  The  critical 
notes  give  abundant  proofs  that  CoIgan's  text  rests  on  F,  though  he 
iias  many  mistakes  of  his  own.  The  Bollandists  print  §§  7,  9-16, 
Mar.  ii.  290-2;  but  their  text  (B)  is  a  mere  reprint  of  Colgan,  with 
whom  they  agree  even  when  he  differs  from  F.  I  know  no  other 
Latin  life  of  St.  Gerald,  and  no  Irish  life. 

The  life  is  extremely  fabulous*.  Gerald  is  made  the  son  of  a  non- 
existent  king  of  England,  Cusperius,  and  his  v\'ife  Benicia^.  He 
becomes  a  pupil  of  St.  Colman,  and  afterwards  abbot  of  Winchester. 
The  Colman  intended  is  Colman  vvho  was  sent  from  lona  to  succeed 
Finan  as  bishop  of  Lindisfarne  on  the  death  of  the  latter  in  661,  and 
who  retired  to  lona  and  aftervvards  to  Ireland  on  the  defeat  of  the 
Celtic  party  at  the  Synod  of  Whitby  in  664.  Yet  according  to  the 
life  he  succeeded  Columba  as  abbot  of  lona,  and  was  expeiled  by  a 

*  Fintan  of  Clonenagh  and  Fintan  Maeldub  occur  together,  LL.  z^-j'^  ad  calcem  ; 
also  Fel.^  p.  224,  il'  this  be  the  same  Fintan  Maeldub,  as  Colgan  thinks.  I  have 
already  pointed  out  (p.  hx)  the  improbabihty  that  Comgall  of  Bangor,  vvho 
died  a  year  before  Fintan  at  the  age  of  eighty  or  ninety,  could  Iiave  been  his 
pupil,  as  Comgairs  hte  asserts,  unless,  vvith  Fel.^  p.  76,  vve  give  Fintan  himself 
a  most  abnormal  longevity. 

2  Unless  Colgan  be  right  in  thinking  that  the  Colum  son  of  Cormac  of  §  1 7  is 
Ihe  Colraan  son  of  Cairbre  son  of  Cormac,  styled  King  of  Leinster,  who  died 
in  576  according  to  F.  M.,  which  suits  very  well. 

'  I  have  lound  110  pedigree  of  Gerald  in  the  Irish  sources,  and  if  he  was  an 
Englishman,  ihis  is  not  surprising.  In  the  life  he  is  said  to  have  died  on 
March  13,  and  this  is  his  day  in  Mart.  Don.  and  Mart.  0'Gorman.  The  Mart. 
Tall.,  however,  at  March  12  has  'Garalt  Maigi  Eo  cum  sociis';  while  the 
calendar  of  his  own  church,  Mayo,  '  nisi  error  transcriptoris  irrepserit  in 
numeris,'  piaced  his  festival  at  Mar.  10,  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  604**.  He  and  his 
'socii'  are  invoked  in  the  Litany  LL.  373'";  '  ccc  ar  trib  milib  im  Garald 
n-cpscop,  7  im  1  noeb  Luigne  Connacht,  congabat  Mag  Eo  na  Saxan,'  i.  e.  the 
3300  vvith  Gerald  the  bishop  and  fifty  saints  of  Leyny  of  Connaught,  who 
occupy  Mayo  of  the  Saxons.  A  chronologically  impossible  legend  about  Gerald 
is  in  Hy  Fiachrach,  pp.  138  flf.  For  his  brother  Berikertus  cf.  Fel.-  pp.  256-8, 
and  Pctrie-Stokes,  Christian  Inscriptions,  ii.  52-3.  Another  brother,  Balanus, 
is  identified  by  Colgan  with  Bollain  of  Tech  Saxan,  Mart.  Don.  p.  362  (Sept.  3;. 

*  '  plures,  eosque  grauissimos,  errores  quam  paragraphos  continet,'  BoU, 

*  This  may  be  a  reflexion  of  the  name  of  the  kingdom  of  Bernicia. 


Ixxii  INTRODUCTION 

conspiracy  from  theabbacy',  though  it  was  under  Cuimine  Ailbhe, 
the  seventh  abbot  of  lona,  that  Cohnan  actually  camc  to  England. 
He  is  made  archbishop  ofall  England,  but  is  expelled  by  the  prelates 
and  clergy,  who  conspire  against  him  as  a  forcigner.  He  goes  to 
Ircland,  and  is  followed  by  Gerald  and  his  brothers.  GeraId'smother 
had  died,  and  his  father  had  contracted  an  ilHcit  union  with  another 
woman  - ;  and  this  was  one  reason  why  Gerald  desired  to  leave 
England.  But  the  Irish  chronology  is  as  confused  as  the  English 
history.  Gerald's  connexion  with  Mayo '  makes  it  possible  that  he 
was  an  English  follower  of  Colman.  Colman's  first  monastery  in 
Ireland,  Inishboffin,  vvas  not,  however,  founded  till  668.  Yet  Gerald 
is  represented  as  already  abbot  of  Mayo  when  he  attendcd  a  meeting 
at  Tara  which  preceded  the  outbreak  of  the  plague  in  which  thc  two 
kings,  Blathmac  and  Diarmait,  St.  Fechin  of  Fore,  and  others  with 
whom  Gerald  is  brought  into  relation,  perished,  whose  deaths  are 
assigned  to  665  or  668.  He  is  also  brought  into  relations  with  Ra- 
ghallach  of  Connaught,  who  died  in  649  or  656.  The  Aillill  and  Cathal 
mentioned  in  §§4-6  are  probably  the  son  and  grandson  of  Donnchadh 
Muirsce  of  the  Hy-Fiachrach  line,  who  died  in  681,  while  Donnchadh, 
son  of  Cathal,  died  in  768*.  This  would  be  about  right.  Gerald's 
own  death  is  placed  in  732 ;  so  that  if  he  really  followed  Colman  from 
Britain  after  the  events  0^664,  he  must  have  lived  to  a  very  great  age. 
This,  however,  is  not  impossible  ;  but  it  is  impossible  that  Adamnan, 
who  died  in  704,  should  have  ruled  the  abbey  of  Mayo  for  seven 
years  after  the  death  of  Gerald. 

The  life  has  no  special  mythological  significance,  but  there  arc 
some  curious  and  interesting  things  in  it,  especially  as  to  the  relations 
between  thc  Druids  and  the  Christian  teachers. 

The  extraordinary  story  of  Fechin's  death  is  discreetly  omitted  by 
the  biographers  of  that  saint.  It  is  found,  howevcr,  in  the  Libcr 
Hymnorum'. 

Vita  Sancte  Ite  Virginis".    This  life  is  from  M  f  109°.     It  pro- 

'  This  may  be  an  echo  of  the  troubles  of  Adamnan  at  lona  over  the  Easter 
question,  and  his  sojourn  in  Ireland,  697-704,  possibly  in  consequence  of  those 
troubles,  Bede,  H.  IC.  v.  15,  21  and  notes  ;   Keevcs,  Adamn.  pp.  liii  f. 

-  This  sounds  like  a  reminiscence  of  the  incestuous  marriage  of  Eadbald  of 
Kent,  Bede,  H.  E.  ii.  5. 

'  Magh  Eo  na  Saxan,  i.  e.  Mayo  of  tlie  Saxons. 

*  See  the  genealogical  table  in  0'Donovan's  Hy  Fiachrach. 

'  L.  H.^  i.  25  ;  Fechin's  dcath  in  thc  plaguc  is  mentioned  in  the  Irish  life  of 
Molaissc,  Silva  Gad.  i.  20-1.  So  in  tiie  Cypria,  Zeus  consults  Themis  as  to 
sending  a  war  to  diminish  thc  superduous  population,  Monros  Odysscy,  p.  347. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Ita  in  LL.  348'',  Laud  610  If.  40',  41",  Fel."  p.  44  ; 
cf.  BB.  231''.  Her  d.iy  in  the  Calcndars  is  Jan.  15.  According  to  the  Bollandists 
some  authorities,  which  I  liave  not  identilied,  give  hcr  day  as  Jan.  14,  othcrs  as 
Jan.  35.  The  Mart.  Don.  at  Jan.  15  cites  lincs  41-4  of  Cuimin's  poem,  which 
lay  stress  on  her  rfile  as  foster-mother  of  the  saints  of  Ircland.     It  also  gives 


THE   SEPARATE    LIVES  Ixxiii 

bablj'  existed  also  in  T,  but  is  lost  owing  to  thc  mutilation  of  that  MS. 
There  is  another  Latin  life  of  Ita  in  R-  f.  169'',  F  p.  212.  In  R'  it  has 
been  lost  owing  to  the  mutilation  of  that  MS.  at  the  end,  but  the 
table  of  contents  shovvs  that  R'  once  contained  this  life.  The  M 
version  was  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  66  ff.,  who  seems  to  have 
taken  more  than  his  usual  liberties  with  the  text.  It  was  also  printed 
by  the  Bollandists,  Jan.  i.  1062  ft".,  who  have  corrected  some  ot 
CoIgan's  mistakes.  They  also  give  readlngs  from  a  copy  of  the 
R  text  supplied  by  Hugh  Ward. 

M  and  R  cover  much  the  same  ground,  though  R  is  shorter'  and 
certainiy  less  original.  M  itself  maj'  be  an  abbreviation  of  a  longer 
life  (cf.  §  I  :  '  breuiter  enarrare  cupimus,'  '  alia  .  .  .  propter  breuita- 
tem  omittimus ').  It  professes  to  have  been  written  in  the  second 
generation  after  St.  Ita  (§  28  '  cuius  filius  adhuc  viuit').  In  its 
present  forni  the  life  cannot  be  so  old  ;  but  it  may  be  based  on  earlier 
materials.  I  know  no  Irish  life.  Ita,  in  Irish  Ite,  or  (with  the  en- 
dearing  prefix  »10  'my')  Mite  or  Mide'',  belonged  by  birth  to  the 
Dcisi',  but  her  active  life  was  spent  among  the  Ui  Conaill  Gabra, 
whose  patron-saint  she  is  (§§  8,  33,  36),  and  whose  name  survives 
in  the  baronies  of  Conello,  co.  Limerick.  For  her  death  and  the 
almost  coincident  death  of  Aengus  or  Oenu  of  Clonmacnois  the 
Ann.  Ult.  give  two  alternative  dates,  570  and  577.  For  the  death 
of  her  foster-son  Brendan  the  same  authoritj'  also  gives  two  dates, 
577  and  583.  Her  other  famous  foster-child,  St.  Mochoemog,  did  not 
die  till  656*.  The  battle  of  §  33  was  fought  in  552,  v.  s.  Ita  is  also 
made  contemporary  vvith  St.  Coluniba,  t  597^  The  life  seems  to 
aim  chiefly  at  exalting  her  powers  as  a  prophetess^  There  also 
seem  to  be  solar  touches'  about  her  legend  (cf  §§  2,  23,  31). 

the  storj'  of  her  asceticism  which  is  found  separately  in  the  Book  of  Lecan, 
f.  i65  v°,  col.  2,  and  Fel.-  p.  44,  where  occurs  the  story  (told  of  other  saints, 
Moling  §  24  ;  Mart.  Don.  p.  254  [  =  Z.  C.  P.  v.  495]  ;  Fel.'  p.  102  ;  Aur.  Leg. 
p.  46},  how  Christ  used  to  appear  to  her  as  a  little  child.  Her  angel,  §§  3,  6, 
10,  II,  is  called  Mithiden,  Fel.-  p.  i8a.  The  war  of  §  33  and  the  prayers  of 
Ita  are  recorded  in  the  Annals,  Tig.  R.  C.  xvii.  140;  Ann.  Ult.  551  (=  5521  ; 
F.  M.  546;  cf.  Keating,  iii.  56.  Ita's  mother.  Necht,  is  mentioned,  LL.  372''  38  ; 
her  father's  namc  in  the  pedigrees  is  Cennfaelad.  These  names  do  not  occur 
in  the  lives. 

'  It  omits  altogether  §5  '3,  13,  26,  35. 

-  In  the  siniple  form  her  name  appears  in  the  name  of  her  church,  Killeedy, 
i.  e.  Cell  Ide  ;  in  the  compound  form  it  appears  in  Rosmead,  co.  Westraeath, 
i.  e.  Ros  M'ide.     Cf.  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  71'' ;  F.  M.  ii.  1147. 

'  The  life  opens  with  a  short  account  of  the  migration  of  the  Deisi  from  Tara, 
of  which  a  long  version  is  given  in  the  life  of  Declan. 

*  She  is  mentioned  frequently  in  the  lives  of  both,  see  Index  s.  v.  Ita. 

'  Colgan  would  idenlify  the  Columbanus  of  §  24  with  Colman  Ela  (t6ii). 
Certainly  the  latter  was  associated  with  Columba,  v.  s.  p.  Ivi,  note  i. 

'  In  Mochoem.  §  15  she  is  called  '  beatissima  prophetissa,  sancta  Yta'. 

'  In  the  Felire  she  is  called  ■  in  grian  ban  ',  i.  e.  the  white  or  fair  sun. 


Ixxiv  INTRODUCTION 

There  is  a  brief  life  of  Ita  in  Noua  Legenda  Anglie,  ii.  543-4.  I  do 
not  think  it  is  derived  either  from  M  or  R.  It  has  preser\'ed  the 
saint"s  original  name  :  '  Derithea,  que  alio  nomine  Itta  uocatur.'  So 
tlie  Martyrology  of  Donegal  says:  '  Deirdri  a  ced  ainm.'  i.e.  Deirdre 
was  her  first  name  (Jan.  15).  Deirdre  was  the  name  of  the  heroine 
of  the  '  Sorrowful  Tale '  of  the  sons  of  Usnech. 

Vita  Sancti  Lasriani  seu  Molassi  Daminse'.  This  life  is  here 
printed  for  the  first  time  ^  from  R'  f.  94''  collated  with  R'  f  135".  It 
exists  also  in  F  p.  31  ;  but  this  has  not  been  compared  in  the  present 
case,  as  no  question  arises  here  as  to  the  genesis  of  any  printed 
edition.  The  life  was  evidently  compiled  as  a  homily  to  be  read  on 
the  saint's  festival,  Sept.  12  ( j  i) ;  and  it  seems  to  be  an  abbrevia- 
tion  of  a  longer  life  (§  34).  But  though  abbreviated,  it  is  more 
substantial  than  some  other  lives  of  the  R  recension.  Its  chief 
interest  is,  however,  mythological.  The  saint  shows  unmistakable 
characteristics  of  a  solar  or  fire  deity  (§§  i,  7,  11-13,  17,  21-2,  25,  27, 
29),  The  accretion  of  this  eiement  is  probably  due  to  the  saint's 
name,  Lasren,  which  means  'flamelet',  a  diminutive  of  'lassar', 
flame.  And  this  element  comes  out  even  more  strongly  in  the  Irish 
life  printed  by  CGrady^  in  Silva  Gadelica,  i.  17  ff. 

In  the  historical  setting  of  the  life  there  is  little  to  object  to.  Lasren 
or  Molaisse*  himself  died  in  564  or  571.  He  is  made  contemporary 
withCiaran  of  Clonmacnois  and  Finnian  of  Clonard,  who  both  died  in 
549;  with  Becc  Mac  De,  +  553  or.558;  Brendan  of  Clonfert,  t  577 
0^583;  Columba ",  t  597  ;  Baithin,  t  598  or  6oo^  The  only  point  to 
criticize  is  the  statement  that  he  was  a  fellow  pupil  ('collactaneus')  of 
Maedoc  of  Ferns  vvho  survived  till  626  (§  20).  I  know  of  no  other 
Latin  life  of  Molaisse  of  Devenish  '. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Molaisse,  LL.  348",  LBr.  15'.  BB.  218''  (cf.  ib.  a^a''!, 
Rawl.  B.  502  (.  51°,  Laud  610  ff.  38''.  40*^,  Kel.-  p.  206.  His  daj'  iii  tlie  Calendar 
is  Sept.  12.  Thc  account  in  .Mart.  Don.  at  that  datc  is  taken  from  the  Irish  life, 
Silva  Gad.  i.  17,  22.  It  also  cites  II.  33-6  of  Cuimin  of  Connor's  poem.  For 
the  shrine  and  bachall  of  Molaisse  cf.  Silva  Gad.  i.  87. 

'  Colgan  printed  §  20  in  A.  S.  p.  222". 

'  From  Brit.  Mus.  Add.  18205  ;  it  exists  also  in  Brussels  MS.  4194  f.  96  ; 
and  there  is  a  bad  paper  copy  by  0'Rcilly  in  R.  I.  A.  23  A  43.  The  lifc  is 
cleaily  incomplete.  It  has  appendcd  to  it  a  curious  account  of  the  wanderings 
of  thc  Dartraighe,  which  has  no  rcal  connexion  with  it. 

*  On  these  hypocoristic  names  see  the  Prcfatory  Notc  to  the  Index  Noniinum. 
'  According  to   other  authoritics   the   Molaisse  who   decided   tliat   Columba 

must  leave  Ireland  on  account  of  his  share  in  causing  the  battle  of  Cuil  Dremnc 
was  not  our  saint,  but  his  namesake  of  Inismurray,  Recvcs,  Adaninan,  pp.  252, 
287  ;  cf.  R.  C.  XX.  254,  434. 

•  The  Conallus  Rubeus  of  §  74  is  possibly  intcnded  for  Conall  Derg  mac 
Daiminc  of  Oriel  (t6o9\  who  has  been  foisted  into  the  pcdigrecs  of  St.  Enda, 
and  that  is  the  view  of  thc  Irish  life,  and  of  Fel.-  p.  ao6  ;  but  see  p.  Ixiv.note  3. 

'  In  L.  H.^  ii.  220-1,  C.  S.  c.  791  is  rcfcrred  to  ;  but  this  is  a  life  of  Molaisse 
of  Lcighlin,  as  the  vory  first  setitence  shows  ;  it  is  also  implied  ^wrongly)  that 
R.  I.  A.  23  A  43  is  a  diflercnt  lifc  from  that  printcd  by  0'Grady. 


THE    SEPARATE    LIVES  Ixxv 

Vita  Sancti  Edani  siue  Moedhog  episcopi  de  Ferna'.  This  life 
is  here  printed  from  M  f  51"^  (M).  In  T  this  hfe  has  been  lost  owing 
to  mutilation.  This  recension  was  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  208  fi'., 
and  by  the  Bollandists,  A.  S.  Jan.  ii.  iiii  fl".  CoIgan's  text  is  cer- 
tainly  taken  from  M  or  a  transcript  of  M  (cf.  the  reading  '  biculei "  et 
anli '  in  §  54) ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  Bollandist  text.  The 
latter  is,  howcvcr,  not  a  mere  reprint  of  Colgan,  for  many  of  his  errors 
are  corrected,  tliough  one  or  two  new  ones  are  also  introduced. 
Another  life  of  Macdoc,  nearlj'  coincident  in  matter  and  arrangenient 
with  M,  exists  in  MS.  Cotton,  Vespasian  A.  xiv.'  f.  96  (V).  It  is,  how- 
ever,  an  earlier  recension*,  and  out  of  it  the  M  text  was  probabiy 
developed".     It  has  been  printed  in  Rees'   Lives  of  the  Cambro- 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Maedoc  in  LL.  347*,  LBr.  14^  BB.  217"  1  cf.  ib.  231"), 
Rawl.  B.  5oa  f.  51',  Laud  610  R.  38'',  40*",  Fel.-  p.  54.  His  mother,  Ethne,  is 
mentioned  LL.  272''  ad  calcem.  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  Jan.  31  prid.  Cal. 
Feb.\  which  is  the  day  of  his  death.  Even  V,  which  wrongly  gives  •  prid. 
Cal.  Mart."  as  the  day  ot'  his  death  and  festival,  witnesses  to  the  other  date  by 
the  story  in  §  56  (=  M  |  57,  which  turns  on  the  nearly  coincident  dates  of 
the  fcstivals  of  Maedoc  and  Brigit.  the  latter  being  on  Feb.  i.  But  in  two 
Welsh  Caiendars  used  by  Baring-Gould  and  Fisher  (Brilish  Saints,  i.  70) 
Maedoc  occurs  both  at  Jan.  31  and  Feb.  28,  and  by  a  duphcation  of  his  name  he 
is  called  Aeddan  Foeddog.  The  account  in  Mart.  Don.  Jan.  31  seems  to  be 
taken  from  the  Brussels  Irish  life,  cc.  3,  4.  A  curious  local  legend  as  to  his 
birth  and  baptism  is  given  by  Reeves  in  Proc.  R.  L  A.  viii.  441  ff.  He  has 
dedications  both  in  Wales,  British  Saints,  u.  s.  i.  126,  and  in  Scotlaicd,  Forbes, 
Calendars,  p.  403  ;  Reeves,  u.  s.  He  is  mentioned  in  tiie  Litany  in  LL.  373*"  60  : 
'  in  da  ailittiir  dec  dollotar  la  Moedoc  Ferna  dar  muir,'  i.  e.  the  twelve  pilgrims 
who  went  with  Maedoc  of  Ferns  across  the  sea  ;  perhaps  a  reference  to  the 
journey  in  §  ii  of  our  life.  On  his  shrine  see  Miss  Stokes,  Early  Christian  Art, 
pp.  106-7. 

^  V's  reading  *brensei '  is  still  more  enigmaticaL 

'  This  is  a  MS.  containing  chiefly  lives  of  British  saints.  The  occurrence  in 
it  of  a  life  of  St.  Maedoc  is  accounted  tbr  by  the  intimate  connexion  of  Maedoc 
with  St.  David's,  cf  §§  11-13,  17,  '9.  20,  32.  Similar  considerations  account 
for  the  occurrence  of  lives  of  St.  David  in  Irish  MSS.,  e.  g.  R'  and  R-.  This 
connexion  is  also  iilustrated  by  the  curious  and  obscure  story  given  in  Fel.' 
p.  xxxix  from  LBr.,  and  in  Fel.'  p.  54  from  Rawl.  B.  512.  It  occurs  separately 
in  LL.  a^s'. 

*  The  MS.  also  is  a  good  deal  earlier,  being  dated  by  Dr.  Warner  c.  1200. 
Marks  of  the  earlier  character  of  V  are  to  be  Ibund  i^a  in  the  preservation  of 
various  Irish  names  of  places  which  M  has  omitted,  e.  g.  Brentrocht,  Fothart 
campi  Itha  §  19,  Dail  Aradii,  Dail  Riata  §  54,  Eclidruim  §  29,  &c. ;  li)  older 
forms  and  expressions,  e.  g.  Daro  cella  §  56,  as  against  the  Kyll  dara  of  M. 
'  Saxones '  is  used  for  the  Teutonic  inhabitants  of  Britain,  according  to  general 
Celtic  usage,  §§  17-18;  M  has  the  mucli  later  'Anglici';  {c)  the  conception 
of  the  manner  in  which  Maedoc  checked  the  advance  of  the  northern  army,  §  24, 
is  much  raore  primitive  in  V  than  in  M.  The  curing  of  the  paralytic  by  saiivaj 
V  §  55,  is  obliterated  in  M.  The  'clericus  quidam  '  of  V  §  57  has  become  a 
*  canonicus  '  in  M  §  58.  If  we  could  iix  the  date  when  canons  were  introduced 
at  Ferns,  we  might  have  a  terminus  a  quo  for  the  date  of  the  M  recension. 

°  There  is  interesting  textual  evidence  that  the  M  text  was  developed  from 
a  text  like  V  in  §  31.  There  V  has  :  '  [bos]  tribus  uicibus  clamauit .  .  .  et  tribus 
mensibus  ueris  apud  illos  arauit.'     M  has  altered  '  tribus  uicibus  '  into  '  ter ',  yet 


Ixxvi  INTRODUCTION 

British  Saints,  pp.  232  ff.  Tliat  edition,  however,  is  so  inaccurate', 
and  the  recension  is  of  such  great  interest,  that  I  have  printed  it 
entire  in  an  appendix'.  Apart  from  the  instructive  relation  in  which 
it  stands  to  the  M  text,  V  has  two  other  points  of  great  interest. 
(i)  It  is  certainly  taken  from  an  Irish  original.  This  is  shown  not 
only  by  the  (very  corrupt)  Irish  verses  in  §  57,  and  the  scraps  of 
Irish  in  §§  12,  21,  but  bj'  various  Latin  words  and  phrases  which  can 
only  be  explained  as  hteral  translations  from  the  Irish  ;  thus  '  aliud  ' 
for  'quoddam'  (=  Ir.  araile),  §  14;  'amicus  anime,'  i.  e.  confessor 
(=  Ir.  anmchara),  §  20;  'complosis  manibus,'  as  a  sign  of  grief 
(=  Ir.  Mmchomairt),  §  43;  'relaicus,'  ex-layman  (=  Ir.  athlaech,  ex- 
warrior),  §  47;  'certamina,'  battalions  (=  Ir.  catha),  §  54^  (ii)  The 
V  text  is  unquestionably  the  basis  of  Capgrave's'  abbreviated  life 
of  Maedoc''  (ed.  Horstman,  i.  18-22).  I  am  incHned  to  go  further 
and  say  that  the  compiler  of  that  life  actually  used  our  MS.  V*.  Not 
only  has  he  an  incident  which  is  in  V  and  V  alone  of  all  the  Latin  Hves 
(§  18"),  not  only  has  he  the  same  erroneous  date  as  V  for  Maedoc's 
death  ('  pridie  Kal.  Mart.,'  instead  of  '  pridie  Kal.  Febr.'),  but  the 
facts  that  he  agrees  with  V  in  the  incorrect  form  of  the  name  of 
Maedoc's  father  ('Sedia'  for  'Sedna')  §  i,  that  his  reading  in  §  42  is 
probably  due  to  an  attempt  to  correct  the  defective  text  of  V,  and  the 
way  in  which  he  has  tried  to  deal  with  the  difficulty  created  in  §  20 
by  V's  misreading  of  'mater'  for  'mac',  prove  that  he  must  have 
used  either  V  or  a  MS.  so  closely  related  as  to  be  practically  idcntical 
with  it'. 

Besides  V,  M,  and  Capgrave  two  other  Latin  lives  of  Maedoc  are 
known  to  me  ;  one  in  S  f.  133"  (C.  S.  cc.  463  fl'.),  the  other  in  R'  f  154'', 

the  superseded  reading  has  influenced  his  own  text,  for,  by  a  shp  of  the  pen,  he 
has  written  '  tribus  uicibus  '  for  '  tribus  mensibus  '  below.  On  the  other  hand 
the  M  text  was  not  actually  derived  froin  our  V,  as  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  in 
I  33  there  is  an  omission  in  V  due  to  homoioteleuton,  which  can  be  supplied 
from  M  (V.  notes  ad  loc). 

^  The  followini;  examples  are  taken  from  a  single  page  (237)  :  ed.  in  ualle, 
MS.  in  uallem  ;  ed.  quodam,  MS.  quadam  vbis)  ;  ed.  eidem,  MS.  ei  Dcus  ;  ed.  in 
fuga,  MS.  in  fugam ;  ed.  latvuuderi,  MS.  latrunculi ;  ed.  nosccrent,  MS. 
noceront. 

^  I  should  have  preferred  to  print  the  two  texts  parallel  to  one  another  ;  but 
the  fact  that  some  of  the  incidents  occur  in  a  ditferent  order  in  the  two  MSS. 
made  this  difficult. 

^  All  these  peculiarities  have  been  smoothed  aw.iy  in  M.  'Ihat  the  scribe 
of  V  knew  no  Irish  is  abundantly  proved  i^rt)  by  the  extraordinary  corruption  of 
the  verses  in  §  57  ;  by  the  facts  {/>)  that  lie  has  twice  misread  the  Irish  con- 
traction  for  tfiac  a  son,  as  tuatcr,  §§  10,  20  ;  and  \^c)  has  wrongly  divided  the 
place-name  '  Inber  Crinithain  '  as  Mn  Bercrimthain '. 

*  As  to  the  use  of  this  narae  for  the  Noua  Legenda  Angliae  see  above,  p.  xxxix, 
note  2. 

°  Owing  to  the  close  relation  betwcen  V  and  Capgrave,  I  have  placcd  the 
referenccs  to  Capg.  under  the  V  text,  not  under  M. 

'  So  Horstman,  i.  18.  '  See  notes  ad  loc. 


THE   SEPARATE    LIVES  Ixxvii 

R'  f.  180'',  and  F  p.  264.  R'  is  iniperfect  owing  to  the  loss  of  two 
folia  in  the  middle.  S  is  an  abridged  recension,  made  from  a  text 
nearly  akin  to  M.  It  omits  M  §§  6,  14,  25,  30,  and  epitomizes  §§  11-13. 
R  follows  S  very  closely,  but  abridges  still  further,  and  omits  in 
addition  M  §  55'.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  none  of  the  eccle- 
siastical  padding  which  is  so  common  in  other  parts  of  R. 

Of  Irish  lives  of  Maedoc  two  are  known  to  me,  a  shorter  and 
a  longer  one.  The  shorter  life  is  contained  in  R.  I.  A.  Stowe  MS. 
ix.  pp.  132  ff.  (cited  occasionally  as  Ir.).  This  is  clearly  an  abbreviated 
translation  of  a  Latin  text ;  but  I  cannot  identify  the  original  with 
any  of  the  Latin  lives  mentioned  above.  The  MS.  is  of  the  seven- 
teenth  century. 

The  longer  life  seems  to  be  mainly  a  translation  of  the  M  text, 
but  has  long  interpolations,  many  of  them  poems,  relating  especially 
to  the  ecclesiastical  dues  payable  to  Ferns^,  genealogical  and  other 
matter.  In  one  or  two  places  it  is  cited  as  In'  Of  this  the  oldest 
copy  is  at  Brussels  among  the  0'CIery  MSS.  2324-2340,  f.  168  (a.d. 
1629),  and  there  are  eighteenth-century  copies  in  T.  C.  D.  and  R.  I.  A.' 
This  is  no  doubt  the  Irish  life  cited  by  Colgan  in  the  notes  to  his 
edition  of  M.  He  ascribes  it  (p.  215'')  to  Gillamochuda  0'Cassidy, 
and  the  poems  in  it  are  ascribed  to  that  writer  in  the  MSS. 

The  mythological  interest  of  the  life  is  considerable.  Maedoc 
seems  to  have  gathered  to  himself  many  of  the  attributes  of  a  fire 
or  solar  deity  or  hero  (cf.  §§  i,  3,  12,  38  (V),  39,  45)*.  This  is  not 
surprising,  for  his  name  in  its  simplest  form,  Aed,  is  one  of  the  Irish 
words  for  '  fire '.  With  this  is  joined,  as  in  other  cases,  the  character 
of  a  protector  of  animals  (§§  5,  7,  12,  22,  25,  30,  31).  But  besides  this 
we  seem  to  find  in  him  clear  traces  of  the  water-god,  which  is  less 
easy  to  account  for  (§§  10,  12,  20,  21,  31,  32,  47).  It  may  be  due 
to  the  prevalence  of  the  worship  of  that  deity  in  South  Leinster,  of 
which  we  have  already  found  evidence  in  the  lives  of  Abban  and 
Declan. 

'  Possibly  on  account  of  an  historical  inaccuracy  which  it  contains.  Ciimascach, 
son  of  Aed  mac  Ainmirech,  is  represented  as  falMng  in  an  attempt  to  avenge  the 
death  of  his  father,  whereas  it  was  the  father  who  died  in  attempting  to  avenge 
tlie  son,  Ann.  Ult.  596,  597. 

2  In  this  respect  the  life  presents  a  strong  analogy  to  the  life  of  St.  Caillin  in 
the  Book  uf  Fenagh,  ed.  Hennessy. 

'  T.  C.  D.  1297,  H.ii.6,  and  1406,  H.  vi.3;  and  R.  I.A.  23041  and  Reeves,  32. 

*  Note  also  his  association  with  Molaisse  of  Devenish,  another  solar  saint. 
55  8,  9.  Moling,  who  has  the  same  character,  is  said  to  have  been  his  pupil, 
Fel.2  p.  152,  and  to  have  held  his  see,  Maed.  §  58  ;  Moling,  §  8.  In  a  poem  in 
which  Finn  is  said  to  have  foretold  Maedoc's  birth,  he  is  called  not  only  '  son 
of  the  star',  cf  §  i,  but  '  maisse  greine  tar  cithu,  .  .  .  in  lassar  borb  bratha', 
i. e.  sheen  of  the  sun  athwart  showers,  the  raging  flame  of  doom,  Acc.  Sen. 
p.  74. 


Ixxviii  INTRODUCTION 

The  chronological  setting  of  the  life  is  on  the  whole  consistent. 
Maedoc  himself  died  in  626.  The  other  saints  with  whom  he  is 
brought  into  relations  are  Molaisse  of  Devenish,  t  564  or  571 ;  Ita, 
+  570  or  577  ;  Columba,  1 397  ;  David,  1 601  (traditional  date) ;  Molua 
of  Clonfertmulloe,  +  609;  Munnu' of  Taghmon, +635.  Ofthesecular 
princes  who  come  into  the  story  Ainmire  died  in  569  or  $16',  Aed, 
son  of  Ainmire,  in  598,  Brandub  of  Leinster'  in  605.  In  the  case  of 
Guaire  Aidhne,  the  free-handed  King  of  Connaught,  there  is  a  diffi- 
culty  *.  Maedoc's  visit  to  him  is  said  to  have  been  thirty  years  before 
the  king's  death,  §  37.  But  Guaire  did  not  die  till  663  or  666;  and 
taking  even  the  earlier  of  these  two  dates  the  visit  would  fall  after 
Maedoc's  death.  The  Damairghid  or  Bos  Argenti  mentioned  in 
§  10  cannot  be  the  man  whosedeath  is  recorded  Ann.  Ult.  513  (=  514). 
But  Damairghid  is  a  mere  nickname,  which  may  have  been  borne 
by  more  than  one  person. 

By  origin  Maedoc  is  a  Connaught  saint,  but  the  chief  sphere  of 
his  activity  is  in  Southern  Leinster. 

Vita  Sancti  Mochoemog  abbatis  de  Liath  Mochoemog\  This 
life  is  from  M  f  80^  collated  with  T  f.  49",  in  which,  however,  the  first 
fifteen  sections  are  lost  by  mutilation.  It  has  been  printed  by 
Fleming,  CoUectanea  Sacra,  pp.  380  ff.,  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  589  if., 
and  by  the  Bollandists,  March  ii.  280  ff.  The  Bollandists  say  that 
their  text  was  taken  from  Codex  Kilkenniensis  (i.  e.  M),  furnished  by 
Hugh  Ward,  and  compared  with  Colgan.  Fleming  is  much  nearer 
to  the  MS.  than  Colgan,  while  the  Bollandists  generally  follow  the 

'  In  Coniiac's  Glossary,  p.  29  (Transl.  p.  iio),  a  quatrain  on  Munnu  is  ascribed 
to  Mafdoc;  in  F6\.'  p.  226,  to  Columba. 

2  There  is  therefore  no  impossibility.  as  Baring-Gould  and  Fisher  allege,  in 
the  statemcnt  of  the  life,  §  4,  that  Maedoc,  as  a  '  paruulus ',  was  a  hostage  at 
the  court  of  this  king. 

'  The  story  of  Maedoc  freeing  the  soul  of  Brandub  is  alluded  to  in  the  Rulc 
printed  in  Reeves'  Culdees,  p.  ga  (  =  LBr.  11").  This  story  occurs  in  our  life, 
6  26,  in  tlie  form  of  a  vision  ;  in  5  43.  and  in  §5  39,  40  of  the  -S  lifc  of  Colman 
Ela  iC.  S.  cc.  437-8)  as  a  resuscitation  from  Ihe  dead  ;  while  in  the  Book  of 
Lecan,  f.  183'',  it  is  represented  as  a  condict  with  demons  icf.  Reeves,  Adamn. 
p.  205;  Cain.  §§  10,  22;  Coem.  §  44;  Ruad.  §  29).  Thc  refcrence  in  thc 
Culdcc  Rule  is  nearest  to  C.  S.  cc.  437  8. 

*  In  Ihe  Chron.  Scot.  there  is  a  double  entry  of  the  death  of  Maedoc  of  Ferns, 
at  625  and  656.  The  origin  of  this  error  is  in  Tigernach,  R.  C.  xvii.  178,  196. 
On  this  vcry  slcnder  basis  Baring-Gould  aud  Fishcr  build  a  vcry  elaborate 
theory  of  two  bisho]>s  of  Fcrns,  both  called  Maedoc,  holding  thc  sce  at  an 
interval  of  thirty  years,  whosc  acts  have  bcen  combincd. 

^  Tiierc  are  pedigrces  of  Mochoemog  in  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  52A  Laud  610  ff.  9", 
38",  Fcl."  p.  96;  cf.  BB.  232'.  His  day  in  thc  Calendar  is  March  13,  where 
Mart.  Don  cites  a  verse  on  his  supposed  lengtli  of  lifc  which  occurs  on  the 
margins  of  LL.  353  ad  calcem.  357",  whcrc,  howevcr,  the  rcading  in  both  cases 
is  414  years,  not  413  as  in  Mart.  Don.  Hc  has  dedications  in  Scotland,  where 
hc  has  been  changcd  into  a  fcmalc  saint,  Kcvoca,and  a  lcgend  has  bct.n  invcnted 
to  malch,  Reeves,  Culdees,  p.  34  ;  Forbes,  Calendars,  pp.  374-7. 


Tllt:    SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixxix 

latter.  There  are,  however,  places  in  which  all  three  editors  agree 
against  M  ;  and  the  explanation  probably  is  that  they  all  worked 
from  the  same  transcript  of  M  which  had  already  departed  somewhat 
from  the  original,  much  as  F  has  departed  from  R-.  Fleming- 
copied  this  transcript  exactiy,  while  Colgan,  followed  by  the  Bol- 
landists,  introduced  further  changes  into  the  text.  Colgan  latinizes 
the  sainfs  name  into  Pulcherius.  I  know  of  no  other  Latin  life  of 
Mochoemog ;  but  in  the  Brussels  MS.  2324  x  2340  ff.  289  flf.,  is  an  Irish 
life,  which  is  unquestionably  a  translation  of  the  M  T  text ;  and  of 
the  two,  it  is  nearer  to  T  than  to  M  '.  Its  readings  are  quoted  as  Ir. 
They  are  sometimes  intercsting  and  important. 

Though  by  origin  a  Connaught  man,  Mochoemog  spent  his  life 
almost  wholly  in  Munster,  and  especially  in  Eile.  As  to  the  chrono- 
logical  framework  of  the  life,  Mochoemog  himself  died  in  656.  The 
Irish  authorities  (v.  s.)  give  him  the  fabulous  age  of  413  or  414  years. 
But  he  must  have  lived  to  a  great  age  if  he  was  fostered  by  St.  Ita, 
who  died  in  570  or  577  ;  indeed,  if  he  was  vvith  her  twenty  years, 
as  §  8  alleges,  he  cannot  have  been  less  than  100  years  old,  and  in 
any  case  must  have  been  about  ninety'.  If  he  died  about  656  at 
an  advanced  age,  the  persons  mentioned  in  the  life  whose  dates  are 
known  could  all  have  been  his  contemporaries ;  Cainnech,  +  599  or 
600;  Colman,  son  of  Feradhach,  Chief  of  Ossory,  t6oi  F.  M. ;  Com- 
gall,  t6o2;  Molua  of  ClonfertmuIIoe,  ^609;  Lachtin  of  Achad  Ur, 
t  622  F.  M.;  Fursa,  who  went  to  Britain  about  630;  Failbe  Flann, 
King  of  Munster,  1 637 ;  Dagan  of  Ennereilly,  t  639  F.  M. ;  Cummine 
Foda ',  1 662 ;  Fechin  of  Fowre,  t  665  or  668. 

There  seem  to  be  touches  of  the  solar  hero  about  Mochoemog*, 
and  some  of  the  persons  with  whom  he  is  brought  into  contact, 
Comgall,  Lugtigern,  Molua,  by  their  names,  or  legends,  or  both, 
suggest  similar  associations. 

Vita  sancti  Mochua  abbatis  de  Tech  Mochua".  This  life  is 
printed  here  from  R'  f.  114'',  collated  with  R-  f.  93'',  and  compared 
with  F  p.  42.  It  is  given  by  the  BoIIandists  at  Jan.  i,  'ex  ueteribus 
MSS.,'  supplied  by  Hugh  Ward,  though  Mochua's  proper  day  in 


'  It  is  a  coniparalively  late  work,  as  is  shown  by  such  words  as  seirbhis, 
(divine    service  ;  privileid,  privilege  ;  maih's,  mahce;  suiper,  supper. 

'  If  we  suppose  the  '  four  hundreds '  of  the  Irish  authorities  to  be  a  mistake 
for  '  four  scores',  his  age  at  death  vvould  be  ninety-three  or  ninety-fuur,  vvhich 
vvould  suit  very  vvell. 

'  Cummine,  ]\ke  Mochoeraog,  is  said  to  have  been  fostered  by  Ita.  If  so,  he 
also  must  have  lived  to  a  great  age. 

*  §5  7.  12,  29,  32  note,  and  perhaps  5  34. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Mochua  in  LL.  347'',  LBr.  13'',  BB.  215'  (cf.  ib.  asi'), 
Ravvl.  B.  502  f.  52",  Laud  610  f.  38",  Fel^  p.  262;  cf.  Acc.  Sen.  p.  67.  His 
mother,  Finecht,  is  ."nentioned,  LL.  372*^  29.    His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  Dec.  24. 


Ixxx  INTRODUCTION 

the  Calendar  is  Dec.  24 '.  The  Bollandist  text  (B)  is  probably  taken 
from  F,  with  vvhich  it  agrees  closelj',  as  thc  critical  notes  will  show. 
The  life  is  headed  both  in  R'  and  R-  '  Vita  Sti  Mochua  Balla  ' ;  though 
the  whole  tenor  of  the  life,  with  its  frequent  references  to  Timahoe, 
the  name  of  the  saint's  father  (Lonan,  §  i),  and  the  day  of  his  death 
(Dec.  24,  §  12),  show  clearly  that  it  is  the  saint  of  Timahoe,  and  not 
his  namesake  of  Balla  that  is  celebrated*. 

The  hfe,  Hke  many  of  the  lives  of  the  R  recension,  is  a  very  sHght 
performance.  Nothing  is  told  of  the  saint's  earlj'  life';  bej^ond 
his  birth,  his  settlement  at  Timahoe  and  afterwards  at  Derinish, 
and  his  dcath,  little  is  narrated  except  three  anecdotes ;  how  he 
cured  St.  Colman  Ela  of  his  sudden  loss  of  memory  (§!)  2-4) ;  how  he 
cleansed  St.  Munnu  of  his  leprosy  (§§  5,  6)*;  and  how  he  provided 
fine  weather  for  a  whole  year  while  St.  Cianan  was  building  his 
stone  church  of  Duleek,  the  first  of  its  kind  in  Ireland  (§§  8-10). 
St.  Patrick  and  St.  Molua  of  ClonfertmuUoe  are  also  mentioned. 

The  date  of  St.  Mochua  himself  does  not  seem  to  be  given  in  the 
Annals.  Molua  died  in  609,  Colman  Ela  in  611,  and  Munnu  in  635. 
These  facts  would  seem  to  point  to  the  early  part  of  the  seventh 
century  as  the  time  of  Mochua's  floniit.  But  apart  from  the  mention 
of  St.  Patrick,  which  might  be  explained  as  meaning  no  more  than 
a  resort  to  the  See  of  Armagh",  St.  Cianan,  who  plays  an  important 
part  in  the  narrative,  is  said  to  have  died  in  489,  which  would  throw 
Mochua's  date  back  by  about  a  century  and  a  half°. 

The  mythological  element  in  the  life  is  not  very  prominent.  The 
sainfs  power  over  fire  (§  4)  and  over  the  weather  (§  8)  maj'  be 
reminiscences  of  a  solar  hero. 

By  origin  Mochua  is  a  Connaught  saint ;  but  his  principal  mon- 
astery,  Timahoe,  is  in  Leix ;  and  his  subsequent  abode,  Derinish ', 
is  in  Oriel. 

1  The  origin  of  this  mistake  is  as  follows  :  In  5  12  it  is  said  that  Mochua  died : 
*anno  iiitc  sue  nonagesimo,  ix"  Kal.  lan.'  (i.  e.  Dec.  24'!.  Tlie  Bollandists  mis- 
read  this  '  anno  .  .  .  nonagesimo  nono,  Kalendis  lan.'  The  Bollandists  also  give 
at  Jan.  i  a  Latin  Translation  of  the  Irish  lifc  of  Mochua  of  Balla,  which  Colgan 
gives  rightly  at  March  30. 

'  On  this  mistake  see  .-jbove,  p.  x.\i,  note  i.  It  has  misled  not  only  Sir  James 
Ware,  but  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes,  Lismore  Livcs.  p.  360  ;  and  has  caused  the  scribe 
of  R^  to  place  the  life  out  of  its  proper  order  ;  sec  thc  table,  p.  xv. 

'  He  entered  religion  in  mature  life  ;  hcncc  in  the  notes  to  the  Ffilire  he  is 
called  '  one  of  the  threc  ex-laics,  or  ex-warriors  (athlaechjof  Erin  ',  FSI.-  p.  112  ; 
cf.  5  I  :   'triginta  annis  laicalilcr  uixit.' 

<  Cf.  Lug.  §  53,  Mun.  §  25,  Mart.  Don.  Oct.  21. 

'  The  connexion  with  Patrick,  however,  cstablished  itsclf  in  tradition.  In 
Acc.  Scn.  p.  67  Mochua  is  called  an  'athlaech'  of  Patrick's  company ;  and 
Cailte  givcs  a  metrical  pcdigree  of  him. 

°  Had  this  difficulty  occurred  to  his  biographer,  he  would  no  doubt  have 
made  Mnchua  live  the  rcquisite  number  of  centurics. 

'  In  Fcl.^  p.  262  Dair  Inis  is  misprinted  Dair  Mis. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixxxi 

1  know  of  no  other  life  of  Mochua  of  Timahoe,  whether  in  Latin 
or  Irish. 

Vita  Sancti  Moling  episcopi  de  Tech  Moling  '.  This  life  is  here 
printed  for  the  first  time  from  M  f.  70''.  In  T  it  is  wanting  owing  to 
niutilation.  There  is  a  seventeenth-century  transcript  of  the  life, 
MS.  Brussels  4190  fT.  59-68.  It  is  quite  worthless.  Apart  from  absurd 
mistakes,  the  scribe  has  taken  great  liberties  with  his  original  (see 
e.  g.  note  to  §  l).  Another  Latin  life  of  Moling  is  contained  in 
S  f.  199«'  (C.  S.  cc.  819  ff.),  R'  f.  50",  R-  f  124",  and  F  p.  39.  S  and 
R  present  an  identical  text,  agreeing  sometimes  even  in  obvious 
niistakes.  The  S  R  recension  is  very  much  shorter  than  the  M  text. 
()f  thc  thirtj'  sections  of  M  fifteen  are  wholly  unrepresented  in  S  R, 
while  others  are  much  abbreviated.  The  order  also  of  the  common 
sections  is  very  diflerent  in  the  two  recensions.  On  the  other  hand 
the  S  R  text  has  preserved  some  things  which  are  not  in  M  (see  notes 
'o  §§  1-3'  9i  13'  25).  An  English  translation  of  the  M  text  with 
notes  was  published  bj'  Mr.  P.  0'Leary  in  1887.  The  notes  contain 
some  interesting  details  of  local  topography  and  legends. 

The  BoIIandists  have  printed  the  S  text,  A.  S.  June  iii.  406  fF.  ;  but 
they  had  '  alia  acta  decessoribus  nostris  olim  communicata  a  R.  P. 
Henrico  Fitzsimon',  from  which  some  extracts  are  given  at  the  end 
of  the  S  life.  These  belong  to  the  M  recension,  and  are  very 
inaccurate. 

The  Brussels  MS.  mentioned  above  contains,  ff.  48-58,  an  Irish 
life  of  Moling  which  has  recently  been  published  bj"  Dr.  Whitley 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Moling  in  I.L.  351',  LBr.  19'',  BB.  221'  (cf.  ib.  232"), 
Laud  610  f.  39'',  Rawl.  B.  486  f.  36'.  As  to  his  parentage  and  his  own  original 
name.  see  notes  to  §  i  of  our  life.  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  June  17.  The 
account  in  Mart.  Don.  at  that  date  is  based  on  the  Irish  Hfe,  cc.  2,  6,  13.  In  the 
notes  to  the  Felire  at  Junc  17  are  found  several  stories  relating  to  Moling.  These 
and  others  are  found  separately  in  various  MSS.,  LL.  ^^^''-aSs'',  Rawl.  B.  512  (f. 
64  v**,  141  v,  T.  C.  D.  J319,  H.  ii.  17,  pp.  397-8,  BB.  256**,  Brussels  2324  ff.  65-7  ; 
5100,  p.  2,  Liber  Flauus  Fergusionim.  I.  B.  f.  10'',  II.  E.  f.  12'',  Dublin  Franciscans, 
A.  ix.  3,  p.  30.  Several  of  them  are  embodied  in  the  Irish  life.  There  is  a  story 
about  him  in  the  so-called  life  of  Maignenn,  Silva  Gad.  i.  43-4.  A  local  variation 
of  the  legend  in  §  11  is  given  by  0'Hanlon,  vi.  720.  According  to  the  Accallam 
na  Sen6rach  there  was  a  Moling  Luatli  in  Finn's  comitatus.  He  occupied  Ross 
Hrocc  (the  later  St.  Mullins^  and  its  water-course  ^taeidiui,  and  it  was  after  his 
slaughter  bj'  the  sons  of  Morna  that  Finnprophesied  of  the  later  Molins-,  Acc.  Sen. 
pp.  74-6.  Finn's  prophecy  of  Moling  is  also  in  the  tract  Borroma,  LL.  297**  12, 
where  he  is  called  Moling  Faid,  or  the  prophet ;  while  in  another  verse,  cited 
Mart.  Don.  p.  326,  he  is  called  one  of  the  four  prophets  of  Ireland.  Moling  of 
course  plays  a  leading  part  in  the  tract  Borroma,  ovving  to  the  famous  equivoque 
by  which  he  cxtorted  the  remission  of  the  tribute  from  the  monarch  Finnachta 
i§  19  ai)d  note  I.  Several  poems  ascribed  to  Moling  are  in  MS.  Brusseis  5100; 
and  have  been  printcd  by  Stokes  in  Anecdota  from  Irish  MSS.  ii.  20  ff.  His 
cult  seems  to  have  existed  in  the  Isle  of  Arran.  Scotland,  wliere  there  was  a 
sacred  stone  of  his  used  for  ordeals,  and  to  cure  stitches,  Martin's  Westem  Isles, 
pp.  325-6. 

rLUHMEK  1 


Ixxxii  INTRODUCTION 

Stokes,  Rev.  Celt.  xxvii.  257  ff.,  from  this  MS.  and  the  so-called  Liber 
Flauus  Fergusiorum,  novv  in  the  R.  I.  A.  This  life  has  no  direct 
relation  to  either  of  the  Latin  lives.  To  some  extent  it  covers  the 
same  ground  ;  but  even  in  these  cases  it  gives  a  very  difterent 
version  of  the  incidents. 

The  text  of  M,  as  we  have  it,  cannot  be  older  than  the  middle 
of  the  twelfth  century,  for  in  §  6  the  '  Baile  Moling '  is  cited,  which,  as 
0'Curry  has  shown  (MS.  Materials,  pp.  420-1),  must  have  been 
composed  between  1137  and  1167.  The  Hfe  is,  however,  of  consider- 
able  interest.  The  writer's  account  of  the  pilgrimages  to  St.  MuUins 
in  his  own  day,  and  the  wading  in  the  water-course  (§  9)  may  be 
noted*.  Mythologically,  Moling  seems  to  combine  the  character  of 
a  solar  or  fire  deity^  (§§  3,  4,  17,  19;  cf.  Irish  Life,  §§  21,  29,  31) 
with  that  of  a  patron  of  animals  (§§  16,  21-4,  27),  a  combination 
which  vve  have  found  elsewhere.  The  historical  framework  is  very 
slight.  Moling  himself  died  in  697.  His  contemporaneousness  with 
Finnachta  '  the  Festive  ',  King  of  Ireland  675-95,  would  be  fixed  in 
tradition  by  the  famous  equivocation  by  which  Moling  is  said  to  have 
secured  the  abolition  of  the  Borromean  tribute  from  that  monarch. 
If  Moling  exercised  episcopal  functions  at  Ferns,  it  can  hardly  have 
been,  as  the  life,  §  8,  seems  to  imply  ',  in  immediate  succession  to 

'  Tliey  are  described  in  Clyn's  Annals  under  the  j'ear  1348:  *  Conuenerunt 
uiuliquc  .  .  .  episcopi  et  prelati  .  .  .  magnates  et  alii,  et  communiter  omnes 
utriusque  sexus  ad  peregrinacionem  et  vadacionem  aque  de  Thaht  Molyngis 
^Teach  Molyng)  .  .  .  slc  ut  multa  millia  hominum  simul  illuc  multis  diebus  con. 
uenirc  uideres  ;  quidam  uenerunt  deuocionis  affectu,  alii,  sed  plures,  pestilencie 
metu,  que  tunc  nimis  inualuit,'  p.  35.  I  owe  this  reference  to  Mr.  O  Leary,  u.  s., 
who  describes  in  an  appendix  how  he  had  seen  the  same  thing  himself.  He 
also  traces  in  a  note  the  exact  line  of  the  water-course.  A  festival  held  on 
July  25  is  bclieved  to  be  the  anniversary  of  its  original  completion  and  consecra- 
tion.  St.  Colman  mac  Luachain  is  represented  in  his  life  as  performing  this 
rite  :  Muid  Colman  do  imthccht  tbidin  Moling  .  .  .  7  ro  imthig  hi,'  i.  e.  Colman 
went  to  perambulate  Moling's  watcr-course,  and  perambulated  it,  Rennes  MS. 
f.  85'' ;  cf.  0'Hanlon,  vi.  720.  The  incident  narrated  in  §  16  h.is  left  its  mark 
on  the  local  topography.  The  townland  Tempul  na  m-Bo  (Church  of  the  Kine) 
takes  its  nanie  from  a  church,  of  which  the  ruins  can  still  be  traced  near  the  top 
of  the  big  hill,  which  St.  Moling  is  said  to  have  built  to  commeraorate  the  event. 
Funerals,  says  Mr.  0'Leary,  used  to  stop  here,  and  unbaptized  infants  were 
buried  here.  In  regard  to  the  book  of  St.  Moling  (§  4  ad  fin.)  which  is  still  in 
T.  C.  D.  Library,  with  its  ancient  covcr,  Mr.  O  Leary  remarks  that  it  was  long 
in  the  custody  of  the  Kavanaghs  of  Borris  Idrone.  See  on  it  Profcssor  Lawlor's 
Chapters  on  the  Book  of  Mulling,  especially  pp.  13  flT.  On  the  topography  of 
St.  Mullins  see  ib.  pp.  183  ff.,  where  a  plan  of  the  existing  ruins  is  given.  and 
a  paper  by  Mr.  ffrench  is  referred  to,  Journal  of  Ro3'al  Soc.  of  Antiquaries  of 
Ircland,  part  iv,  vol.  ii,  5th  series,  p.  377. 

^  In  a  poem  in  the  notes  to  the  Fclire  he  is  called  '  nem  im  grein,  .  .  .  grian 
gurois  ricliid  niieb',  i.  c.  the  heaven  around  the  sun,  .  .  .  the  sun  which  warms 
the  sacred  hcaven,  Fcl.-  p.  156. 

'  The  words  of  the  life  do  not  necessarily  mean  this.  The  question  is  dis- 
cussed,  A.  S.  u.  s.  pp.  407-8. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixxxiii 

Macdoc,  vvho  died  in  626  (v.  s.  p.  Ixxviii).  He  is  said  to  have  exercised 
hke  functions  at  Giendalough,  §  6,  but  it  is  not  stated  that  this  was  in 
ininiediate  succession  to  St.  Coemgen. 

Vita  Sancti  Lugidi  seu  Moluae  abbatis  de  Cluain  Ferta  Moluae^ 
This  life  is  taken  froni  M  f.  112''.  The  last  eleven  sections  are  also  in 
T  f.  92",  but  the  rest  has  been  lost  owing  to  mutilation.  Two  other 
Latin  Hves  of  this  saint  are  known  to  me.  Both  are  contained  in  S  ; 
the  first  (S')  at  f.  94'  (C.  S.  cc.  261  ff.),  the  second  (S=)  at  f.  202" 
(C.  S.  cc.  879  ff.).  With  the  lalter  is  practically  identical  the  hfe  in 
R-  f.  126",  F  p.  99.  In  R'  the  life  has  been  lost  owing  to  the  mutila- 
tionofthat  MS.  at  the  end.  The  M  text  was  printed  by  Fleming- 
in  his  Collectanea  Sacra,  pp.  368  ff.  The  Bollandists  (A.  S.  Aug.  i. 
342  ff.)  give  the  text  of  S' ;  the  editor,  however,  cites  Fleming  and 
S'.  He  mentions  a  fourth  life  contained  'in  MS  non  admoduni 
antiquo'  belonging  to  Fitzsimon.  This  I  have  not  identified.  The 
relation  between  the  three  texts  is  curious.  S'  and  M  each  contain 
a  good  deal  that  is  not  in  the  other.  Where  they  cover  the  same 
ground  they  resemble  each  other  strongly,  S'  being  as  a  rule  the 
more  original.  It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  they  are  independent 
recensions  of  a  common  original.  The  S'  R  text  is  a  much  abbre- 
viated  recension,  evidently  made  for  homiletic  purposes  (cf.  §§  21,  35, 
41).  But  it  cannot  be  taken  from  either  S^  or  M,  for  it  contains 
several  of  the  sections  which  are  peculiar  to  S'  and  M  respectively. 
It  has  also  preserved  one  or  two  things  which  are  not  either  in  S  or 
M.     It  may  be  an  independent  epitome  of  their  common  original. 

From  the  nij'thological  point  of  view  as  bearing  on  the  cult  of  the 

'  There  are  pedierees  of  Lugaid  or  Molua  in  LL.  348".  LBr.  15",  BB.  218", 
Rawl.  B.  502  f.  51''.  His  mother  Sochla  is  mentioned  LL.  372*  32.  In  the 
pedigrees,  as  in  the  lives,  he  is  inade  son  of  Carthach  ;  but  he  is  often  called 
Mac  Oche  or  Mac  Coche  i  the  scribes  being  uncertain  whether  the  c  belonged 
to  the  end  of  mac  or  the  beginning  of  the  following  name).  The  latter  form 
occurs  in  our  lives,  Car.  §  18,  Maed.  §  20,  Mochoem.  §§  10,  29,  Munnu,  §  25; 
the  former  occurs  LL.  3-/2^  32,  Fel.^  p.  180,  and  elsewhere.  Our  life,  §  i,  treats 
Coche  as  a  nickname  or  alias  of  the  father  ;  in  Fel.  u.  s.  an  absurd  etymological 
explanation  is  given  both  to  the  name  Molua  (which  is  simply  a  hypocoristic 
form  of  Lugaid,  §  44^  and  to  the  phrase  '  mac  Oche '.  In  the  LL.  pedigree  and 
in  that  on  the  margin  of  M  the  great  grandfather  of  the  saint  appears  as  Corc 
Ocha.  Mac  Oche  is  therefore  probably  a  mistake  for  Maccu  Oche,  great  grandson 
or  descendant  of  Oche,  and  is  the  sainfs  family  name.  The  saint's  clan  is 
Corcoche,  §  i,  i.  e.  Corca  Oche,  or  the  tribe  of  Oche  ;  and  the  Corc  in  the 
ancestor's  name  is  probably  a  wronsr  abstraction  from  this.  His  day  in  the 
Calendar  is  Aug.  4.  At  that  date  Mart.  Don.  cites  IL  141-4  of  Cuimin  of 
Connor's  poem,  though  doubtful  whether  it  applies  to  this  Molua  or  not.  It  also 
cites  another  quatrain,  contained  in  the  notes  to  the  Felire,  illustrating  MoIua's 
relations  with  St.  David,  Fel.''  p.  182  (§  381.  His  tenderness  to  men  and  animals 
established  itself  in  tradition,  §  53,  cf.  Mochua  §  5  ;  Mun.  §  25,  and  is  illustrated 
by  the  beautiful  legend  of  the  little  bird  lamenting  his  death,  Fel.^  pp.  56,  182. 

'  55  38,  39  are  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  221'',  623'';  in  §  39  he  reads 
Emenus  for  Ernenus,  probably  rightly. 

f   2 


Ixxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

Celtic  fire '  and  sun  deity  the  life  lias  very  great  interest ;  §§  2,  3, 
13  '0.  '5'  17  •Tid  notc,  23,  35  and  note,  53,  C.  S.  c.  282  (§  53,  not  in  M ). 
Of  this  I  hope  to  say  more  later. 

Molua's  sphere  of  influence  is  partly  Munster  and  partly  Ossory. 

In  the  chronological  setting  of  the  life  there  is  not  much  to  criticize. 
The  date  of  Molua's  own  death  is  given  as  609.  If  he  was,  as 
asserted,  a  pupil  of  Finnian  of  Clonard  ^549,  his  life  must  have  been 
a  long  one.  That  he  is  made  a  contemporary  of  St.  David  would  not 
cause  difficulty  according  to  the  commonly  received  date  of  David's 
death,  viz.  601,  but  it  would  be  otherwise,  if  that  event  is  to  be  moved 
back  to  544,  as  Mr.  E.  W.  B.  Nicholson  contends  (v.  s.  p.  xxxii).  The 
other  personages  who  can  be  dated  cause  no  difficulty.  If  the 
Molaisse  of  §  31  is  the  abbot  of  Devenish  he  died  in  564  or  571 ' ; 
Comgall  of  Bangor  in  602,  Maedoc  of  Fcrns  in  626,  Munnu  in  635', 
Dagan  in  639  (F.  M.),  if  this  is  the  abbot  of  Ennereillj'. 

I  know  no  Irish  life  of  Molua.  The  0'Clerys,  however,  seem  to 
have  had  one,  as  appears  from  the  list  in  Rawl.  B.  487,  f.  74  v", 
alluded  to  above  (p.  x,  note  3). 

Vita  Sancti  Fintani  siue  Munnu  abbatis  de  Tech  Munnu*.     This 

'   Note  that  in  pedigrees  Molua's  grandfather  is  called  Daigir,  i  e.  Blaze. 

^  1(  the  abbot  of  Leighlin  be  meant,  he  died  in  639. 

'  This  would  be  twenty-six  years  after  Molua's  own  death,  not  twenty,  as 
§  53  statcs.  Munnu's  own  life  gives  the  interval  as  twenty-four  years,  which  is 
very  nearly  right. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Munnu,  LL.  349.'^(cf.  ib.  364,  top  margin),  LBr.  15', 
BB.  aic''  ad  calcein,  Rawl.  B.  502  f,  51*',  Laud  610  (.  40/,  Fel."  p.  226.  His 
mother  Fedelm  is  mentioned,  LL,  372''  19;  cf.  Rceves,  Adamn,  p.  21,  His  father, 
Tulchan,  was  a  druid,  according  to  Fel,^  u,  s,,  which  is  interesting  if  true,  With 
this  statemcnt  may  be  connected  a  curious  passage  in  0"Donncirs  Life  of 
Columba  (Z,  C,  P,  v,  38I,  Christ  is  represented  as  saying  to  Munnu  :  'do  ba- 
dhais  at  drai  an  uair  do  bi  tu  og,'  i,  e.  thou  wert  a  druid  when  thou  wert  young  ; 
for,  as  we  shall  see,  thc  profession  of  druid  was  frequently  hereditary,  Munnu 
is  a  h3'pocoristic  name,  contracted  from  Mo-fhinnu,  Cormac,  Glossary,  p,  29 
(Translation,  p.  iio;  cf.  Fel.'  p.  clix),  whcrc  a  verse  is  cited  which  occurs  also 
Fcl,''  u,  s.  His  day  in  the  Calendar  is  Oct.  21,  at  which  datc  Mart,  Don,  cites 
a  verse  on  his  leprosy,  the  source  of  which  I  have  not  traced.  It  gives  the 
numbcr  of  his  monks  as  230.  In  the  Mart.  Tall.,  LL.  s^-i^  ^"^  ^^P  niargin,  their 
number  is  given  as  233,  and  a  list  of  thcir  names  is  added,  which  do  not  however 
amount  to  233,  There  is  an  interesting  reference  to  Muiinu  in  tlic  1-itany, 
I-L,  373''  47  :  '  Tri  I  fir  itiarlir  fo  m<im  Munnu  meic  Tulchain,'  i,  e.  tlie  thrice 
fiftj' true  inartyrs  under  the  yoke  of  Munnu,  son  of  Tulchan.  Thc  martyrdom 
intended  is,  no  doubt  what  the  Irish  call  '  white  martyrdom ',  i,  e.  asceticisra 
as  opposed  to  '  red-martyrdom*,  the  mart^Tdom  of  actual  bloodshcd,  This 
agrees  wcll  with  tlie  traditions  in  thc  lives  and  clsewhcre  of  thc  rigour  of 
Munnu's  monastic  rule.  In  thc  parallcl  table  of  saints,  LL.  370,  citcd  Mart. 
Don.  u.  s.,  he  is  compared  to  Job.  This  is  no  doubt  on  accouiil  of  his  lcprosy 
and  tlie  patieiice  vvitli  whicli  Iic  bore  it,  §  25  ;  tlie  comparison  hardly  fits  his 
general  charactcr,  sce  below.  The  story  of  Ihe  cure  of  liis  lcprosy  by  Mochua 
(Mochua.  §§  4-6)  finds  no  support  in  his  own  lives.  He  has  dedications  in 
Scotland,  Kccvcs,  Adamn,  p,  22  note  ;  Forbes,  Calendars,  p,  416,  The  Icctions 
in  the  Abcrdeen  Breviary,  Propr,  Sanct,,  Pars  Lstiua,  f,  cxxxi,  are  reprinted  in 
A,  S,  u,  s.  pp.  341-2. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixxxv 

life  is  taken  from  M  f.  127'',  collated  for  tlie  lattcr  half  with  T  f.  105". 
Thc  fornicr  half  has  been  lost  in  T  owing  to  mutilation.  There  are 
two  Latin  livcs  of  Munnu  in  S  ;  the  first  (S'j  at  f.  iio"  (C.  S.  cc.  393  ff.)  : 
the  second  (S'^)  at  f.  137''  (C.S.  cc.  489  ff.).  Tliere  is  also  a  life  of 
Munnu  in  R'  f  i2i^  R''  f.  148",  F  p.  157.  R*  is  imperfect  at  the 
beginning '.  Of  the  four  lives  S'  is  clearly  the  fuUest  and  most 
original.  But  it  and  the  M  recension  have  a  common  source.  S'  is 
closcly  allied  to  M,  agreeing  with  it  in  omissions  and  arrangement 
as  compared  with  S'  ;  S"  also  agrees  with  M  in  calling  the  virgin 
to  whom  Munnu  abandoned  Tehelly,  Emcr,  whereas  S'  and  R  ca!l 
her  Ciar  (Kera,  Kyear).  The  R  recension  is  nearly  identical  with  S*, 
but  is  still  further  abbreviated  in  certain  parts,  and  has  not  been 
padded  with  nioral  and  religious  commonplaces  as  is  the  case  with 
many  of  the  lives  in  R.  It  cannot,  however,  have  been  taken  direct 
from  S",  as  in  some  cases  it  has  preserved  a  better  reading  ;  and. 
as  has  been  stated  above,  in  an  important  point  it  agrees  with  S' 
against  M  and  S^  The  life  printed  in  the  A.  S.  Oct.  i.\.  333  ff.  is  S', 
but  the  editor  mentions  S^  and  notes  that  a  different  life  (which  is 
no  doubt  M)  is  quoted  by  Colgan  ^,  Ussher,  and  VVare.  The  M  text 
has  never  to  my  knowledge  been  printed  ;  and  this  fact,  and  the 
fact  that  it  forms  an  important  link  in  the  transmission  of  the  legend 
between  S'  on  the  one  hand,  and  S"  and  R  on  the  other,  justify  the 
inclusion  of  it  in  the  present  coUection.  I  know  no  Irish  life  of 
Munnu. 

In  the  historical  setting  of  the  life  there  are  no  inconsistencies. 
The  persons  of  known  date  with  whom  the  saint  is  brought  into 
relation  are  Brendan  of  Clonfert,  ^577  or  583;  Columba,  ^597 ; 
Cainnech,  t  599  or  600 ;  Baithine  of  lona,  +  598  x  600  ;  Comgall,  t  602  ; 
Molua,  t  609  ;  Molaisse  of  Leighlin,  +  639  ;  while  Mochoemog,  who 
is  represented  as  surviving  Munnu  (§  29),  died  in  656.  As  Munnu 
himself  died  in  635,  this  is  quite  consistent.  The  synod  on  the 
Paschal  question  mentioned  in  §  27  must  be  the  earlier  of  the  two 
South  Irish  synods  held  on  that  subject,  as  the  S'  version  clearly 
shows  that  the  result  was  indeterminate  ^  The  date  of  the  earlier 
synod  is  probably  630  (Bede,  ii.  125).  And  generally  the  historical 
element  in  this  life  is  larger  than  in  some  others,  and  we  get  an 
impression  of  Munnu  as  a  real  man,  and  not  merely  a  peg  to  hang 
miracles   on ;    a   man   of  somewhat   harsh  and  hasty  temper,  but 

'  That  F  has  not  this  defcct  shows  that  this  mutilation  is  subsequent 
to  1627. 

*  Colgan  quotes  §§  i,  5  of  our  life,  A.  S.  p.  452",  and  §59,  10.  ib.  606". 
0'Clery  knevv  of  a  Latin  life  of  Munnu  in  the  possession  of  Simon  Barnewall, 
V.  s.  p.  ix,  nole  i. 

^   '  Unusquisque  faciat  quod  .  .  .  rectum  sibi  uide.itur,'  S'  §  30  ad  finem. 


Ixxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

placable  and  conciliatory  when  the  momentary  irritation  was  over*. 
Both  here  and  in  the  Hfe  of  Molua  he  is  contrasted  with  that  gentler 
saint'.    The  action  of  the  life  is  almost  entirely  in  Leinster. 

There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  special  mythical  significance  in  the 
life  of  Munnu.  Stress  is  laid  on  his  gift  of  prophecy  and  his  power 
of  reading  the  hearts  of  others  ;  but  these  may  be  only  exaggerations 
of  real  spiritual  gifts.  Attention  may  be  called  to  the  very  intercsting 
passage  on  the  Land  of  Promise  (the  Tir  Tairngire  of  the  Irish)  given 
from  S'  in  the  notes  to  §  28,  which  is  of  some  importancc  in  connexion 
with  the  Brendan  legend. 

There  is  no  trace  in  these  lives  of  the  curious  story  found  in 
the  life  of  Cainnech  (§  21)  how  Munnu's  father,  Tulchan,  retired  soon 
after  Munnu's  birth  to  the  monastery  of  lona,  and  was  bidden  by 
Columba,  at  Baithine's  suggestion,  to  drown  his  infant  son.  Columba 
is  brought  into  relation  with  the  infant  and  youthful  Munnu,  but  in 
a  very  diflerent  way  (§§  2,  5 ;  cf.  Reeves,  Adamn.  p.  99).  The  story 
of  Munnu's  wish  to  be  admitted  to  lona  after  CoIumba's  death  (§  7)  is 
in  Adamnan,  i.  2  (Reeves,  pp.  18-23  and  notes)'. 

Vita  Sancti  Ruadani  abbatis  de  Lothra  *.  This  life  is  taken 
from  M  f.  86''  collated  with  T  f.  53".  There  are  two  other  Latin  lives 
of  Ruadan  ;  one  in  S  f.  106"  (C.  S.  cc.  319  ff.),  the  other  in  R' f  145", 
R^  f.  97%  and  F  p.  14.  M  and  S  have  clearly  a  common  source, 
S  being  in  some  cases  nearer  to  that  source.  The  M  text  has, 
however,  points  of  interest  of  its  own,  and  as  it  has  never  been 
printed  before,  it  is  given  here.  The  text  given  in  the  A.  S.  Apr.  ii. 
382  flf.  is  S;  the  editor  notes  that  Colgan  has  printed  §  29  of  M 
In  Trias  Thaum.  p.  461",  but  forbears  to  cite  it,  '  ne  scandahim  gignat ' ; 
he  also  omits  the  corresponding  sections  of  S  (23  and  24),  '  ne 
scandalo  foret.' 


'  '  Si  aliquem  hospitem  uerbo  aspero  et  repentino  salutasset,  nunquam  come- 
debat  cibum,  priusquam  hospes  illc  leniter  placatus  esset ;  et  dicebat :  "Ego 
preterita  hora  carnalitcr  filius  Tulchani ;  nunc  uero  spirituahter  fihus  Dei  sum." ' 

S'  §  34. 

*  Mun.  §  25  ;  I.ugf.  §  53  ;  cf.  5  7  note  :  '  natura  illius  aspera  est ' ;  Mocliua,  §  5. 

^  Despite  this  clear  testimony,  the  lections  in  the  Aberdeen  Brcviary,  u.  s., 
not  only  make  him  a  monk  at  lona  under  Columba,  but  rcpresent  him  as  dying 
and  being  buried  at  Kilmun  in  Argyilsliire. 

'  Thcre  are  pedigrces  of  Ruadan  LL.  350/,  LBr.  iS"",  BB.  220"  (cf.  ib.  232''), 
I.aud  610  f.  39",  Rawl.  B.  486  I.  34''.  His  day  in  the  Calcndar  is  April  15,  at 
which  date  Mart.  Don.  cites  the  LL.  table  of  parallel  saints,  in  which  Ruadan  is 
equated  with  St.  Matthew.  Thc  rest  of  the  account  is  taken  frotn  the  Brussels 
Irish  life,  c.  10.  The  account  of  Ruadan's  miraculous  tree  occurs  also  in  the  S 
life  of  Finnian  of  Clonard,  CS.  cc.  202-3.  On  his  bell  sce  Stokcs-Petrie, 
Christian  Inscriptions,  ii.  94,  where  it  is  also  stated,  on  thc  authority  of  Ware, 
that  a  shrine  containing  one  of  his  hands  was  preserved  at  Lorrha  till  the 
dissolution.  The  othcr  hand  sccms  to  have  bcen  at  Canterbury  ;  sce  the  curious 
note  in  M,  cited  infra,  ii.  240,  uote  i. 


THE   SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixxxvii 

The  R  text  is  a  shorter  recension  of  S.  There  is  an  Irish  life 
of  Ruadan  in  Brussels  MS.  4190  x  4200  f  193  ff.,  and  in  R.  I.  A.  Stowe, 
i.K.  p.  287 '.  This  seems  to  be  derived  from  a  Latin  original.  It  does 
not,  howcver,  agree  exactly  with  either  M  or  S,  though  it  is  nearer 
on  the  whole  to  S.     It  is  cited  occasionally  as  Br. 

The  Chroniclers  do  not  seem  to  give  any  date  to  Ruadan.  He 
must,  however,  have  lived  in  the  si.xth  century.  He  is  made  a  pupil 
of  Finnian  of  Clonard,  1 549 ;  and  the  other  personages  of  icnown 
date  vvith  whom  he  is  brought  into  contact  are  Diarmait  mac  Cerbaill, 
King  of  Ireland,  who  reigned,  according  to  Ann.  Ult.,  either  from 
544  to  565  or  from  549  to  572  (and  this  would  be  fixed  in  tradition  by 
the  famousquarrel  of  the  saint  with  this  monarch) ;  Brendan  of  Clon- 
fert,  +577  or  583  ;  bishop  Aed  mac  Bricc,  +  589  ;  Colum  Cille,  t  597  ; 
Baithine,  ^598  or  600  ;  Cohnan  Ela,  t  611. 

Ruadan's  principal  monastery,  Lorrha,  is  in  Ormond  near  the 
northern  end  of  Lough  Derg,  but  his  activity  seems  to  have  extended 
into  many  parts  of  Ireland  both  north  and  south. 

The  life  is  very  mythical,  but  does  not  seein  to  have  any  very 
distinct  mythological  significance. 

Vita  sancte  Samthanne  uirginis  -.  This  is  the  only  Hfe  of 
St.  Samthann  known  to  me,  whether  in  Latin  or  in  Irish.  It  is  here 
printed  for  the  first  time.  The  text  is  from  R'  f.  150''  flf.,  collated 
with  R-  f  161'  ff.  It  exists  also  in  F  p.  206.  The  life,  lilce  most 
of  those  in  the  R  recension,  is  slight,  but  contains  points  of  consider- 
able  interest ;  and  the  sainfs  replies  to  the  questions  asked  her  as  to 
the  attitude  of  prayer,  the  relation  of  study  to  devotion',  and  the 
efficacy  of  pilgrimages,  show  a  spiritual  insight  and  a  width  of  view 
which  are  too  often  absent  from  these  compositions.  The  chrono- 
logical  data  are  few,  but  for  the  most  part  consistent.  Samthann's 
ovvn  death  is  assigned  to  739.  The  '  rex  Kennedus  '  of  §  7  is  probably 
Cinaed,son  of  Irgalach,  Kingof  Ireland,t  728;  the'  Rechtabra  regulus ' 
of  §  21  may  be  either  Rechtabra  ua  Cathasaigh  (CCasey),  chief  of  Ui 

'  The  life  in  the  tvvo  MSS.  is  practically  the  same,  though  they  differ  some- 
whal  in  phrasing,  and  a  little  in  arrangement.  To  the  Brussels  copy  are 
appended  two  stories  about  Ruadan.  For  the  use  of  a  transcript  of  the  Dublin 
copy  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  J.  G.  0'Keeffe.  Irish  stories  bearing 
on  the  famous  cursing  of  Tara  by  Ruadan  are  cited  in  the  notes  to  §  15  ;  cf.  also 
Lismore  Lives,  pp.  xxvi,  404"  ad  calcem.  He  occurs  in  the  Visio  Tundali,  Noua 
Legenda  Angliae,  ii.  311. 

'  There  are  pedigrees  of  Samthann  in  LL.  350'',  LBr.  17',  BB.  220'^  (cf.  ib. 
331'),  RawL  B.  502  f.  52",  Laud  610  f.  38",  38.^^,  Fel.^  p.  260.  The  name  of  her 
father  is  variously  given  as  Diaran.  Diamran  i^so  life),  Diamaran,  Dimaran,  the 
pronunciation  of  which  would  not  differ  very  much.  There  are  some  obscure 
verses  on  her,  LL.  365  top  margin.     Her  day  in  the  Calendar  is  Dec.  19. 

^  Cf.  Aurea  Leg.  p.  106  ;  '  uidit  quemdam  sedentem  atque  operantem,  et 
deinde  surgentem  et  orantem.  Erat  autem  angelus  Domini ;  et  dixit  ei  "  Sic 
fac,  et  saluus  eris''.' 


Ixxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

Tuirtre  near  Lough  Neagh,  ^  734,  or  Rechtabra,  son  of  Dunchu,  chicl 
of  Cremorne,  t759-  Dairchellach  or  Tairchellach  'niagister',  §  24, 
is  probably  the  Tairchelltach  'sapiens',  who  died  in  760  (Ann.  Ult.). 
Fland,  son  of  Conla  (§  13),  is  not  mentioned  in  theannals,  but  Aelghal, 
son  of  Fland,  son  of  Conla,  chief  of  Tethbha,  died  in  770  according  to 
F.  M.  ;  which  suits  very  well  both  as  to  tiine  and  place.  The  miracle 
of  §  17  connected  with  Niall  Frossach,  King  of  Ireland  763-778,  is 
probably  to  be  understood  as  having  taken  place  after  Sanithann's 
death.  The  only  chronological  absurdity  is  that  perpetrated  in  §  26, 
vvhere  Lasrianus  or  Molaisse,  the  founder  of  Devenish  in  Lough 
Erne,  who  died  564  or  571,  is  represented  as  alive  at  the  time 
of  Samthann's  death  in  739.  The  name  is  probablj'  the  insertion 
of  some  ignorant  scribe,  who  knew  only  one  abbot  of  Dcvenish.  In 
§  10  this  abbot  is  spoken  of  merely  by  his  title,  and  no  name  is  given. 
St.  Samthann  was  of  Ultonian  descent ;  but  her  work  is  chiefly 
associated  with  the  district  of  Tethbha  in  Meath.  There  she  was 
fostered  by  the  chief  of  the  Cairbre-Gabhra,  and  there  in  later  life 
she  founded  Clonbroney ;  though  for  a  time  she  was  prioress  under 
St.  Cognat  at  Urney  on  the  borders  of  Donegal  and  Tyrone.  This 
is  probably  historical ;  but  the  life  shows  decided  traces  of  the 
influence  of  solar  or  fire  myths',  and  it  is  just  possible  that  the 
accretion  niay  be  due  to  a  fanciful  etymologizing  of  the  sainfs  name 
as  Sam-theine,  i.  e.  summer-fire. 

Vita  Sancti  Tigernaci  episcopi  de  Cluain-Eois^  This  life  is  the 
only  life  of  Tigernacii  known  to  me  whether  in  Latin  or  Irish.  It  is 
here  printed  from  R'  f  116'',  collated  with  R-  f.  95",  and  with  the 
imperfect  copy  in  S  f.  86'^  (C.  S.  cc.  212  ff.)  which  breaks  otT  niutilated 
in  the  middle  of  §  13  ;  and  compared  with  F  p.  21.  S  and  R  must 
have  some  common  source,  as  they  agree  occasionally  in  obvious 
blunders'.  On  the  whole  the  text  of  S  is  superior  to  that  of  R.  The 
hfe  was  printed  by  the  Bollandists,  A.  S.  April  i.  401  ff.,  from  three 

'  §§  I.  2,  5  and  probably  §§  7,  la,  22;  in  the  pedigrees  one  of  her  ancestors 
is  called  Trichem,  which  seems  to  mean  a  spark  (cf.  §  5  '  in  specie  scintille 
ignis'). 

*  There  are  pedigrees  of  Tigernach  in  LL.  351'',  LBr.  19'',  BB.  221'  (cf.  ib. 
232"),  Laud  610  ff.  38/,  41^,  Fcl.'^  pp.  iio,  H2.  His  niother,  Derfraich,  is 
mentioned  at  LL.  372''  25,  and  her  pedigiee  is  given  among  those  of  tlie  saints 
in  LL.  347-'^,  LBr.  14",  BB.  216''  (cf.  ib.  231").  A  tale  about  her  is  in  the  notes 
to  the  F(5lire,  Fel.^  p.  iio,  where  also  there  is  a  diflerent  version  of  the  incident 
in  §  2,  and  a  vcrsu  ascribed  to  Tigernach  is  cited.  A  Titiernach,  possibly 
our  saint,  is  said  to  have  assisted  in  the  redaction  of  thc  tale  called  the  Death  of 
Muirchcrtach  inac  Krca,  R.  C.  xxiii.  430.  His  day  is  Apiil  4.  The  Hollandists 
give  him  at  April  5,  for  which  datc  I  know  no  authority  earlier  than  Adam  King 
and  Dcmpster,  Fotbes,  Calendars,  pp.  148,  196  ;  thc  latter  gives  a  Tigernach 
abbot  at  April  4,  and  a  Tigernach  bishop  at  April  5  ;  cf.  ib.  452.  The  Hollandists 
cite  various  foreign  martyrologies  which  I  am  not  in  a  positJon  to  verify. 

•*  e.  g.  Moncnsiumyc^/' Momonensium,  §  8;  ingcrentybr  iungcrent,  §  10. 


THE    SEPARATE   LIVES  Ixxxix 

MSS.,  onc  being  S;  vvhile  of  the  remaining  tvvo  one  vvas  supplied 
by  Ilugh  Ward,  the  other  by  Henry  Fitzsimon.  This  edition  is 
occasionally  cited  as  B.  Ward's  MS.  vvas  probably  F  or  a  copy 
of  it ;  for  the  text  of  B  often  agrees  with  F,  especially  in  the  later 
chapters,  where  S  was  not  available.  Fitzsimon's  MS.  inust  have 
differed  markedly  from  the  others.  In  particular  it  contained  one 
chaptcr  peculiar  to  itself,  vvhich  is  given  in  a  note  to  §  7.  The  life 
is  somevvhat  slight,  and  the  chronological  data  contained  in  it  are 
few.  I  have  not  succeeded  in  identifying  any  of  the  secular  princes 
mentioned  in  it.  Tigernach  himself  is  said  to  have  died  in  549  or 
550.  He  is  made  contemporary  with  bishop  Conlaed  of  Kildare 
(1520),  with  Brigit  (^525^.  M.),  and  with  Duach  or  Dubthach  of 
Armagh  (t  548).  So  far  all  is  consistent '.  The  only  inconsistency 
is  the  introduction  of  Monend  or  Monennus;  if,  as  is  probable,  he 
is  meant  to  be  identified  vvith  Nynias  of  Whitern  or  Candida  Casa, 
who  is  said  to  have  died  in  432,  and  who  certainly  was  alive  about 
400  (Bede,  ii.  128).  Possibly  the  compilers  of  these  lives  knew  of 
only  one  abbot  of  Whitern,  just  as  they  seem  to  have  known  of  only 
two  popes,  Celestine,  the  alleged  sender  of  St.  Patrick,  and  Gregory 
the  Great. 

Tigernach  seems  to  be  exclusively  an  Oriel  Saint,  to  the  royal 
family  of  vvhich  he  belonged  through  his  mother ;  though  visits  are 
recorded  to  Rome,  Britain,  Kildare,  and  Munster. 

The  life  does  not  seem  to  have  much  mythological  significance. 
What  little  indication  there  is  points  rather  to  a  solar  hero. 


PART   III.      COMPOSITION    AND    CHARACTER 
OF   THE   LIVES 

The  foregoing  analysis  has  already  throvvn  some  light  on  the 
character  and  mode  of  composition  of  the  lives.  In  their  present 
shape  none  of  them  are  very  ancient '-.     But  they  contain  earlier  ^, 

^  The  Keranus  or  Ciaranus,  son  of  Eochaid,  in  §  5,  cannot  be  either  of  the 
two  well-known  saints  of  that  name ;  for  Ciaran  of  Saigir  was  son  of  Lugna, 
and  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois  was  the  son  of  Beoaed  or  Beodan,  the  artificer. 
Eochaid  was  the  name  of  Tigernach's  maternal  grandfather,  so  this  Keranus 
may  be  an  uncle.  Or  he  may  be  the  Ciaran,  son  of  Eochaid,  of  Tibrada,  men- 
tioncd  Dec.  §  31,  and  commcmorated  in  Mart.  Don.  at  Nov.  10;  cf  ib.  p.  376. 

"  The  Bollandists  suggest  with  much  plausibility  that  the  reconstitution  of 
many  monasteries  by  tlie  regular  monastic  orders,  which  followed  tlie  coming 
of  the  English  in  the  twehth  century,  gave  a  great  impulse  to  the  compilation 
of  the  lives  of  Irish  saints,  A.  S.  March,  i.  390". 

'  Cf.  what  Ricemarc  says  in  his  life  of  St.  David  :  'hec  .  .  .  ex  plurimis  .  .  . 
in  unum  collegimus,  que  in  uetustissimis  patrie  .  .  .  sparsim  inuenta  [sunt] 
scriptis,"  C.  B.  S.  p.  143. 


xc  INTRODUCTION 

sometimes  primitive,  materials.  We  have  seen  in  many  cases  the 
process  of  composition  going  on  under  our  eyes :  the  conflation 
of  two  different  recensions  of  the  same  or  closely  analogous 
series  of  incidents  as  in  the  combination  of  the  Vita  Brendani  and 
the  Nauigatio  Brendani  in  our  R  Hfe  of  Brendan ;  the  harking 
back  to  include  another  version  of  the  saint's  youth ',  as  in  the 
life  of  Boetius,  §§19-20;  the  insertion  of  an  'ahter'  version  of 
certain  transactions,  as  in  the  life  of  Enda ;  the  incorporation 
of  separate  documents  or  stories,  as  in  the  R  lives  of  Finniaa  of 
Clonard -,  Bairre  *,  Ciaran  of  Saigir';  the  'farcing'  of  an  earlier  life 
with  scriptural  references  and  religious  commonplaces  for  purposes 
of  edification,  as  in  our  life  of  Abban,  and  many  of  the  lives  in  the  R 
recension  ;  the  abbreviation  of  an  earlier  life  to  make  it  more  suitable 
for  use  as  Lectionsin  Choir  or  Refectory'' ;  the  translation  of  an  Irish 
life  into  Latin  ^  The  uncritical  amalgamation  of  materials  drawn 
from  different  sources  is  shown  by  the  way  in  which  doublets, 
triplets,  and  even  quadruplets '  occur  in  some  of  the  lives,  a  very 
slight  difference  in  form  being  often  enough  to  conceal  from  the 
compiler  the  fact  that  they  are  only  varying  versions  of  the  same 
incident.  One  very  obvious  way  of  expanding  the  life  of  a  saint 
was  to  incorporate  incidents  relating  to  that  saint  from  the  lives  of 
other  saints ;  or  again,  whether  intentionally  or  not,  stories  belong- 
ing  to  one  saint  are  transferred  to  another  saint  of  the  same  name '. 

'  On  these  '  macgnimartha '  and  their  parallels  in  the  secular  literature  sce 
above,  p.  xxxiv. 

^  V.  s.  p.  xvii.  '  See  i.  6g  note.  *  i.  233  note. 

"  V.  s.  pp.  xxii  f.,  xxxviii,  xlvi,  Ixii,  Ixxxiii.     Cf.  i.  139  note. 

•  V.  s.  pp.  xi,  xxii,  xliii,  lix,  Ixxvi. 

'  e.  g.  Enda,  §|  25,  32  ;  Ita,  §§  17,  34  ;  Samtliann,  §§  12,  22.  In  the  S  life  of 
Aed  mac  Bricc  the  incident  of  liis  chariot  flying  througli  the  air  occurs  four 
limes,  §§  II,  19,  36,  42.  Tliat  compilers  did  occasionally  noticc  these  things  is 
shown  by  thc  way  in  which  the  coinpiler  of  the  R  life  of  Brendan  omits  the 
N  B  recension  of  the  Judas  incident,  because  the  VB  version  of  it  occurs  later 
in  his  work,  cf.  i.  130  iiote.  But  to  this  uncritical  habit  of  the  compilcrs  we 
owe  the  preservation  of  much  interesting  material  which  would  otherwise  have 
perishcd. 

'  Cf  Ci.  C.  §  30  with  Ci.  S.  §  32  ;  in  the  S  life  of  Colman  Ela,  §  40  (CS.  c.  438), 
a  miracle  is  attributed  to  that  saint  wliich  in  the  life  of  Colman  of  Dromore,  §  10 
(ib.  c.  831),  is  attributcd  to  tlie  latter  ;  a  miracle  belonging  to  St.  Brigit  of  Cluain 
Infide  (LS.  pp.  71-2)  has  been  transferred  to  the  great  St.  Brigit  of  Kildare, 
Tr.  Th.  pp.  540-1  t§  115)  ;  and  gcnerally  there  is  a  tendcncy  to  substitute  better 
known  saints  for  morc  obscure  pcrsonalities.  Luzel,  Legendes  Clireticnnes,  ii.  81. 
(For  non-Celtic  instances  cf.  Delehaye,  Legendes,  p.  23  ;  Saintyves,  p.  235  ; 
R.  C.  V.  130.)  I  have  not,  howcver,  found  any  instances  of  those  deliberatc 
transfers,  with  fraudulent  change  of  name,  of  incidents  and  even  whole 
biographics  from  one  saint  to  anothcr,  which  are  not  unknown  in  other  depart- 
ments  of  hagiology,  scc  thc  Abbe  Duchesnc  in  R.  C.  xi.  6-8,  11  ;  Delehaye, 
Legcndcs,  pp.  105,  1 14-19,  162-4,  255;  Baring-Gould  and  Fisher,  i.  137.  We 
find  occasional  rcfcrences  in  onc  life  to  anothcr,  e.  g.  in  Ci.  C.  §  32  a  reference 
to  Cocmg.  §  28  ;  in  Lug.  §  53  to  the  life  of  Munnu  ;  in  Coemg.  §  22  to  one  of 


COMPOSITION  OF  THE  LIVES  xci 

To  some  of  these  processes  analogies  can  be  found  in  thc  secular 
literature  of  the  Irish  '. 

Of  course  the  main  object  in  the  compilation  of  these  lives  was  the  l/ 
glorification  of  the  saint  vvho  was  regarded  as  the  founder  or  the 
patron  of  the  community  in  vvhich  the  compilation  was  made'';  where 
aiso,  it  may  well  be,  his  earthly  remains  or  other  outward  relics  of 
him  were  enshrined.  The  life  was  the  pilgrim's  guidc-book  to  the 
sanctuary  which  he  had  come  to  visit'.  Subsidiary  objects  can  also 
be  traced.  One  of  these  was  clearly  to  explain  the  special  relations 
of  confraternity,  subordination,  tribute,  &c.,  existing  between  different 
monasteries  *.    Such  relations  received  not  only  explanation  but  con- 

the  lives  of  Patrick ;  in  Br.  i.  5  104  to  one  of  Columba.  References  to  lives  not 
known  to  exist  are  in  Ab.  §  22,  Car.  |  27  ;  Ci.  S.  §  25  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  135  : 
'  Paterniis,  cuius  .  .  .  uirtutes  in  sua  continentur  hystoria'  ;  Br.  life  of  Maedoc, 
c.  72  :  'aniail  adeir  betha  Molaisi,'  i.  e.  as  says  the  life  of  Molaise.  It  is  very 
rarely  that  a  writer  alludes  to  himself,  as  Ab.  §  26  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  143. 

'  See  Zimmer's  masterly  essay,  Ueber  den  compilatorischen  Charakter  der 
irischen  Sagentexte  im  Lebor  na  h-Uidre  (Kelt.  Studien,  5%  Kuhn's  Zeitschr. 
xxviii.  41-;  tt.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  story  found  in  the  tale  called 
'  Imthecht  na  tromdaime ',  or  '  Troindam  Guairc  ',  Oss.  Soc.  v,  that  none  of  the 
poets  of  Ireland  could  recite  a  complete  version  of  the  famous  Tain  bo  Cualgne, 
and  had  to  go  abroad  to  Armorica  to  find  it.  points  to  a  time  when  the  separate 
incidents  of  that  epic  were  being  gradually  combined  into  a  whole.  The  story- 
teller  conceives  this  process  as  a  re-collecting  of  fragments  of  an  ancient  whole 
vvhich  had  become  dispersed  ;  see  Zimmer,  Sitzungsb.  d.  preuss.  Akad.  xlix.  1114. 
Compiire  also  the  way  in  which  separate  incidents  get  combined  in  various  ways 
in  folk-tales,  MaccuUoch,  Childhood,  pp.  11,  455;  Luzel  u.  s.  ii.  244. 

-  The  frequent  occurrence  of  the  words,  pater  or  patronus  noster,  noster 
senex,  &c.,  proves  Ihat  such  lives  were  composed  primarily  in  and  for  the 
saints'  own  communities  ;  see  Car.  §5  45,  59,  68-9  ;  Ci.  C.  §  32  ;  Ci.  S.  §  38, 
cf.  §  22  :  ^  nos  latet,  quia  nemini  ex  iiostris  hoc  indicauit ' ;  Co.  E.  §  36  ;  (Ilom. 
§  58;  Cron.  §§  28-9;  Decl.  §  39;  Fm.  C.  §29;  Maed.  §  59  ^M);  Mochoem. 
§  35  ;  Mol.  §§  29,  30 ;  Rua.  §  30  ;  cf.  'peruenientes  Imc',  Com.  §  17. 

'  '  La  biographie  etait  comme  la  legende  explicative  des  reliques  que  le 
couvent  possedait,  et  qui  faisaient  sa  fortune,'  Fustel  de  Coulanges,  Monarquie 
Franque,  pp.  9  if.  ;  cited  LS.  pp.  xci,  .\cii.     The  whole  passage  is  admirable. 

*  Moyarny  (or  perhaps  Killabban)  with  Cluain  Immurchuir,  Clonfert, 
St.  Mullins.  Killaloe,  and  Taghmon,  Ab.  §§37,46;  Aghaboe  with  Durrow,  Cain. 
§  21  ;  Rahen  ^or  perhaps  Lismore)  with  Bangor  and  Clonfert,  Car.  §§  2,  3,cf.  §  11 ; 
Clonmacnois  with  Scattery,  Saigir  ^cf.  Ci.  S.  §§  31,  32),  and  Glendalough 
(cf.  Coem.  §  281,  Ci.  C.  §§  22,  30,  32  ;  Saigir  with  Clonfert  and  Birr,  Ci.  S.  §  31 ; 
Glendalough  with  Durrow  and  Aghaboe,  Coem.  §  27  ;  Ardmore  with  Beggery, 
Emly,  and  St.  Davids,  Decl.  §§  12,  15  ;  Aranmore  with  Emly  and  Clonmacnois, 
Enda,  §§  21,  27  ;  Devenish  with  Durrow,  Las.  §  31  (where  it  is  evidently 
intended  to  make  the  former  superiorl ;  Ferns  with  St.  David's,  Maed.  §  32, 
with  Scattery,  LS.  p.  62  ;  with  Ardbraccan,  Devenish,  Drumlane,  Fenagh,  and 
Rossinver,  Br.  life  of  Maedoc.  cc.  14,  69-72  ;  Leamokevoge  with  Kilcolman, 
Mochoem.  §  15;  Clones  with  Tiprat  mac  Nenna  and  Kildare,  Tig.  §§  5.  7  note 
(here  there  is  an  evident  attempt  to  claim  superiority) ;  Fore  with  Balla,  LS. 
p.  139.  Other  instances  will  be  found  Fel.-  pp.  224,  244;  C.  B.  S.  p.  79;  CS. 
cc.  229  (§  11),  893  (§  4I,  897  (§§  n,  12),  907  (§  7),  934  (§  81  ;  this  last  is  worth 
quoting  :  'hec  confraternitas  sanctorum  erat  quoad  sutiragia  orationum,  et  quoad 
defensionem  subiectorum  eisdem  populorum.'  This  defensive  alliance  was 
probably  directed  not  merely  against  secular  encroachments,  but  against  the 


xcii  INTRODUCTION 

secration  from  legends  which  told  of  the  ties  of  sacred  friendship  or 
discipleship  existing  of  old  between  their  respective  founders,  or 
from  traditions  of  a  conimon  founder.  Other  stories  seem  to  be 
inserted  to  account  for  the  traditional  customs  or  characteristics  oi 
certain  monasteries  S  the  latter,  according  as  they  are  good  or  evil, 
being  often  ascribed  to  the  blessings  or  curses  of  certain  saints  '.  Ot 
another  group  of  stones  the  motive  obviously  is  to  give  a  title  and  a 
sanction  to  the  possessions  of  the  community,  their  rights,  dues, 
privileges,  &c.''  This  motive  becomes  increasingly  prominent  in 
some  of  the  later  Irish  lives.  The  Brussels  lives  of  Berach*,  Maedoc", 
and  MacCreiche  "  are  filled  with  this  sort  of  thing  ;  the  lovvest  depth 
being  reached  perhaps  in  the  life  oi  Caillin  in  the  Book  of  Fenagh  ', 
in  which  eternal  damnation  is  freely  awarded  as  a  penalty  for  being 
buried  in  an  adjoining  parish ". 

Unfortunately  too,  the  alniost  universal  idea  of  these  writers  was 
that  the  best  way  of  honouring  their  saintly  patrons  was  to  heap  as 
many  miracles  as  possible  upon  them'.     It  is  true  that  niany  of  the 

attacks  of  other  ecclesiastical  communities.  The  Annals  of  Ulster  give  frequent 
instances  of  connicts  between  monasteries,  which  the  Four  Masters  discreetly 
omit ;  see  Ann.  Ult.  759,  763,  806,  cf.  803  :  V.  Tr.  p.  78  ;  wc  also  find  monasteries 
taking  part  in  secular  conflicts,  Ann.  Ult.  775,  810,  832  ;  no  one  will  blame 
them  for  fighting  against  the  heathen  Danes,  ib.  827,  830.  The  Annals  also 
show  us,  from  the  eighth  to  the  eleventh  century,  many  instances  of  the  samc 
person  holding  the  abbacy  of  two  or  more  monasteries,  often  belonging  to 
entirely  distinct  foundations  ;  Connor  and  Lynally  seem  to  have  become 
permancntly  united  in  this  way,  Ann.  Ult.  777,  866,  900,  953,  955,  964,  975, 
1038;  other  instanccs,  ib.  747,  781,  783-4,  788,  805,  808-9,  824,  834,  837,  839, 
844,  849,  867,  870,  879,  881,  887.  895,  903,  920,  922-3,  925-6,  928,  930,  937, 
944,  952-3,  957,  968,  98B,  1009,  loio,  1019,  1020,  1025,  1040,  1042-3,  1052, 
1055.  1093.  Not  unfrequently  the  office  of  abbot  in  one  monastery  was  com- 
bined  with  a  diflerent  oflice  in  another,  ib.  868,  874,  881,  884.  890,  906,  923, 
930,  955,  908,  992.  It  is  obvious  that  such  arrangements  would  tenU  to  work 
raore  smoothly  if  it  could  be  shown  that  the  communities  so  connected  had  had 
some  link  of  union  in  the  past.     See  Addenda. 

1  e.  g  Car.  5§  47,  58;  Ci.  S.  §  31 ;  Cron.  §  5. 

"  The  Irish  have  a  technical  word  'facbala',  lit.  leavings,  i.  e.  bequests,  for 
such  entails  of  good  or  cvil.  More  will  be  said  on  this  subject  whcn  we  deal 
with  this  curious  characteristic  of  Celtic  saints,  p.  clxxiv  infra. 

'  e.  g.  Com.  §  58  ;  Dec.  §  19  ad  fin.  (io  account  for  Armagh  having  property 
in  Munster)  ;  Ger.  §  7  ;  a  particularly  gross  instance  of  this  kind  is  given  from 
the  S  text  in  the  notes  to  Fin.  C.  §  9  :  '  omnis  laicus  qui  comederit  butirum 
noslruiii  iugulabitur  prius  quam  degerit '  ;  cf.  C.  S.  c.  921  ^§  15) ;  R.  C.  x.  254  ; 
Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  138''  (§  42).  Whole  lives  were  sometimes  fabricated  with  this 
object,  British  Saints,  i.  6;  cf.  Archacology  and  Authorily,  p.  175. 

*  cc.  4,  10,  28.  '  cc.  17-19,  689,  71-2. 

'  cc.  3,  8,  11-13,  15-17.  '  ed.  Hennessy  and  Kclly,  1875. 

'  pp.  190  fl'.  ;  202  ff.,  &c. 

'  'porlentosis  pleraque  acta  obscurantes  figmentis,'  A.  S.  March,  i.  390"  ;  of 
Ruadan's  miraculous  tree  Ihc  Bollandist  editor  says  :  '  utinam  non  magis  incredi- 
bilia  in  Hibernorum  sanctorum  uitis  inuenirentur,'  Apr.  ii.  385".  Even  hagio- 
logists  occasionally  appear  consciuus  that  this  elcmcnt  may  bc  overdone  :  '  tanla 


COMPOSITION  OF  THE  LIVES  xciii 

lives,  both  Latin  and  Irish,  conclude  vvith  a  list  of  the  superhuman 
virtues  of  the  saint.  But  this  moral  tribute  is  purely  perfunctory, 
and  is  very  largely  'common  form  ''.  The  real  interest  of  the  writer 
is  in  the  thaumaturgj'.  Another  unpleasant  characteristic  is  the  way 
in  vvhich  spiritual  blcssings,  including  salvation  itself,  are  made  to 
dcpcnd  on  purely  material  conditions  -,  on  cxternal  circumstances  and 
acts,  such  as  burial  in  a  certain  cemetery ',  dying  in  a  certain  bed*, 
drinking  of,  or  being  sprinkled  with,  a  certain  fountain '',  reciting  a 
certain  form  of  vvords '.  Both  these  characteristics  come  from  the 
pagan  amalgam  in  these  lives'  which  it  is  one  main  purpose  of  this 
introduction  to  trace.  The  saint  is  regarded  as  a  more  powerful 
druid,  the  forces  underlying  his  religion  are  conceived  as  magical 
rather  than  spiritual  and  moral,  and  the  objects  and  ceremonies 
associated  vvith  his  creed  and  worship  are  only  a  very  superior  kind 
of  '  medicine '.  These  points  will  be  illustrated  more  fully  later. 
Meanwhile  it  may  be  noted  that  the  very  points  which  give  offence  to 

fucrunt  miracula,  ut,  nisi  merita  praecessissent,  phantastica  putarentur,'  Aur. 
I.eg.  p  449;  cf.  Ab.  I  10;  and  in  the  later  recensions  this  element  tends  to 
grow,  Delehaye,  p.  roi. 

'   See  Delehaye,  pp.  28-g. 

-  Colgan  has  a  long  note  trying  to  get  over  this  difficulty, 

'  l"his  is  the  commonest  condition  ;  and  the  superstition  is  probably  responsible 
for  the  crowded  condition  of  many  Irish  cemeteries  to-day  ;  see  Ba.  §  13;  Car. 
§§  29,  30 ;  Ci.  S.  §  35  ;  Coem.  §  24  ;  Col.  E.  §  36 ;  Maedoc,  §  33  M  ;  Mun.  §  19 
(a  less  purely  material  view  is  taken.  Fint.  §  13,  q.  v.^ ;  L.S.  pp.  67,  79,  82,  104  ; 
C.  B.  S.  p.  124  (.where  an  attempt  is  made  to  save  the  situation  bj'  the  insertion 
of  the  words  italicized)  :  'omnjs  qui  cimiterio  ilHus  snna  Jiiie  sepuUus  fuerit, 
misericordiam  consequetur  '  ;  Eriu,  ii.  202  ;  Cain  Ad.  §  25  ;  Fel.'  p.  Ixxxvi ; 
R.  C.  xxvi.  362  iwhere  a  departed  soul  is  represented  as  saying  that  what 
had  helped  it  most  was  burial  at  Clonmacnois  ;  Brussels  Prose  life  of  Coemgen, 
c.  10  :  '  dorad  Dia  nemh  do  gach  aon  do  hadlaicfidhe  i  n-uir  Caoimhgin,"  i.  e. 
God  granted  heaven  to  every  one  vvho  should  be  buried  in  Coemgen's  ground. 
Tlie  Rabbis  held  similar  views  as  to  burial  in  the  land  of  Israel,  Edersheim, 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  i.  513;  cf.  Salmon,  Infallibility,  p.  218. 

'  Com.  §  16;  dying  on  the  hide  of  Ciarans  dun  cow,  Ci.  C.  §  15  (=  L.S. 
pp.  123,  127);  cf.  Ita,  §  13;  and  the  curious  passage  quoted  from  the  Oitte, 
above.  p.  xxxiv,  note  2. 

'•  Fel,-  p.  198  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  37. 

'  Invoking  saint  at  death.  Col.  E.  §  36  ;  Fdl.'  pp.  74.  246  ;  reciting  saint's  liymn 
or  part  of  it.  Cain.  §  41  ;  L.  H.=  i.  5,  6,  ii.  98  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  S46  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  432« 
(§  9,  where  also  homage  is  done  to  moral  conditions)  ;  ib.  p.  445''  ( §  76I  :  prayer 
.at  a  certain  cross,  Br.  life  of  Berach,  c.  25  ;  observing  a  sainfs  day,  Col.  E.  §  36  ; 
Ci.  S.  §  35  ;  maUing  certain  oiTerings  :  '  nem  donti  dogena  secht  m-broit  di.' 
i.e.  heaven  to  whoever  shall  make  seven  coverings  for  it  (viz.  for  the  '  bachall' 
of  Colman  Ela.  Iience  called  the  'bachall  cochlach",  or  cowled  crozier),  Rennes 
M.S.  f.  f&^  ;  membership  of  the  saint's  monastery.  Fech.  §  15. 

'  '  Multa  continet  admiranda  portenta.  sed  usitata  apud  gentem  illam  simplicem 
et  sanctam.  ,  .  .  Quod  in  gentiiium  suorum  rebus  gestis  animaduerti  oportere  nos 
docuit  Henricus  Fitzsimon  .  .  .  egregio  reium  usu  preditus,'  A.  S.  Jan.  i.  45 
(Introduction  to  life  of  Mochua).  For  a  secular  analogy  to  some  of  the  things 
just  quoted,  see  Three  Fragments,  p.  38  :  '  ni  mhaidh  Ibr  Laigliniu,  da  n-dearnat 
a  comairle  ann,'  i.  e.  the  Leinster-men  are  never  defeated  if  they  hold  their 
council  at  that  spot. 


xciv  INTRODUCTION 

the  hagiologist  in  search  of  edification  are  often  the  things  which  most 
interest  the  student  of  mythology  and  primitive  modes  of  thought. 

A  further  result  of  this  materializing  tendency  is  that  any  incidents 
or  traits  of  character  which  do  show  spiritual  feeling  and  insight,  tend 
to  be  eliminated  in  later  recensions  of  the  lives.  Such  things  there 
are,  though  they  are  not  common ;  the  saying  of  the  young  Ciaran 
that  the  golden  rule  would  alone  furnish  material  enough  forany  one 
to  teach  and  practise  without  further  reading  ' ;  the  beautiful  account 
of  his  death  ' ;  St.  Ita's  teaching  on  the  need  of  meditation  and  prayer  ', 
and  on  the  works  that  are  pleasing  to  God ' ;  the  striking  parable  on 
the  nature  of  temptation^ ;  St.  Samthann's  answers  as  to  the  attitude 
of  prayer,  and  the  union  of  study  and  devotion  ° ;  Mochoemog's 
protest  against  harsh  judgements  of  the  departed';  the  pathetic 
plaint  of  CoIman's  monks  as  to  the  difficulty  of  realizing  the  'glory 
that  shall  be  revealed',  amid  'the  sufferings  of  the  present  time''. 
Beautiful  too  are  MoIua's  rebuke  of  selfishness,  and  his  gentle  mode 
of  teaching  his  novices,  '  here  a  little,  and  there  a  little '* ;  the  fine 
saying  of  Munnu,  already  quoted,  about  the  difference  between  the 
natural  and  spiritual  man,  between  Munnu  'the  son  of  Tulchan  '  and 
Munnu  'the  child  of  God''";  and  an  equally  fine  answerof  Columba  to 
those  who  urged  him  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  his  austerity :  '  No  one 
who  sleepeth  will  be  crowned,  and  no  one  who  is  confident  can 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven".' 

Several  beautiful  and  genuinely  religious  customs  are  also 
mentioned  :  blessing  a  harbour  on  entering  and  leaving  it  '^,  blessing 
the  road  before  a  journey ",  prayer  before  entering  a  house  ",  and  on 
arriving  at  the  end  of  a  journey '^. 

On  the  style  of  the  lives  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  much.  It  does 
not  difter  greatly  from  that  of  similar  mediaeval  compositions.  There 
are  a  certain  number  of  words  and  expressions  which  are  translations 
or  imitations  of  corresponding  Irish  ones  ;  these  are  explained  in  the 

'  Ci.  C.  §  17  ;  omitted  in  the  S  epitome. 

^  Ci.  C.  §  32  ;  omilted  in  R  ;  cf.  the  similar  story  of  Brendan,  i.  150  note, 
from  S^,  omitted  by  all  the  other  lives. 

'  Ita,  §11;  cf.  Br.  i.  5  86  ;  Cain.  §  16  ;  on  '  grace '  before  meat  cf.  Ci.  C.  §  18  ; 
and  Molua*s  teaching  on  the  need  of  confession,  Lug.  §  30. 

*  Ita,  §  22. 

^  Mochoem.  §  9  ;  see  a  somewhat  similar  parable  in  Joinvilie,  ch.  ix. 

"  Sam.  §§  20,  24.  '  Mochoem.  §  17.  '  Co.  E.  (  16. 

"  C.  S.  ce.  275  6  (§§  36.  38  omitted  by  M). 

'^  Above,  p.  l.xxxvi,  note  i  :  ii.  239  note. 

"  This  comes  from  the  S  R  life  of  Columba,  but  in  S  the  passage  has  been 
lost  ovving  to  mutilation.  It  will  be  found  R'  f.  38",  R-  f.  119"  :  '  nemo  dormiens 
coronabitur,  et  nemo  securus  possidet  regnum  celorum.' 

"  Br.  i.  §§  15,  17,  36.  "  Macd.  §  7. 

'*  Com.  §  15  note. 

"  Ber.  §  6;  Br.  i.  §  30;  Com.  §  33  ;  Mun.  §  10  ;  Adamn.  ii.  42. 


COMPOSITION  OF  THE  LIVES  xcv 

glossary.  One  marked  peculiarity  in  all  the  lives  is  the  tendency  to 
use  the  noniinative  absolute  instead  of  the  ablative  absolute  ' ;  con- 
versely  the  ablative  is  sometimes  used  where  a  nominative  construc- 
tion  would  be  more  natural  '^. 


PART  IV.     CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES 

We  have  seen  that  we  must  not,  as  a  rule,  look  for  spiritual  edifica- 
tion  in  these  hves.  Nor  must  we,  as  a  rule,  look  for  direct  historical 
information  ^  The  Hves  must  be  tested  by  the  annals  (as  has  been 
attempted  in  Part  II),  not  vice  versa.  It  would  probably  be  rash  to 
accept  any  historical  statement  on  the  sole  authority  of  these  lives. 
Indirect  historical  information,  however,  of  very  great  value  is  con- 
tained  in  them  *. 

A.  And  first  as  to  the  social  life  and  customs  of  the  people. 

We  are  struck  at  once  with  the  prevalence  of  pastoral  as  com- 
pared  with  agricultural  pursuits ".  The  nomad  stage  is  not  wholly 
over,  or  at  least  not  wholly  forgotten.  The  migrations  of  Desi 
and  Dartraighe  *  are  recorded ;  the  nomadic  character  of  the 
Ui  Fenna  is  traced  to  the  curse  of  a  saint  whom  their  ancestors  had 
mocked'.    Agriculture  is  by  no  means   unknown,  ploughing'   and 

*  e.  g.  Ab.  §  5  :  '  uocatus  ad  eos,  dixerunt  ei' ;  Br.  i.  §  73  :  '  nauigantes,  .  .  . 
mors  irruit  in  iabrum '  ;  Co.  E.  §  9  :  '  somnus  opprimens  eum.  dormiuit '  T  (vvhere 
M  has  the  ablative) ;  cf.  ib.  §  aa  :  '  clamor  omnium  sanctitatem  . .  .  admirantes .  .  . 
ortusest'(for'admiranlium',or'omnibusadmirantibus') ;  Mochoem.  §3  (bis\  &c. 
This  construction  is  found  in  the  Vulgate :  '  et  e.^csiliens,  osculati  sunt  se  in- 
uicem,'  Tob.  ix.  8. 

-  e.  g.  Br.  i.  §46;  '  exeuntibus  fratribus  inuenerunt';  Com.  §  7:  'crescente 
puero,  ipse  operabatur ' ;  so  Coem.  §  43 ;  Enda,  §  33  ;  Maed.  §  12  ad  finem. 

'  On  lives  of  saints  as  religious  romances  see  Baumer,  Histoire  du  Breviaire, 
>•  398. 

*  Cf  the  passage  frora  Fustel  de  Coulanges  referred  to  above,  p.  xci.  The 
topographical  interest  of  some  of  the  lives  is  very  great.  In  some  cases,  as  at 
Ardmore  i^Declan),  St.  Mullins  (Moling),  Lismore  (Mochuda\  I  have  testcd  this 
element  myself ;  but  much  more  could  be  done  by  natives  with  local  knowledge, 
both  in  this  way,  and  also  in  the  way  of  collecting  the  local  legends,  which  often 
both  by  their  likeness  and  divergence  form  an  interesting  commentary  on  the 
lives. 

^  Of  his  own  time  Giraldus  Cambrensis  says  :  '  gens  a  primo  pastoralis  uitae 
uiuendi  modo  non  recedens,'  Opp.  v.  151. 

^  Declan,  §  1  ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  36-7  (Molaisse) ;  the  migration  was  sometimes 
due  to  over-population,  Br.  Grellan,  c.  4. 

'  Car.  §  32. 

*  Aed,  §  4;  Ail.  §5  32  note,  34;  Car.  §  25,  cf.  ib.  §  20:  '  sarculis  arare'; 
Ci.  C.  §5  9,  10  ;  Maed.  §§  30,  31  ;  Fel.-  p.  72.  The  story  in  Ci.  C.  §  lo  implies 
that  it  was  unusual  to  use  horses  Ibr  ploughing.  Their  use  in  war  appears  from 
Mochoem.  §  30.  The  eating  of  horseflesh  is  mentioned,  Enda,  5  30  ;  Adamn. 
i.  21  ;  Irish  Moling,  §  53  ;  but  in  the  first  two  cases  it  is  regarded  as  a  sign  of 


xcvi  INTRODUCTION 

sowing '  and  reaping ' ;  and  all  these  operations  have  their  appropriate 
miracles.  But  they  are  not  so  numerous  as  those  which  have  to  do  with 
the  care  of  cattle,  sheep^,  pigs',  goats,  and  kine".  The  country  was 
largely  unenclosed",  and  the  youthful  saint,  hke  many  an  Irish  child 
since  then,  gained  his  first  experience  of  life  in  herding  the  domestic 
animals  of  the  family',  and  seeing  that  they  did  not  stray  or  trespass' 
on  a  neighbour"s  land  or  crops,  and  that  the  calves  were  not  allowed 
to  filch  their  mothers'  milk '.     We  hear  of  a  murrain    stopped  by 

iitter  degeneracy,  wliile  in  thc  third  the  saint  changes  the  horsenesh  into 
mutton,  so  that  it  was  no  doubt  regarded,  as  iii  Norway,  as  a  relic  of 
heatlienism  :  '  t>at  er  hit  mesta  Kristnispell  .  .  .  at  eta  hross,'  that  is  the 
greatest  violation  of  Christianity  to  eat  horseflesh,  FornsOgur,  i.  126.  Hakon 
the  Good  was  put  to  sore  straits  in  trying  to  avoid  compliance  vvith  tliis  national 
custom,  see  his  Saga,  c.  18,  Dog's  flesh  is  served  up  as  a  delibcrate  insult,  Dec. 
§  25:  Br.  Adamn.  c.  9,  Anecdota,  ii.  16.  In  both  cases  the  fraud  is  detected  by 
the  saint. 

'  Maed.  §§  40,  45;  C.  S.  c.  228  (§  7)  ;  gathered  crops,  Bo.  §  22. 

=  Aed,  §6;  Cain.  §  16  ;  Car.  §  48  ;  Coem.  §  8  ;  Fin.  C.  §  18  ;  Maed.  §  36  ; 
Mochoem.  §  23  ;  C.  S.  c.  226  (§  4)  ;  Adamn.  i.  37.  Corn  after  being  reaped 
Iiad  often  to  be  artificially  dried,  owing  to  the  dampness  of  the  climate,  Ci.  C. 
§  12  :  C.  S.  cc.  378-9  (§  35,  not  in  M)  ;   Reeves,  Ad.  p.  88  note. 

'  Br.  i.  §  23  ;  Ci.  S.  §  II  ;  Coem.  5§  3,  10  ;  Maed.  §  5  ;  Lug.  §  3  ;  'V.  Tr. 
p.  12. 

'  Ab.  §  37  ;  Aed,  §§  2  note,  20  (where  pigs  apparently  '  pay  the  rent ') ; 
Bo.  §  12  ;  Car.  §§  7-9  ;  Ci.  S.  §  10.  The  herding  of  sheep  was  considered 
more  reputable  than  that  of  swine,  and  thereforc  the  swine  of  the  youthful 
Molua  are  made  to  appe:ir  as  sheep,  Lug.  §  5.  Sometimes  this  change  is  made 
by  the  scribes  of  these  lives,  see  Lug.  §  15  note.  For  the  same  reason  goats 
are  turned  into  kine,  C.  S.  c.  227  (§  5I. 

=  Ab.  §  7  ;  Aed,  §  22,  cf.  ib.  §  9 ;  Ber.  §  8  ;  Bo.  §§  20,  22  ;  Ci.  C.  §  15  ; 
Fech.  §  7.  For  the  making  and  washing  of  butter  cl^.  C.  S.  c.  283  (§  59,  not 
in  M) ;  Lib.  Land.  p.  129  (136).  Butler  was  used  for  lamps  instead  of  oil, 
Capg.  i.  446. 

*  Cf.  the  explanatory  note  iiisertcd  by  the  scribe  of  LU.  128  ( =  Ir.  T.  i.  136)  : 
'  ni  bid  clad,  na  hairbe,  na  caissle,  im  thir  i  n-h  Ere  isind  amsir  anall,  co  tanic 
remis  mac  n-Aeda  Slani,  acht  maigi  reidi,'  i.  e.  there  was  neither  mound  nor 
hedgc  nor  stone  walis  round  land  in  Ireland  then.  until  the  tinie  of  the  sons  of 
Acd  Slane  (seventh  century),  but  unbroken  plains.  In  Tr.  Th.  p.  534"  (§  61)  is 
a  curious  instance  of  the  unpopularity  caused  by  the  stopping  up  of  paths 
involved  in  enclosing  ;  *  omnes  .  .  .  uno  ore  malcdicentcs  te,  eo  quod  agricola 
tuos  agros  sepibus  municns,  commutauit  omnes  uias  planas  .  .  .  in  aspcras.' 

'  Cain.  §  2  note  ;  Car.  §§  7-9  ;  Ci.  C.  §§  4,  5,  8  ;  Coem.  §  3  ;  Fcch.  §  7  ; 
Fint.  §  3  ;  Mochoem.  §  27  ;  Lug.  §  2. 

*  Ail.  §  34  note  ;  such  animals  were  impounded  until  the  damage  was  made 
good,  Bo.  5  22  ;  Lug.  §  2.  Children  wcre  also  set  to  guard  growing  grass  from 
straying  animals,  Fech.  §  6.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  frequcnt  torm  ofoppression 
by  powerful  persons  to  send  their  cattle  and  horses  to  grazc  in  the  lands  of  their 
weaker  neighbours,  Fech.  §  6 :  Mochoem.  §  19  ;  LS.  pp.  63.  69  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  228  ; 
C.  B.  S.  p.  258  :  an  intcresting  secular  parallel,  R.  C.  .w.  481.  In  other  cascs 
the  keeping  of  the  chiefs  liorses  was  a  legal  obligation,  Cron.  §  24  ;  cf.  Acc. 
.Sen.  p.  130.  It  seems  to  havc  becn  the  custom  for  herdsmen  to  go  round  with 
thcir  flocks  and  make  a  tour  of  summer  grazing  ;  this  was  called  •  cuairt  buaill- 
tcchuis ',  T.  C.  D.  1346,  H.  iv.  4.  p.  149  (Cocmgrn).  It  is  obvious  that  the 
temptation  to  trespass  would  bc  strong  ;  cf.  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  238. 

'  Miraclcs  to  prevent  this  are  frequcnt,  Bo.   §  ai  ;  Lug.  §  4 ;  C.  S.  c.  281 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  xcvii 

St.  Munnu ' ;  cattle-reiving,  the  capital  oflence  of  a  pastoral  society, 
was  frequent",  and  mutilation  of  cattle  was  not  unknown'. 

The  keeping  of  bees  is  mentioned*. 

Besides  the  ordinary  domestic  animals,  the  nionks  of  lona  had 
a  preserve  of  seals  °. 

The  kilns  for  artificially  drj-ing  corn  have  been  already  alluded  to. 
There  were  mills  for  grinding  it,  at  which  customers  had  to  take  their 
turn'. 

The  artisan  was  in  high  repute,  and  occupied  a  good  social  position. 
He  might  in  addition  be  a  warrior.  Bairre's  father  was  '  faber 
ferrarius  '  to  the  chief  of  the  district',  Ciaran  the  younger  was  known 
from  his  father's  trade  as  'son  of  the  wright";  Mochoemog's  father 
was  a  craftsman  in  vvood  and  stone';  the  saints  themselves  were 


(§  48.  not  in  M^  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  142  (where  '  ni  dendais  a  loig ',  '  his  calves  did  not 
suck,'  is  wrongly  translated).  The  usual  way  is  for  the  saint  to  draw  a  line 
with  his  bachall  between  the  calves  and  their  mothers  which  cannot  be  crossed, 
Ci.  C.  §  15  ;  Fin.  C.  5  2  note  ;  C.  S.  cc.  229  (§  lol,  305  (5  3,  not  in  M)  ;  L.  S. 
pp.  59,  144;  Rennes  MS.  f.  81".  (In  the  Highlands  the  Glaistig  performs 
this  useful  office,  Campbell,  Superstitions.  pp.  i6o,  162,  167.)  The  '  bachall ' 
keeps  cattle  safe  generally,  Ail.  §  8  ;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  12  ;  N,  and  K. 
p.  149- 

»  Mun.  §  8. 

-  Ab.  §  37  ;  Bo.  §  12;  Coem.  5  10  ;  Ger.  5  11  ;  '  abactores,  quibus  semper 
Hispano  more  tellus  Hybernica  abundat,'  C.  S.  cc.  655,  665-7.     ^ee  Addenda. 

*  L.  S.  p.  87  :  '  gerrtur  a  n-indile,  7  buailter  a  n-aighedairedha,'  i.  e.  their 
cattle  are  mutilated  ^lit.  cut  ;  wrongly  translated  '  diminishcd  ')  and  their  herds- 
men  beaten.  In  C.  B.  S.  p.  42  is  a  curious  instance  of  the  ears  and  lips  of 
horses  being  mutilated  by  way  of  insult  and  revenge  ;  this  seems  borrowed 
direct  from  the  secular  literature,  Mabinogion,  ed.  Rhys  and  Evans,  pp.  28  ff. ; 
ed.  Guest,  iii.  84  ff.,  106  ff.  The  manes  of  horses  are  plucked  off  as  an  iosult, 
Oitte,  p.  36. 

*  Bo.  §§  30,  31,  where  the  saint  is  said  to  have  understood  the  bees'  language. 
Bees,  according  to  the  tradition,  were  introduced  into  Ireland  from  Wales  by 
St.  Modomnoc,  Fel,-  pp.  74-5,  112,  465  :  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  i^^''  (5  17) ;  C.  B.  S. 
p.  134  ;  Gir.  Cambr.  Opp.  v.  29.  56;  Magh  Rath,  pp.  34-5.  St.  Gobnat  is 
regarded  as  the  special  patroness  of  bees,  Elder  Faiths,  i.  228.  In  Eriu,  ii.  82, 
is  a  pretty  story  from  Liber  Flauus  Fergusiorum,  how  bees  wrought  a  shrine  of 
wax  for  the  Host  which  a  careless  priest  had  dropped.  The  folk-lore  of  bees 
is  very  voluminous ;  cf.  Grimm,  ii.  695-7;  '■'•  '235;  iv.  1496;  Aur.  Leg. 
p.  28. 

'  Adamn.  i.  41. 

'  '  interuallum,'  Lug.  §  11  (the  mill  stops  because  the  saint  is  not  granted 
a  turn)  ;  ib.  §  21.  There  are  water-mills,  Fech.  5  14  ;  C.  S.  c.  232  §  15  ;  hand- 
mills  or  querns,  L.S.  p.  122  ;  and  mills  the  nature  of  which  is  not  indicated, 
Ci.  C.  §§  II,  15.  19  note  ;  Maed.  §  23  ;  Lug.  §  ai  ;  L.  S.  p.  60.  All  these  mills 
grind  of  ihemselves  to  save  the  saint  trouble.  But  there  are  mills  which  will 
not  grind  stolen  wheat.  N.  and  K.  pp.  368-9  ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  635"  (§  7)  ;  Ir. 
Nenn.  p.  216  (^  Gir.  Camb.  v.  133).  This  last  mill  refuses  also  to  grind  on 
a  Sunday. 

'  Ba.  §  2. 

'  Mac  in  t-iaeir  (M^^Intyre),  Ci.  C.  §  i  ;  cf.  Ita,  §  18. 

'  Mochoem.  §  i ;  Ita,  §  18. 

rLt.'M.M£R  g 


xcviii  INTRODUCTION 

often  skilful  artisans'.  Brendan  had  goldsmiths  working  for  hlm '. 
Yct  for  all  this  there  remained  something  uncanny  about  the  smith  or 
wright.  He  ranked,  as  we  shall  see,  with  druids  and  others  whose 
knowledge  was  regarded  as  more  than  human.  A  celebrated 
character  in  Irish  mythology  was  Gobban  Saer,  or  Gobban  the 
Wright,  who  has  passed  on  somc  of  his  characteristics  to  saints  of 
the  same  name'. 

A  special  kind  of  artisan  was  the  rath-buiider,  or  maker  of  fortifica- 
tions.  \Ve  hear  of  one  who  aftcr  building  a  triple  rath'  received  as 
his  fee  as  much  as  the  rath  would  hold  of  cattle '.  We  find  a  rath 
built  round  a  monastery  or  cemetery^;  while  the  statements  that 
a  chief  surrendered  his  rath  entirely  to  the  saint '  are  borne  out  by 
instances  in  which  we  find  ruins  obviously  ecclesiastical  surrounded 


*  Comgall.  §  i6  ;  Daig  mac  Cairill,  who  was  scribe  as  well  as  artisan,  C.  S. 
cc.  892-4,  897,  900  (§5  3,  5,  6,  13,  27)  ;  cf.  Fel.'  p.  186;  Tassach,  ib.  p.  1 14  ; 
Conlaed,  ib.  p.  128  ;  Gildas,  C.  B.  S.  pp.  59,  175.  A  late  legend  of  Ciaran  of 
Clonmacnois  in  this  character,  Oss.  Soc.  v.  84.  In  Moling  §  13  the  makingof  a 
'  liorologium  ',  perhaps  a  dial,  is  mentioned.  A  large  stone  was  needcd  for  it, 
possibly  as  a  pedestal.     See  Addenda. 

^  Cain.  §  43,  Some  monasteries  appear  to  have  had  hereditary  artisans  or 
'  cerds  '  attached  to  them  ;  see  Christian  Inscriptions,  ii.  159  ;  and  we  seem  to 
have  a  glimpse  of  an  hereditan,'  caste  or  tribe  of  goldsmiths  in  the  Cerdraighe 
of  Munster,  ^^.320*^52  ff.,  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  73",  Laud6io  f.  loi'',  Misc.  Celt.  Soc. 
p.  10.  M.  and  C.  iii.  207.  Bri  Gobann,  '  Hill  of  the  Smiths,'  got  its  name  frora 
an  hereditary  caste  of  smiths,  L.  S.  p.  88.      Hcreditary  serfs,  Ab.  §  47. 

^  See  below,  pp.  clxiii  f 

*  Aed.  §  9  note.  Giraldus  speaks  of  *  fossata  .  .  .  plerumque  triplicia  '.  Opp. 
V.  182  ;  he  atlributes  them  to  tlie  Northnien,  A  famous  instnnce  is  Navan 
Fort  near  Armagh.  Forgall  Manach's  'diin'  had  three  '  lisu  '  or  ramparts, 
R.  C.  xi.  452.  He  was  a  famous  mythical  character.  A  yet  more  famous  one, 
the  Dagda,  was  a  noted  rath-builder,  ib.  xii.  64  ;  cf.  M.  and  C.  lii.  14  ff.  Herc 
again  something  uncanny  attached  to  their  skill.  On  the  Gaulish  druids  as  rath- 
builders  see  an  interesting  chapter  in  Bertrand,  Religion  dcs  Gaulois,  pp.  245  ff. 
He  suggests  that  the  original  purposeof  the  rath  raay  have  been,  in  some  cases, 
religious,  ib,  p.  90.  For  the  skill  of  the  druids  in  otlier  branches  of  craftsman- 
ship  cf.  ib.  pp.  298,  365,  369,  379.  A  raagic  rath  is  mentioned  Laud  610 
f.  95''"  :  '  Raith  Ailella  .  .  .  atcither  di  chein,  7  ni  fagabair  i  n-ocus,'  i.  e.  the 
Rath  of  Ailill  which  is  seen  afar,  and  never  found  anear.  So  that  here,  as  in 
other  cases  ^below,  pp.  clxv  ff.),  the  Christian  saint  may  havc  inherited  some  of 
the  characteristics  of  his  druidical  predeccssor. 

'  We  hear  complaints  as  to  the  excessive  fees  charged  by  artisans,  Ab.  §  42  ; 
cf.  Decl.  §  30. 

*  Ger.  §  10;  Tig.  §  g ;  C.  S.  c.  198  (§  i6> :  '  fundauit  ecclesiam,  atquc  in 
circuitu  eius  fossauit '  ;  C.  B.  S,  pp.  17,  34  :  '  uastus  aceruus  de  terra,'  cf.  p.  57 
(at  p.  44  it  is  '  castellum  ',  Ir.  caisel.  or  stone  fort).  ib.  p.  88  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  79** : 
'claidit  na  manaigh  mur  mor  tirachell  na  cillc,'  i.  e.  the  monks  dig  a  great 
rampart  round  the  cell.  In  Aed  §  18  the  monks  dig  the  fosse  round  the 
monastery,  but  in  the  R  text  this  is  done  by  '  fossatores ',  professional  rath- 
makers  ;  cf  Enda,  §  5  ;  and  Adilenda. 

'  Aed,  §  34  ;  Car.  5§  17,  39  ;  Muchoeni.  §  13  ;  Lug.  §  28  ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  38  ; 
cf.  R.  C.  v.  443. 


CONTENTS  OF  TIIE  LIVES  xcix 

by  fortifications  apparcntly  secular  in  character'.  \Ve  hear  of 
structurcs  madc  of  wattle  -  and  of  wood '.  St.  Cianan's  church  at 
Duleek  got  its  name  from  the  tradition  that  it  was  the  first  stonc 
church  built  in  Ireland  '. 

Another  important  artisan  was  the  shipwright.  The  parallel  sagas 
of  Brcndan  in  the  ecclesiastical,  and  Maelduin  in  the  secular,  literature, 
whatever  may  be  the  relationship  between  them,  both  show  how  the 
niagic  of  the  sea  appealed  to  the  magic  of  the  Celtic  nature  ;  and  the 
union  of  the  two  gave  birth  to  a  new  class  of  literary  production  called 
Imrama  or  voyages.  In  the  Brendan  story  we  find  described  both 
the  construction  of  a  skin-covered  coracle  and  also  of  a  timber-built 
vessel ',    This  is  further  illustrated  by  the  constant  intercourse,  both 


'  F-lder  Faiths,  i.  277.  It  is  not,  however,  always  easy  to  distinguish  between 
the  two  ;  Book  of  Mulling',  p.  181.  We  find  a  chief  building  a  church  in  his 
own  rath,  Mochoem.  §  12. 

'^  Ci.  S.  §  5  ;  Coem.  §  19  ;  Mart.  Don.  p.  176  ;  L.  S.  p.  47  ;  Capg.  ii.  8x  ;  C.  S. 
c.  596  v§  37,  this  is  in  the  twelfth  century,  but  was  probably  only  a  temporary 
structureX  The  Welsh  word  for  to  build.  '  adeiladu,'  lit.  to  weave,  implies  this 
mode  of  construction.  It  is  used  nearly  m  its  original  sense  in  the  Preface  to 
the  Dimeiian  Code  :  *  Y  Ty  Gvvynn  .  .  .  aberis  ef  y  adeilat  o  wyeil  gwj"nnion,' 
i.  e.  the  White  House  .  .  .  he  caused  it  to  be  constructed  (woven^  of  white  rods, 
Haddan  and  Stubbs,  i.  212.  The  name  Cell  Cleithe  (Kilcliel),  i.  e.  Church  of 
the  hurdle,  implies  a  structure  of  this  kind,  Reeves,  Eccl.  Antiquities,  p.  217. 
We  learn  of  l'atrick  :  '  fecit  ibi  aecclessiam  terrenam  de  humo  quadratam,  quia 
non  prope  erat  silua,'  V.  Tr.  p.  327,  which  implies  that  the  usual  material  was 
wood.  It  is  interesting  to  find  that  the  writer  of  a  later  life,  influenced  by  the 
custom  of  his  own  day,  alters  this  into:  'quia  in  propinquo  non  erat  lapis,' 
Tr.  Th.  p.  25^  ($  541.  Joceline  combines  both,  and  speaks  of  the  site  as 
'  lienorum  et  l.T)icIum  expertem  '. 

5  Sam.  §§6,  15;  Mol.  §§  10,  II  ;  C.  S.  c.  186  (5  33^,  c.  571  (§  13  :  'oratorium 
.  ,  .  de  lignis  .  .  .  leuigatis  .  .  .  opits  Scoticum,^  this  is  in  the  twelfth  century  ; 
cf.  ib.  c.  622  :  '  in  terra  illa  necdum  eiusmodi  [sc.  lapideal  edificia  inuenirentur  '\ 
c.  671  (§  28I;  Lib.  Land.  p.  265  2771.  Warren,  Celtic  Liturgy,  pp.  85  ff.  ; 
Petrie,  Round  Towers,  pp.  126  ff.,  141  ff.,348fl.;  Bede,  ii.  101-2,  where  addi- 
tional  references  will  be  Ibund. 

'  Mochua  §  8;  Daimliac  :,Duleek)  means  '  house  of  stone'.  Ruadan  seems 
to  have  had  a  souterrain  in  connexion  with  one  of  his  cells,  §  15  ;  cf  C.  B.  S. 
p.  380. 

'  Br.  i.  §  15.  ii.  5§  5,  22  ;coracle) ;  Br.  i.  §  71  (vessel) ;  Brendan  and  his 
companions  seem  to  have  built  the  former  themselves,  the  latter  was  built  by 
'  fabri  et  artifices  '.  A  timber-built  vessel  is  given  as  a  present  to  a  chief,  Fin. 
C.  §  10.  In  the  secular  romances  we  have  ships  of  bronze,  and  silver,  Ir.  T. 
i.  210  ;  R.  C.  vi.  183.  xii.  60.  xv.  294  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  106  ;  Eriu,  i.  114.  One 
such  we  have  in  our  lives,  Ail.  §  46  ;  but  it  hailed  apparently  from  the  Land  of 
Promise.  These  craft  have  their  own  miracles  or  magic.  Like  the  ships  of  the 
Phaeacians  ^Odyss.  viii.  558  ff.  they  travel  of  themselves,  Ail.  §  4  ;  Br.  i.  §  62  ; 
Decl.  §  II  ^cf.  Capg.  ii.  22  ;  Aur.  Leg.  p.  2681  ;  for  a  ■  long  draoidhechta ',  or 
magic  boat,  cf.  Enu,  iv.  63.  So  too  ships  remain  miraculously  moiionless, 
Ab.  §§  12,  19.  Ou  exposure,  voluntary  or  involuntary,  in  a  drifting  coracle  see 
my  edition  of  ihe  Saxon  Chron.  ii.  103-5.  The  reterences  there  might  be  largely 
added  to,  e.g.  Cain  Adamn.  pp  30, 43;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  147"  (§  12);  Hy  Fiachrach, 
p.38. 

g   2 


c  INTRODUCTION 

ecclesiastical'  and  secular^  with  Britain  both  north  and  south ;  and 
Britain  was  for  passengers  the  usual  way  to  the  Continent'.     Fishing 

*  On  this  see  below,  pp.  cxxiv  fi". 

'  Commercial,  C.  S.  igt  (§  4^).  Gold  is  imported  from  Britain,  C.  S.  c.  388 
(5  53'  cited  Cain.  5  43  note  ;  unless  Sir  John  Rhys  would  say  that  Britain  here 
means  Hades,  as  in  some  culture  mj-ths,  Hibbert  Lcct.  pp.  90-1).  We  have 
mention  of  a  '  marggad  gall  7  deorad  ic  creicc  oir  7  argait  *,  i.  e.  a  market  or  fair 
of  foreigners  and  strangers  selling  gold  and  silver,  LL.  215"  19.  but  it  is  not  said 
whence  they  came.  We  hear  of  '  pure  white  silver  of  Spain  ',  ib.  256''  49. 
Wine  was  imported  from  Gaul,  Ci.  C.  §  31  ad  fin.  ;  cf.  R.  C.  xi.  442;  Misc. 
Celt.  Soc.  p.  12  ;  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  72**.  (On  the  direct  trade  tjetween  Ireland 
and  Gaul  see  papers  by  Zimmer  in  Sitzungsb.  d.  preuss.  Akad.  1909. "i  Miitual 
piracy  and  invasion  between  Britain  and  Ireland  occur  both  in  the  ecclesiastical 
and  secular  literatures,  and  hence  captives  and  slaves  and  political  refugees  be- 
longing  to  one  island  are  found  in  the  other,  Ail.  §  i  and  note  ;  see  above,  p.  x.kx, 
note  5  ;  Tig.  §  3  ;  C.  S.  c.  915  (§  i)  ;  L.  S.  p.  88  ;  Rua.  5  15  ;  Lib.  Land.  p.  3  (i) : 
'  captus  .  .  .  a  piratarum  classe  .  .  .  solilo  iitoic  ductus  in  captiuitatem  in  Hiber- 
niam  ';  C.  B.  S.  pp.  97,  loi  ;  Three  Fragm.  p.  104  ;  R.  C.  xxii.  30,  40-1.  291, 
310,  324  (these  references  are  from  the  famous  tale  Bruiden  da  Derga,  the  whole 
plot  of  which  turns  on  the  mutual  piracy  between  the  two  islands") ;  xxiv.  igo. 
Pirates  in  Ulster  are  mentioned  C.  S.  c.  227  (§  6),  c.  919  (§  10),  but  their  origin 
is  not  stated  ;  pirates  from  Gaul,  ib,  c.  358  (§  49^  c.  915  (§  2V  An  Irish  wright 
is  driven  by  want  to  settle  in  Wales,  C.  B.  S.  p.  47.  A  diflicult  case  is  referred 
for  decision  to  Aedan  mac  Gabrain,  king  of  British  Dal  Riada,  Ber.  §  14.  But 
we  do  not  find  such  assertions  of  the  exercise  of  political  sovereignty  by  the 
Irish  in  Britain  as  we  have  in  the  secular  tales,  LL.  300"  ( =  R.  C.  xiii.  56)  ; 
LU.  126"  16  ff.,  LL.  171''  46  ff".  ;  R.  C.  x.>civ.  176  ;  Ir.  T.  11.  i.  178  ;  cf.  Cormac, 
GIoss.  p.  29  (Trans.  p.  iii)  ;  R.  C.  v.  200.  British  kings  are  said  to  have  been 
buried  at  Glendalough,  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  11.  Even  after  the  Dalriadic  colony  in 
Britain  had  thrown  ofi"  all  political  dependence  on  Ireland,  it  still  formed  part 
of  it  so  far  as  language,  traditions,  and  culture  were  concerned.  From  the 
dedications  to  Irish  saints  in  Scotland  we  have  seen  that  the  sea  was  no  barrier 
to  them  and  to  their  fame.  Here  again  they  may  have  been  preceded  by  the 
druids  ;  '  dia  n-dechaid  .  .  .  Riiadan  for  cuairt  clcircechta  .  .  .  tainic  araile  drai 
d'  feraib  Alban  for  cuairt  bid  go  feraibh  Erenn,'  i.  e.  while  Ruadan  was  on  a 
clerical  tour  there  came  a  druid  of  the  men  of  Alba  on  a  g^iestiiig  tour  to  thc 
men  of  Erin,  Br.  2324  f.  160  v** ;  C.  S.  c.  903  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  124  ;  Ir.  T.  11.  i.  240  ; 
Kcating,  iii.  58.  Poetry  ifilidecht,  ecse\  so  closely  connected  with  druidism, 
was  also  learnt  in  Scotland,  LL.  55''  12  ;  R.  C.  xxvi.  8.  Patrick  prophesies 
that  '  Erin  atid  Alba  '  will  be  full  of  Ciaran*s  praise,  Fel.-  p.  204  ;  the  clergy  are 
the  '  cliara  Krend  7  Alban  ',  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  518  ;  just  as  the  fians  of  the  Find  cycle 
arethe  'Fianna  Erend  7  Alban',  R.  C.  xxii.  315  :  Acc.  Sen.  11.  489,  1661,  cf  5526, 
6575.  So  '  sancti  Hibernie  seu  (  -  et)  Sencie  ',  C.  S.  cc.  644  fi'.,  where  '  Scocia  ' 
is  used  in  the  modern  sense.  A  powerful  monarch  cxacts  '  the  hostagcs  of  Erin 
and  Alba",  Magh  Rath,  p.  4.  In  the  older  cycle  also  it  is  said  :  '  ni  fuil  i  n-Erind 
no  i  n-AIbain  6clach  macsamla  Conchobair ',  i.  e.  there  is  not  in  Erin  or  Alba  a 
warrior  who  is  Conchobar's  peer,  T.  B.  C.  p.  109.  In  1169  Rory  0"Connor, 
king  of  Ireland,  endowed  the  leclorship  of  Anuagh  with  ten  cows  annually  for 
the  instruction  of  the  studcnts  of  Erin  and  Alba,  Ann.  Ult.  sub  anno.  Alba  was, 
howcver,  considercd  inferior  in  '  scelaidecht ',  or  story-telling,  Oss.  Soc.  v.  106. 
As  I  have  shovvn  elsewherc,  Bede,  ii.  135,  it  was  the  Scandinavian  invasions 
which  first  brokc  up  this  unity  of  Erin  antl  Alba  by  driving  a  wcdge  in  betwcen 
them.  The  spiritual  and  literary  union  was  finally  broken  by  the  Reformation, 
R.  C.  ix.  144. 

'  Ab.  §  12  ad  fin.  ;  Decl.  §  11  ;  Enda,  §§  8,  22  ;  cf.  Aur.  Leg.  pp  879,  894. 
So  in  the  secular  Irish  tales  '  documlat  tar  muir,  tar  Saxoin  tuascirt  tar  muir 
n-Icht,'  i.  e.  they  sct  out  across  the  (Irish)  sea,  across  tlie  north  of  England, 


CONTENTS  OF  TIIE  LIVES  ci 

both  in  salt-watcr  and  frcsh  is  often  mentioncd  ;  and  the  way  in 
which  saints  are  said  to  have  brought  fisli  to  or  banished  them  from 
certain  localities'  seems  to  indicate  that  the  migratory  fish  were  as 
capricious  in  their  visits  then  as  they  are  now.  Fishing  rights,  then 
as  now,  caused  disputes'''. 

Brewing  is  not  unfrequently  referred  to'.  Besides  the  stoclc 
miracles  of  multiplying  Hquor  or  turning  water  into  some  more 
generous  fluid  *,  and  making  fountains  run  with  wine,  beer,  or  milk", 
the  saint's  wonder-working  power  is  called  in  to  assist  the  ordinary 
processes  of  brewing".  The  Irish  saints  were  certainly  no  bigoted 
teetotallers.  Inebriation  in  the  literal  sense  results  from  their 
miracles'.  It  is  an  aftcrthought  when  one  writer  explains  this  of 
spiritual  exaltation  *,  or  when  another  Hmits  to  sacramental  purposes 
the  wine  whicli  a  fountain  brings  forth." 

Dyeing  appears  to  be  an  exclusively  female  mystery  "" ;  a  currier  is 
mentioned  who  is  apparently  attached  to  the  monastery  ". 

Some  occupations  are  hereditary.  We  have  had  a  glimpse  of  a 
clan  or  caste  of  metal-vvorkers.    Hereditary  physicians  lasted  long  in 

across  the  British  Channel,  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  45  (=LL.  252""'';  cf.  Dom  Louis 
Gougaud,  Un  point  obscur  de  rilineraire  de  St.  Colomban  1^1907). 

'  Ail.  5  36;  i3r.  i.  §  78  (cf.  Moran,  p.  11)  ;  Comg.  §  13  note  ;  Enda,  §  29  ; 
V.  Tr.  pp.  34,  36,  70,  142,  146,  148,  210;  N.  and  K.  p.  250.  The  heathen  'file' 
or  poet  did  the  like  :  'asbert  in  fili  .  .  .  dochechnad  for  a  n-usciu,  connagebtha 
iasc  i  n-a  n-inberaib,'  i.e.  the  poet  said  that  he  would  sing  incantations  on  their 
waters,  so  that  no  fish  should  be  caught  in  their  estuaries,  Bran.  i.  46  (  =  M .  and  C. 
iii.  175) ;  cf.  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  13  ;  Martins  Western  Isles,  p.  143  ;  Outer  Isles, 
p.  241. 

'  Comg.  §  13  note. 

'  Cron.  §  23  ;  Lug.  §  42 ;  cf.  Martin,  Western  Isles,  p.  192. 

*  These  of  course  may  have  been  influenced  by  Biblical  miracles,  such  as  the 
Widow's  Cruse  of  Oil,  and  the  Marriage  at  Cana  ;  Ultan's  Brigit,  cc.  23,  26,  104 
(Tr.  Th.  pp.  529,  540"").  A  magic  vat  which  turns  water  to  wine,  Acc.  Sen. 
P-  13- 

f^  Car.  §  67  ;  C.  S.  e.  280  (§  46,  not  in  M),  c.  283  (§  56,  not  in  M) ;  C.  B.  S. 
pp.  28,  208  ;  cf.  Grimm,  ii.  585-6,  iv.  1455  ;  Saintyves,  p.  396  ;  Hardy,  Holy 
Wells.  pp.  7-10. 

'  Aed,  §  30  note  ;  Col.  E.  §  13  note  ;  Lug.  §  42. 

'  Cron.  §  23  ;  Lug.  §§  6,  10.  *  Ail.  §  38  and  note. 

^  C.  B.  S.  p.  130  :  '  ad  efficiendum  dorainici  corporis  et  sanguinis  sacra- 
mentum  ' ;  this  limitation  is  not  in  the  Welsh  life,  ib.  p.  108.  Gir.  Camb.  tells 
ol  a  similar  fountain  near  Cork  ;  '  quotidie  .  .  .  tantum  uini  reperitur,  quantum 
ad  missarum  solemnia  iuxta  numerum  sacerdotum  .  .  .  sufficere  possit,'  Opp. 
V.  119.  The  odour  of  such  miraculous  vvine  remains  for  years,  Ci.  C.  §  31.  In 
the  Maelduin  story  ihere  is  a  fountain  vvhich  produces  only  water  or  vvhey  on 
fastdays  ;  milk  on  Sundaj's  and  festivals  of  martyrs  ;  wine  and  beer  on  the 
greater  ecclesiastical  festivals  ;  an  obvious  christianization,  R.  C.  x.  50. 

'"  L.  S.  p.  121  ;  Bo.  §  27,  where  the  Irish  word  for  woad,  '  glassen '  or 
'  glaisin  ',  is  given.  For  the  exclusion  of  men  frora  the  house  vvhile  certain 
specially  female  occupations  are  being  carried  on,  see  Grinim,  iv.  1778. 

"  Coem.  §§  23,  43;  cf.  0'Hanlon,  vi.  52,  for  the  tanneries  of  Glendalough. 
Tanning  is  mentioned  L.  S.  p.  28. 


cii  INTRODUCTION 

Ireland.  One  faniily  of  thcm  owcd  its  origin  to  the  blessing  of  St. 
Declan  ^  Of  the  influence  of  the  Celtic  clan  system  on  the  Church 
something  will  be  said  later ;  we  seem  to  trace  it  even  in  the 
organization  of  robber  bands  -. 

The  poets  were  an  important  and  powcrful  class  ^.  The  power 
which  they  exercised  was  due  mainly  to  tlie  dread  of  their  satire, 
which  was  believed  to  raise  actual  blotches  or  blisters  on  the  face  of 
the  person  satirized*.  But  apart  from  this,  the  dread  of  their  libels, 
especially  of  any  charge  of  illiberality  or  want  of  hospitality,  enabled 
them  to  enforce  successfully  the  most  outrageous  demands.  The 
secular  literature  is  full  of  stories  of  the  tyrannj'  which  they  exercised 
in  this  way  ^  One  long  story  is  based  almost  whollj'  on  this  theme''. 
More  than  once  they  were  threatened  vvith  total  expulsion  from 
Ireland  because  of  the  intolerable  burden  which  they  inflicted  on  the 
community.  More  than  once  the  saints  interposed  to  save  them  by 
imposing  limits  on  these  abuses'.  So  regularly  was  this  power  of 
the  poets  recognized  that  it  is  incorporated  among  the  formal 
sanctions  of  a  treaty'.    We  have  the  same  sort  of  thing  in  the  lives 

*  Dec.  §  30  ;  F.  M.  i.  494-5  note  ;  lar  Connaught,  pp.  70-1  ;  cf.  Odyssey, 
iv.  231  ;  Mytli,  Ritual,  &c.,  ii.  224  [203I  ;  Grimra,  iv.  1652.  On  Ihe  connexion 
of  the  physician  and  druid  v.  infr.  p.  clxiii. 

*  Ger.  §  II  ;  C.  S.  c.  919;  cf.  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  p.  164.  The  technical 
Irish  name  for  these  marauders  is  '  dibergaig; ',  and  their  profession  is  '  diberg ' ; 
these  words  occur  in  the  S  te.xt,  see  Ail.  §  31  note,  Cain.  §  38  note.  Thc  other 
te.xts  paraphrase  ;  cf.  L.  S.  p.  89  ;  Rua.  §  10.  They  seem  to  have  worn  sonie 
mark  of  their  nefarious  trade  on  their  heads  :  '  sumpsitque  cum  sociis  suis 
signa  diabohca  super  capita  .i.  diberch,'  Tr.  Th.  p.  27"  (§  731  ;  '  signa  sumens 
nequissima  crudelitatis  .i.  diberca,'  V.  Tr.  p.  286  ;  '  sub  stigmatibus  malignis  .  .  . 
signa  diaboH,'  Tr.  Th.  p,  534''  (§  67^  ;  '  habentes  stigmata  diabolica  in  capitibus,' 
ib.  535"  (§  69)  ;  cf.  '  scola  diaboh  uexilla  in  capitibus  habentes  ',  C.  S.  c.  279 
(§  44,  not  in  M  ;  vvhere  '  uexilla'  is  perhaps  a  misunderstanding  of  '  signa  '  or 
of  some  similar  word  in  Irish).  For  other  quotations  from  the  sccular  litcrature 
see  Zimmer  in  Gott.  gel.  Anz.  1891,  pp.  188-200 ;  Silzungsber.  d.  preuss.  Akad. 
1891,  pp.  304  ff. 

^  For  their  close  connexion  with  the  druids  see  below,  pp.  clxi  f. 

*  Br.  Berach,  c.  23;  Three  Glossaries,  pp.  xxxvi  ff. ;  R.  C.  xxiv,  278;  Oss. 
Soc.  V.  20;  these  satires  affected  even  inanimate  nature,  T.  B.  C.  p.  789; 
CCurry,  M.  and  C.  ii.  70. 

'  R.  C.  viii.  48  ff.  (=  LL.  114'  5  ff.,  a  lociis  classiciis  on  the  subject)  ;  xxvi. 
22,  40  ;  Ir.  T,  i.  255  ;  Magh  Rath,  p.  40  ;  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  297  ;  Martin,  p.  ri6  ; 
M.  and  C.  ii.  56,  from  YBL.  126**.  Cuchulainn  dealt  vcrj'  summarily  with  these 
gentry,  T.  B.  C.  p.  273  ;  LL.  120''  44  ff.  ;  cf.  Rhys,  II.  L.  pp.  324  ff. ;  Joyce, 
Social  History,  i.  449  ff.     We  hear  of  female  satirists,  Ir.  T.  i.  71. 

^  Imthecht  na  Tromdaime  ^Circuit  of  the  Burdcnsomc  Company),  Oss.  Soc.  v  ; 
see  the  Introduction,  especially  pp.  xxix  f,  Buffoons  (druithi)  actcd  in  much 
the  same  way,  L.  S.  p.  358  ;  see  below,  p.  cvii. 

'  Oss.  Soc.  V.  20  ff.  ;  Reeves,  Adamn.  pp.  79  f.  ;  Keating,  iii.  78-94  ;  R.  C. 
XX.  38  ff. ;  L.  S.  pp.  309,  312, 

'  '  Na  druid  dia  rimsad  tria  brichtu  ;  na  filid  dia  n  glamad,'  i.e.  the  druids  to 
bewitch  (?)  him  with  spells,  tho  poets  to  lampoon  him,  sc.  if  hc  broke  the  treat^', 
R.C.  xvi.  280  ;  Ann.  Clonm.  p.  39  ;  '  dia  fhclllair  form  fiachaib,  filid  dia  n-air 
7  glaim  n-dicind,  cainte  dia  silad  7  dia  n-gabail  duit,'  i.  e.  if  I  am  defrauded  of 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  ciii 

of  saints ' ;  and  it  looics  in  some  cases  as  if  the  saint's  iiospitality  were 
dictated  less  bj'  Ciiristian  cliarity,  than  by  dread  of  the  tongue  of 
satire'.  But  satire  was  not  the  only  function  of  the  poets ;  wc  hear 
also,  though  less  frequently,  of  thcir  panegjTics ',  for  which  they 
received  guerdon*. 

Grants  of  land  to  the  saints  for  ecclesiastical  purposes  are  of  course 
frequent.  We  shall  see  reason  later  to  believe  that  in  some  cases 
these  lands  had  previously  been  the  official  lands  of  the  Druids.  But 
we  do  not  hear  mucli  of  the  conditions  on  which  land  was  held*. 
Land  is  granted  as  far  as  the  eye  can  sce  on  a  clear  day ",  or  as  far  as 
the  roar  of  an  ox  can  be  hcard'.    Land  is  divided  between  brothers', 

my  dues,  poets  to  satirize  and  extemporize  lampoons,  and  satirists  to  circulate 
and  sing  ^tlie  lampoons)  against  thee,  Aislinge  Meic  Conglinne,  pp.  44-7.  Their 
power  vvas  supposed  to  work  even  after  death  :  '  Cnan  hiia  Lolhcha'i]n  primeices 
Erenn  do  marbad.  .  .  .  Brenait  a  n-aen  uair  in  lucht  ro  marb.  Firt  filed  innsein,' 
i.  e.  Cuan  CLolhchan  was  murdered.  .  .  .  The  murderers  became  putrid  in  a 
siiigle  liour.  TViji'  was  a  pofl's  inhacle,  Ann  Ult.  1024;  see  Ann.  Loch  Ce, 
1024,  where  the  punishment  is  different.  For  schools  of  poets,  cf.  R.  C. 
xxvi.  12;  Kriu  iv.  51  ;  for  heieditar\'  poets,  &c.,  R.  C.  xxvi.  14  note  ;  Acc. 
Sen.  p.  95;  Hy  Fiachrach,  p.  10;  Misc.  Celt.  Soc.  p.  28.  For  their  special 
dress,  R.  C.  x.wi.  12  ;  Corm.  Glossary,  p.  36  (Transl.  p.  135J ;  Magh  Rath, 
pp.  66-8. 

'  C.  S.  c.  796  (§11"):  '  tres  poete  aliquid  accepturi,  et,  si  non  inuenirent, 
ipsum  diffamaturi  uenerunt ' ;  c.  832  ,  §  15^  ;  cf.  c.  332  (§  16  '  mimi  et  histriones ') ; 
c.  672  (■  ioculatores,'  '  satisfac  petitioni  nostre,  alioquin  .  .  .  te  uituperando 
diffamabimus")  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  204  (' praecones  '  =  druithi,  ib.  p.  Ix  ;  Br.  Coemgen, 
c.  17  (aos  ciuil,  i.e.  musicians)  ;  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  296-8.  In  Br.  Berach,  c.  23,  the 
saint  interposes  miraculously  to  save  a  friendly  chief  from  a  poet's  satire. 

'  'ar  sgath  a  einigh  7  a  naire,'  i.  e.  to  protect  his  honour  and  modesty,  Br. 
Coemgen,  c.  15  ;  in  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  72,  it  is  said  that  Maedoc  distributed  his 
possessions  to  the  poor  and  needy,  and  to  musicians,  players,  and  mcn  of 
iearning  'ar  sgath  a  einigh  7  a  uaisle  7  a  ionnracais',  i.  e.  to  protect  his  honour 
and  nobility  and  excellence;  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  v.  42  ^of  Columba).  Giraldus  speaks 
of '  hospitalitatis  gratia,  quam  sancti  ibidem  [sc.  in  Hibernia]  pro  uiribus,  iwwo 
lottge  sttpra  ttires  .  .  .  exercere  solebant',  Opp.  v.  126. 

'  Ci.  S.  §  14  :  '  acta  heroum  cantant ' ;  C.  S.  c.  202  (§  23)  :  '  uenit  carminator  .  .  . 
ad  sanctum  Finnianum,  habens  secum  quoddam  carmen  magnificum,  in  quo 
multa  uirtutum  eius  continebantur.'  Sechnalfs  h^-mn  in  honour  of  Patrick, 
'  Audite  omnes,'  is  said  to  have  been  presented  in  this  way  to  the  saint  in  his 
lifetime,  L.  H.-  i.  3-6. 

*  See  below,  p.  xcii.  Br.  Berach,  c.  23  :  '  is  e  do  rad  Rathonn  do  Diarmait 
i  (hachaibh  molta  doroine  do,'  i.  e.  it  was  he  who  gave  Rathonn  to  Diarmait 
[a  poet^,  in  payment  of  a  panegyric  which  he  made  for  him.  And  when  Bcrach 
literally  stops  the  poet's  mouth,  he  says  :  *  ni  thi  aoir  na  moladh  tar  an  m-belsan 
tre  bitlibe,'  i.e.  neither  satire  nor  panegyric  shall  cross  these  lips  for  ever. 
We  hear  of  'tir  denma  .  .  .  admolta  Ulad',  i.e.  makers  of  the  panegyrics  of 
Ulster,  R.  C.  xiv.  412  ad  calcem  ;  cf.  Keating.  iii.  112.  We  have  an  instance 
of  a  poet  entering  a  monastery,  C.  S.  c.  276  ^j  38"!  =  c.  885  (§  21". 

'  We  have  seen  above,  p.  xcii,  that  many  of  our  legends  aim  at  limiting 
secular  exactions  in  the  way  of  entertainment  i,Ir  oegidecht),  &c  ,  LL.  106''  13. 

'  Cain.  §  6  note  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  148  ;  Capg.  ii.  184  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  148.  In  a  secular 
tale  the  grant  is  :  'an  ro  siacht  a  radarc  .  .  .  co  cend  sechtmaine,'  i.  e.  all  that 
his  sight  could  reach  to  the  end  of  a  week,  R.  C.  x.wi.  30-1. 

'  C.  S.  c.  800  ^§  2  .  8  Aed,  §  3. 


civ  INTRODUCTION 

and  granted  as  a  dowry  ^  Land  hunger  existed  then  as  now,  and  the 
plague  of  c.  665  was  invoked  to  diminish  '  congestion  " '.  Seizin  was 
given  by  a  twig  or  sod '.  The  growth  of  enclosures  and  stopping  up 
of  paths  has  been  already  spoken  of.  Roads  were  built  by  the 
co-operation  of  tribes*.  The  use  of  wheeled  vehicles  was  constant ; 
and  they  have  their  appropriate  miracles''. 

In  the  political  sphere  we  have  the  chief,  who  is  sometimes  called 
'rex'  and  sometimes  'dux'.  Above  him  is  the  provincial  king,  and 
over  all  the  high-king, '  rex  Temoriae  ',  or  king  of  Tara.  There  is  a 
special  spot  for  the  solemn  inauguration  of  the  chief  ;  and  the  tanist 
or  future  chief  is  elected  during  the  chiePs  hfetime '.  The  chief  s 
rath  or  fort  is  frequently  for  greater  security  in  an  island  in  a  lough*. 
Robber  bands  chose  islands  as  their  refuges  for  similar  reasons '. 
Hence,  as  a  punishment,  the  lough  is  removed  or  dried  up '",  or  the 
island  with  the  chiefs  house  is  submerged  ".  Another  fact  which  is 
explained  by  the  weakness  of  the  royal  or  chiefly  power  is  the  pre- 
valence  of  a  system  of  exacting  hostages  as  a  means  of  giving  a  ruler 


'  C.  S.  c.  909  (§  g). 

-  Ger.  §  12,  where  also  the  size  of  the  holding  is  given,  'seven  acres  of 
smoothe  land,  eight  of  rough  land,  and  nine  of  wood.' 

'  '  craobh  sheiibhe,'  lit.  twig  of  possession,  Br.  life  of  Grellan,  c.  3  ;  the 
formula  '  fot  fri  (or  (or)  alt(5ir',  altar  sod,  is  common  for  ecclesiastical  land. 

*  Tr.  Th.  p.  522  (§  31) ;  we  hear  of  a  'lebar  sliged'  road  book,  or  itinerary, 
Las.  §  18  note ;  bridges  are  seldom  nientioned,  Br.  ii.  §  47 ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  68-9. 

"i  e.  g.  Cron.  §  22;  Tr.  Th.  p.  532  (,§§  51-2);  Adamn.  ii.  43;  C.  S.  c.  358 
(§  49,  not  in  M)  ;  Capg.  i.  394,  ii.  597. 

*  Decl.  §  22  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  25"  (§  60)  ;  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  19  ;  cf.  Hy  Fiachrach, 
pp.  100.  108,  425  ff.  ;  Keating,  iii.  10  ff.  ;  Misc.  Celt.  Soc.  p.  86  ;  Martin, 
pp.  ro2,  241.  The  inauguration  often  took  place  at  the  tribal  sacred  tree  ; 
the  'terebinthus  regum '  of  Coem.  §  40.  Giraldus'  curious  account  of  the 
inauguration  of  the  chiefs  of  Cinel  Conaill,  Opp.  v.  169,  has  been  hotly  con- 
tested.  Modern  researches  into  totemism  make  it  possible  that  a  basis  of  fact 
underlies  the  account.  The  office  of  king's  bedfellow  is  possibly  alluded  to, 
Tig.  §  3.  The  privilege  of  holding  this  office  is  among  the  saint's  '  facbala ',  or 
bequests  to  certain  families,  Br.  Berach,  c.  28;  Rennes  MS.  f.  84';  Acc.  Sen. 
p.  217. 

'  Ab.  §  8  ;  for  monastic  tanistry  see  below,  p.  cxvii.  Conchobar  seems  to 
dispose  of  the  kingdom  after  his  own  death,  Oitte,  p.  6. 

'  Car.  §  39  ;  Ci.  C.  §  24  ;  Mochoem.  §§  18  ad  fin.  30  ;  Mun.  §  23  ;  C.  S.  c.  350 
(§  31,  not  in  M),  c.  376  (§  32)  ;  R.  C.  v.  443-4  ;  xii.  342  ;  cf.  Pagan  Ireland, 
pp.  216  ir.  ;  Martin,  Western  Islcs,  pp.  58,  240-1  ;  Macculloch,  i.  141,  ii.  235, 
325.  The  point  on  the  mainland  from  which  the  transit  to  the  island  is  made 
is  called  'portus  insulae',  Mun.  §  23. 

*  Aed,  §  19 ;  Gcr.  §  11. 

">  Aed,  §  19  ;  Ci.  C.  §  24  ;  Ger.  §  11 ;  Mochoem.  §  30  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  84.  For 
loughs  removed  for  other  reasons,  Ci.  S.  §  14  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  539''  (§  96) ;  C.  S. 
c.  192  (§  4)  ;  cf.  Ann.  Ult.  1054. 

"  L.S.  p.  143  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  84'' :  '  in  inis  lit  asa  tancus  dom  sarugud  do  dol 
fon  loch  co  brath.'  i.  e.  Iit  yondcr  island  frora  which  they  came  to  outrage  me 
go  under  the  lough  till  doom. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cv 

a  greater  hold  on  his  subject  chiefs '.    This  power  was  often  ruthlessly 

exercised  ^    There  are  traditions  of  hostages  being  buried   alive '. 

The  release  of  hostages  in  danger  is  a  regular  metier  of  the  saint. 

On  the  other  hand  hostages    were    often    kindly  used,  and    treated 

rather  as  foster-children  than  as  hostages*.    Assemblies  of  the  tribe 

or  kingdom  were  held  for  business^  and  pleasure";  and  the  saints 

seem  in  some  cases  to  have  taken  a  considerable  share  in  political 

rcvolutions '. 

In   the  legal  sphere,  accused   persons  can   clear  themselves  by 

oaths';  various  sacred  objects  connected  with  the  saints  being  used 

for  this  purpose,  and  for  the  making  of  binding  covenants,  death  or 

some  other  dreadful  calamity  being  the  penalty  of  perjury'.     The 

institution  called  by  the  Norsemen '  self-doom  ' '",  whereby  an  injured 

'  Ail.  ^  21  :  Car.  §  12  ;  Decl.  §  23  (death  of  hostages  by  plague  is  deplored  as 
likelv  to  excite  suspicions  of  treachery'i  ;  Maed.  §  24  vcf.  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  8  : 
'mar  fa  giiaithbes  ag  na  rioghaibh  7  ag  na  tigernaibh  an  tan  sin,'  i.  e.  as  was  the 
usual  custom  with  kings  and  chiefs  at  that  timc"^ ;  Sam.  §  12  ;  in  Br.  Mac  Creiche, 
c.  10.  in  a  hst  of  dues  proposed  to  be  exacted,  is  '  bithghiall ',  or  a  perpetual 
hostage.  In  Br.  Grellan,  c.  4,  a  chief  is  nicknamed  '  Fer  da  ghiall  ',  i.  e.  man 
of  the  two  hostages,  'aga  rabatar  geill  Uladh  7  Oirghiall  a  n-aoinfecht,'  because 
he  held  hostages  of  the  Ulaid  and  Oriel  at  the  same  time.  In  the  hfe  of  Molaga 
(Stowe  MS.  ix,  pp.  46-7  the  surrender  of  hostages  is  treated  as  practical 
resignation  :  '  ro  iodlaic  uadh  a  gialla  uile.  .  .  .  Ro  fiarfaighsit  fir  Muman  don 
righ,  cread  far  dhiochuir  uadh  a  righe,'  i.  e.  he  gave  up  all  his  hostages.  The 
men  of  Munster  asked  the  king  why  he  resigned  the  kingship.  There  was 
a  place  at  Tara  called  Duma  or  Dun  na  n-giall,  mound  or  fort  of  the  hostages 
(R.  C.  XV.  281,  xvi.  50  ,  or  Carcair  i^Prison)  na  n-g.,  Magh  Rath,  p.  8.  We  read  of 
Cuithe  na  n-giall,  or  pit  of  the  hostages,  Br.  Abban.  c.  3  .altered  into  '  prison 
for  criminals ',  Slowe,  ix,  p,  206^  ;  cf.  Magh  Rath,  pp.  6,  12  :  '  geill  cacha  cuicid,' 
i.e.  hostages  from  every  province  ;  R.  C.  xxiv.  180,  182  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  129. 

*  Fin.  C.  §  22 ;  Mochoem.  §  ig  ;  Tig.  5  15;  L.  S.  p.  10  ;  cf.  Adamn.  ii.  42. 
'  R.  C,  XV,  319;  xxiv.  184. 

*  Rua.  I  16  ;  R,  C.  xxiii.  404.  As  a  rule  children  are  given  as  hostages  for 
their  parents,  but  in  C.  S.  c.  909  (§  lo)  we  find  parents  imprisoned  as  security 
for  the  good  behaviour  of  their  son. 

*  Decl.  5  19  ;  Ger.  §  12.  One  cause  of  meeting  would  be  the  inauguration 
of  a  new  king  or  chief.  The  assembly,  Mun.  §  26,  seems  to  be  an  ecclesiastical 
council  ;  but  secular  princes  are  present. 

*  Fin.  C.  §  13  ;  the  latter  kind  of  assembly  is  in  Irish  generally  called 
'  acnach  ',  the  former  '  airecht ',  but  the  distinction  is  not  a  rigid  one,  and  the 
same  assembly  ser\'ed  both  purposes  ,  cf.  infra,  p,  clxxxi  note  17  ;  Br.  Maed.  c.  35). 
The  assemblies  of  the  Deisi  are  said  to  have  been  held  by  night,  V.  Tr,  p,  208. 

'  Coem,  5  36;  Decl,  §  ig  ;  cf,  Keating,  iii.  54. 

'  Coem.  §  10 ;  Maed.  §  50 

'  Bells  are  very  commonly  used  for  these  purposes,  Ci.  S.  §  4 ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  60, 
66  ;  Capg.  ii.  107  ;  Gir.  Camb,  Opp,  v,  179  i  who  notes  that  oaths  on  bells  and 
bachalls  were  more  frequent  than  on  the  gospels  1  ;  Lib.  Land.  p.  loi  (106)  ; 
Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  17;  hence  a  bell  is  called  'mind  cotaig ',  i.  e.  covenant 
relic,  Rennes  MS.  f.  iSfl.  A  gospel  or  missal  written  by  a  saint,  C,  B.  S,  p.  66  ; 
a  saint's  knife,  ib. ;  stone  on  which  saint  was  born.  or  which  stands  near  his 
tomb,  V.  Tr,  p,  8 ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  69  ;  cf.  Magh  Rath,  p,  82  ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  65-6  ; 
Martin,  Western  Islands,  pp.  167,  226,  259  ;  cf.  Hastings,  Dict.  Bib.  v.  128". 
See  below,  pp.  clxxvi  f. 

'"  Sjalf-dacmi;  inlrish=  'abrethfein',  'ariar  fein,'one'sownjudgement,  orwill. 


cvi  INTRODUCTION 

person  vvas  allowcd  to  assess  his  own  damages  or  reward,  occurs 
frequently  in  tlie  Irish  lives ' ;  I  have  only  found  one  allusion  to  it  in 
the  Latin  lives  (Dec.  §  19).  A  chief  submits  to  Fechin  by  placing  the 
sainfs  foot  on  his  own  neck^.  From  the  number  of  prisoners 
released  by  the  saints  we  shall  see  that  imprisonment  was  a  common 
form  of  punishment.  The  death  penalty  was  frequently  exacted ;  in 
one  case  it  is  inflicted  by  drowning,  in  another  by  burning',  in  a 
third  by  '  crucifixion  ',  by  which  hanging  is  probably  meant  *. 

In  regard  to  the  family  we  have  one  or  two  traces  of  a  state  of 
things  anterior  to  the  institution  of  monogamy.  A  man,  apparently 
a  Christian,  has  twowives^.  Children  are  exposed  and  liilled",  or 
sold  in  the  evil  days  of  famine '.    Fosterage  *  is  a  great  Celtic  institu- 

'  e.  g.  L.  S.  p.  87  ;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  cc.  3,  10.  It  is  common  in  the  secular 
literature,  e.  g.  LL.  iii''35;  GG.  §70;  Silva  Gad.  i.  83. 

^  R.  C.  .\ii.  352,  and  Stokes'  note  a.  1.  ;  (cf.  Josh.  x.  24  1  ;  there  is  a  curious 
form  of  submission  by  the  defeated  party  takmg  the  point  of  the  conqueror's 
svvord  into  his  mouth,  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  212-13. 

'  C.  S.  c.  909  (§  10)  ;  Ba.  §  2.  I  have  already  spoken  of  exposure  in  a  coracle 
as  a  form  of  punishment  ;  and  burial  alive  (which  occurs  only  in  the  secular 
literature) ;  burning  alive  is  nientioned  as  a  punishment  in  one  of  the  romances, 
but  in  a  very  mythical  passage,  Eriu,  iii.  150-2  ;  see  also  Keating  ii.  314  ;  a  man 
is  thrown  over  a  cliff  by  his  enemies,  C.  S.  c.  909  (§  11 !.  I  have  already  spoken 
of  the  cruel  command  to  treat  the  infant  Munnu  in  the  same  way,  Cain.  §  2t  ; 
cf.  Bran,  i.  272;  Hdt.  iv.  103;  and  for  asimilar  test  of  obedience,Capg.  i.  411.  For 
a  curious  mode  of  detcrmining  the  person  on  whom  devolved  the  office  of 
avenger  of  blood,  cf.  Oitte.  p.  24. 

*  Coem.  §  47  ;  cf.  Ir.  crochad. 

^  'secundum  legem  illius  temporis,'  Br.  i.  §98;  this  explanation  is  not  in 
Capgrave,  i.  152  ;  cf.  L.  S.  p.  90.  In  the  secular  tale  of  the  birth  of  Aed  Slane, 
in  which,  however,  Finnian  of  Movilla  and  Aed  mac  Bric  play  a  part,  the  king, 
Diarmait,  has  two  wives,  if  not  more,  and  the  prelates  seem  to  make  no  objection 
(L.  U.53-4;  printed  in  Silva  Gad.  i.82-4;  perhaps,  however,  as  Mr.  Nutt  suggests, 
Bran,  ii.  83,  these  prelates  have  taken  the  place  ofdruids  in  the  original  versiou). 
Aed.  son  of  Muiredach,  King  of  Connaught.  is  represented  as  resenting  bitterly 
Patrick's  insistence  on  monogamy,  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  176-7  ;  Finn  had  three  wives, 
and  Sanb  had  seven,  ib.  pp.  60,  140.  Two  sisters  are  married  simiiltaneously 
to  the  same  man,  R.C.  xv.  317;  cf.  Macculloch,  Childhood,  p.  9.  (For  the 
ring  in  marriage  cf.  Fcchin,  §  8.)  In  the  Irish  lives  the  standard  of  sexual 
morality  is  low  ;  the  worst  picture  in  this  way  is  in  the  Br.  life  of  Cuimine 
Foda.  When  the  fact  of  his  incestuous  birth  came  to  light.  Ita,  a  virgin  saint, 
is  represented  as  exclaiming,  '  nach  olc  an  gniomh  e,  uair  as  gniomh  diadha 
dcghrathmar  e,'  i.  e.  not  evil  is  the  deed,  for  it  is  a  divine  deed  and  full  of  grace, 
Br.  2324,  f.  51  v". 

«  Ail.  5  I  ;  Ba.  §  i  ;  Co.  E.  §26;  LL  286''  47;  Brev.  Aberd.  Pars  Hiem. 
Propr.  Sanct.  fV.  24  v".  26  v"  ;  cf.  V.  Tr.  p.  355  1  abandonment  to  the  Church, 
and  no  doubt  many  infants  vvho  otherwise  would  have  perished  were  nurtured 
by  the  Church  ;  cf.  Br.  Berach,  c.  26).  In  Ir.  T.  iii.  189  the  exposure  of  an 
infant  is  forbidden  by  a  fair>' ;  cf.  R.  C.  xxii.  390  ;  Keating,  ii.  314. 

'  L  S.  p.  56. 

'  In  F.  M  ii.  976  we  have  a  striking  example  of  the  way  in  which  the  tie  of 
*kinship  by  the  milk ',  as  it  is  called  in  India  (Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  p.  221), 
took  prccedence  even  of  the  tie  of  kinship  by  the  blood  :  '  Amhalghaidh  .  .  .  do 
marbhadh  dia  athair  7  dia  derbhrathair  lon  i  n-dioghail  a  n-dalta,  i.Conchobhar 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cvii 

tion.  We  find  it  mentioned  in  tlncse  lives',  but  generally  in  thc 
form  of  fosterage  in  a  monastery ',  or  with  some  feniale  saint  vvith 
a  vievv  to  the  fosterling^s  fiiture  ecclesiastical  career  ^  We  have  the 
vvell-icnovvn  Irish  unit  of  value,  the  ctiinat,  ancilla,  or  fcmalc  slave  '. 
Hot  stones  or  metal  balls  are  used  for  cooking",  and  for  warming 
drinks".  Clothes  made  of  skin  and  of  linen  are  mentioned ',  and  we 
have  an  elaborate  description  of  a  type  of  splendid  and  of  sordid  dress 
in  thc  case  of  two  monastic  fosterlings  *.  We  hear  of  a  military 
dandy  vain  of  his  hair°,  and  of  another  vvho  artificially  coloured  his 
eyelids  '",  but  the  standard  of  personal  cleanliness  cannot  have  been 
high  when  a  saint  could  bid  a  child  kill  the  vermin  in  his  tunic  or  in 
his  head";  and  there  was  a  total  absence  of  sanitary  arrangements  ". 
Of  games  ball  and  dice  are  mentioned " ;  but  we  do  not  hear 
either  of  draughts  (fithchell)  or  hurly,  vvhich  occur  so  frequently  in 
the  sccular  tales.  We  find  an  Irish  '  ioculator'  or  buffoon  at  a  British 
court  '*. 


.  .  .  do  marbliadh  laisiom  ',  i.  e.  Amalgaid  was  slain  by  his  own  father  and  brother 
in  revcnge  lor  his  having  slain  their  loster.child,  Conchobar  ;  cf.  Magh  Rath, 
pp.  134-5.  notes,  and  ib.  p.  294,  where  is  a  proverbial  saying  that  two-tliirds  of 
a  child's  disposition  depend  on  its  '  daltacht ',  or  fosterage.  The  Welsh  word 
for  '  friend ',  n/rtiV/,  means  foster-brother,  Ir.  coiiwlta  ;  the  O.  Norse  frkndi 
means  '  kinsman  '.  Teutonic  friendship  is  based  on  blood-liinship,  Celtic  friend- 
ship  on  milk-kinship.  We  find  a  name,  patronymic  in  form,  given  from  the 
foster-lather  and  not  from  the  real  father,  Petrie,  Tara,  p.  118,  from  B.  Lecan, 
f.  306".  In  Oitte,  p.  16,  is  a  curious  use  of  '  comalta  '  for  children  born  at  the 
same  time,  though  they  never  see  each  other. 

'  Fint.  §  II. 

^  Ber.  §  9  ;  Mochoem.  §  31,  Mun.  §  21  ;  N  and  K.  p.  151. 

^  Br  i.  §§  3,  4,  8,  71,  92  ;  Cain.  §  25  ;  Ita.  §  24  ;  Mochoem.  §§  8,  14  ;  Sam.  §  18. 

'  Fin.  C.  §  17  ;  an  "ancilia  '  freed  as  an  act  of  merit,  C.  S.  c.  183  (§  29).  The 
ancilla  is  often  mentioned,  the  male  slave  very  rarely,  Ail.  §§  i,  3  notes. 

"  Mun.  §6. 

*  Lug.  §  17  ;  Br.  Berach,  c.  17  ;  Ir.  T.  II.  i.  179  ;  so  for  heating  a  bath,  B.  B. 
262"  56. 

'  Maed.  §  47  ;  Mun.  %  22,  note ;  C.  B.  S.,  p.  128  ;  cf.  Elder  Faiths,  i.  iio. 

'  C.  S.  c.  405  .  §  24 )  ;  the  description  is  omitted  in  M.  In  C.  B.  S.,  p.  44,  the 
coccit/a,  cloak  or  plaid.  is  mentioned  as  a  specially  Irish  dress. 

"  Coem.  §41;  women  washing  their  hair,  Aed,  §  30 ;  a  wooden  comb,  C.  S. 
c.  176  §  19,  which  was,  however,  only  used  once  a  year  ! 

'"  C.  S.  c.  429  (§  24)  :   'sicut  moris  est.' 

"  Co.  E.  ^  34,  note  ;  Lug.  §  7,  note  ;  M  discreetly  omits  these  details  ;  cf. 
C.  B.  S.  p.  126.  The  sheen  of  a  sword  gives  light  enough  to  catch  a  flesh  worm, 
R.  C.  xxii.  202  (  =  L.  U.  90''  ad  calcem} ;  cf.  Dicuirs  well-known  saying  about 
the  nights  of  the  Arctic  Circle. 

'-  C.  S.  c.  ao6  (§  30) ;  Hib.  Min.  pp.  71-2. 

'3  Ber.  §  14  ;  Lug.  §  27. 

'*  N  and  K.  pp.  226-7  !  he  makes  the  usual  unreasonable  demands  of  his  class ; 
V.  p.  cii  note  6.  In  the  secular  tales  the  buffoon  (^druth)  often  wears  a  diadem 
(mind~i  and  other  royal  trappings,  and  is  treated  as  a  sort  of  mock  Uing,  e.  g. 
LL.  248'';  R.C.  xxiv.  144  ;  one  lucklessdruth  gets  killed  by  Cuchulainn  under  the 
impression  that  he  is  the  king,  T.  B.  C.  p.  411. 


cviii  INTRODUCTION 

But  the  chief  amusement  was  war,  and  a  very  brutal  sport  it  was. 
Decapitation  of  slaughtered  enemies  was  constantly  practised  '.  Even 
women  were  not  exempt  from  this  barbarous  trcatment  '^.  The 
fiendish  exultation  over  a  fallen  foe  is  mentioned  frequently  as  a 
cause  of  annoyance  to  the  saints'.     The  prevalence  of  war  and  other 

'  Fint.  §  13  ;  Ita,  §  18  ;  Mochoem.  §§3.  27  ;  Mun.  §  18 ;  C.  S.  c.  247  (§  26. 
not  in  M ),  c.  910  (§  14);  Adamn.  i.  12,  39.  Decapitated  persons  are  raised 
to  life  again,  Aed  §  12  ;  Bo.  §  16  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  47  ;  this  last  is  the  only  Celtic 
instance  wliich  1  have  iound  of  the  praclice.  so  common  with  other  decapitated 
saints,  ofcarrying  theirown  heads,  a  class  of  lcgends  due  to  sculpture,  Saintyves, 
p.  123  ;  there  are,  however,  secular  parallels,  Fled  Bricrend^,  p.  112  ;  Grimm, 
iii.  944.  In  Br.  Berach,  c.  29.  ninc  *dibergaig'  kill  one  of  the  saint*s  monks: 
'7  tangattar  iter  a  chend  7  a  cholann.'  i.  e.  and  went  between  his  head  and  his 
trunk,  probably  to  prevent  the  ghost  from  walking  fthough  the  Icelandic  phrase 
'  ganga  milli  bols  ok  hOfu>5s'  merely  means  to  kill  outright,  Cleasby-Vigfusson, 
s.  V.  hbfuS^.  Sitting  on  the  head  of  a  decapitated  foe  had  the  same  object, 
Three  Fragments,  p.  212  ;  vvhile  in  Iceland  the  sameend  wasattained  by  burning 
the  corpse,  FornsOgur,  p.  144.  Conall  Cernach  never  slept  without  the  head  of 
a  Connaught  man  under  his  knee,  LL.  107"  22  ;  Hib.  Min.  p.  55  ;  and  it  was 
one  of  Fothad's  taboos  (gessa)  '  not  to  drink  without  the  heads  of  dead  men 
before  him  ',  R.  C.  xiv.  242.  The  object  was  partly  to  exhibit  the  heads  as 
trophies,  partly  to  terrorize  the  surviving  enemies  ;  cf.  T.  B.  C.  pp.  159,  166, 
177,  243,  395;  Cath  Finnlraga,  pp,  20,  79:  Magh  Rath,  pp.  40,  260-2;  Acc. 
Sen.  pp.  8.  54,214;  R.  C.  xiii.  60,  xiv.  410,  xv.  289,  479,  xxiv.  62;  Oitte, 
pp.  4,  28,  36.  40,  42  ;  F.  M.  i.  500,  502.  The  heads  were  impaled,  R.  C.  xiv.  428, 
xvi.  137,  xxiii.  416,  xxix.  126  ;  Eriu,  iii.  r66  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  49  and  note  ;  Ir.  T. 
II.  i.  176  ;  or  piled  in  a  cairn,  R.  C.  xiii.  52  (  =  LL.  299''  32-3;  ;  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  210  ; 
cf.  Elder  Faiths,  i.  328.  The  custom  was  a  very  ancient  one,  see  the  passages 
collected  by  Windisch,  T.  B.  C.  pp.  xxiii  f. ;  and  it  lasted  late,  see  Marlin,  p.  278  ; 
The  Heart  of  Midlothian,  c.  52.  It  is  less  barbarous  when  a  man  cuts  off  the 
tress  of  a  fallen  foe  as  a  trophy  (comartha),  Br.  Berach,  c.  23  sub  fin. 

^  Coem.  §  II  ;  Co.  E.  §32.  where  S  adds  ;  '  ut  moris  erat  in  illo  temporc 
interficere  feminas '  ;  C.  S.  c.  342  (§  16,  =  Aed  §  12,  where  M  has  altered  the 
'  tres  puelle'  into  '  tres  uiri')  ;  ib.  c.  832  (§14);  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  18;  Cain 
Adamn.  §3  :  '  ar  ba  cenn  mna  no  da  cich  no  berthe  i  tasilbath  in  tan  sin,'  i.  e. 
for  it  was  the  head  of  a  woman  or  her  tvvo  breasts  that  used  to  be  taken  as 
trophies  in  those  days.  It  was  tlie  Cain  Adamnain  which  put  an  end  to  the 
service  of  women  in  war.  In  the  old  heroic  days  there  were  many  Irish 
Amazons,  such  as  Ness,  the  mother  of  Conchobar,  LL.  io6'*,  and  the  famous 
Medb,  queen  of  Connaught  ;  Scathach,  the  military  instructress  of  Cuchulain  ; 
cf.  Ir.  T.  II.  ii.  149  ;  R.C.  xxi.  395.  In  C.  S.  c.  247  (§  25)  we  have  a  queen  of 
Dal  n  Araide  slain  in  war  ;  M  (,AiI.  §  21)  has  obliterated  this  trait. 

^  Col.  E.  §  8  ;  Enda,  §2  (' carmen ')  :  Fin.  C.  §16,  note :  '  ne  ulularent,  si 
uinccrent ' ;  Fint.  §  13 ;  Mun,  §  18  and  note  ;  C.  S.  c.  407  (§  25' .  The  ordinary 
Latin  term  fnr  this  is  '  iubilatio",  in  Irish  '  ilach  or  nuall  commaidmi ',  R.  C.  xvii. 
137  ;  Threc  Fragments,  pp.  40,  206.  There  is  an  intcrcsting  referencc  to  obliga- 
tion  to  military  scrvice  in  C.  B.  S.  p.  56 :  '  pergant  tecum  in  cxercitu  ad  prelium 
trihus  diebus  et  tribus  noctibus,  ct  si  amplius  tecum  ierint,  cibabis  eos  '  ;  an 
attacking  band  all  plungc  their  swords  into  a  murdcred  man's  corpse,  no  doubt 
to  prevent  the  blood  feud  being  fixed  on  any  one  individual,  ib.  p.  78  (this 
happens  in  Irclandi.  Invadcrs  are  accompanicd  by  a  band  of  music,  'aes 
ciuil,'  '  combad  leiriti  a  n-airgni,'  that  their  ravages  may  be  more  cffective, 
Cath  Ruis,§3(  =  LL,  i^i^s^ff.).  For  other  war  customs  cf.  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  164, 
198  ;  Three  Fragments,  p.  180  ;  Martin,  pp.  102-3  For  the  savagery  of  war 
cf.  T.  B.  C.  p.  643.  Thc  horriblc  practice  of  tossing  childrcn  on  spcar-points  is 
shown  by  ils  name,  •  gall-cherd,'  i.  e.  foreign  art,  to  be  an  importation  of  the 
Norsemen,  Cain.  §34  ;  C.  S.  c.  928  (§  9)  ;  sce  Glossary,  s.  v. 


CONTENTS  OF  TIIE  LIVES  cix 

troubles  caused  treasure  to  be  buricd '.  Trcasure  trove  belonged 
apparcntly  to  the  king  ^ 

The  ininiic  vvar  of  the  chase  vvas  highly  popular,  as  is  shovvn  by 
the  number  ot"  stories  in  vvhich  the  huntcd  beast  is  rcscucd  by  the 
saint'. 

The  burial  customs  of  the  Irish  are  vividly  portrayed  ;  the  un- 
restrained  lamentation  for  the  dead,  the  kecning*,  which  is  regarded 
as  somevvhat  hcathenish ',  as  is  also  the  prolongcd  wake^ ;  still  more 
distinctlj'  hcathen  seenis  to  be  burial  under  a  cairn  of  stones,  yct  we 
find  it  practiscd  in  thc  case  of  a  Christian  '.  The  pagan  custom  of 
upright  burial  is  mentioned  in  one  or  two  of  the  Irish  lives^,  but  not 

'  '  dorat  '^in  delg]  i  talmain  iar  tnaidm  air  chatha  for  Ulto,'  i.  e.  he  buried  the 
brooeh  in  the  earth,  after  the  defeat  of  the  Ultonians,  R.  C.  viii.  52  (=  LL. 
1 15"^  ;  cf.  Rua.  §  8  ;  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  298.  The  head  of  a  family  reveals  his  hoards 
to  his  sons  at  the  approach  of  death,  L.  U.  70".  There  is  a  story  of  King  Mael- 
sechlainn  ob.  862^  burying  treasure,  and  killing  the  gillie  who  helped  him,  lest 
he  should  betray  Ihe  hoard,  R.  C.  xxvi.  366.  As  the  saints  discovered  these 
hoards  by  their  miraculous  povvcrs,  so  the  Danes  are  said  to  have  discovered 
them  '  tre  geintlidecht ',  by  paganism,  i.  e.  inagic,  G.  G.  §  69. 

'  Cron.  §  27.  *  vide  infra,  p.  cxli. 

'  '  ululatus,'  Ab.  §47;  Ba.  §8;  Ita,  §30;  '  lamenta,'  Br.  i.  511;  cf.  Tig. 
55;  C.  B.  S.  p.  47  ;  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  157  ;  Elder  Faiths,  i.  309  ff.  ;  Martin, 
p.  294;  Saintyves,  pp.  64-5;  the  hand-smiting,  'manuum  lamentatio,'  Ab. 
§  34 ;  '  complosis  manibus,'  Maed.  §  43  (V),  Ir.  lamchomairt,  is  penitential  rather 
than  funereal. 

°  'Consanguinei  .  .  .  plangentes  fecerunt  saeculares  exequias,'  infra  ii.  10, 
note. 

*  'peractis,  ut  moris  erat  gentilium,  diebus  septem  exequiarum,'  C.  S.  c.  908 
^l  8).  St.  David,  hovvever,  is  said  not  to  have  been  buried  till  the  eighth  day, 
ib.  c.  755.  Burial  on  the  day  after  death  seems  to  be  regarded  as  the  rule,  Br. 
Coemgen,  c.  10. 

'  Adamn.  i.  33  ;  he  was,  however.  a  recent  convert ;  cf.  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  55 ; 
and  vve  have  already  noticed  the  cairns  of  heads.  The  underlying  idea  is  pro- 
bably  that  contained  in  a  letter  ascribed  to  Theodoret  (Ep.  i8o)  :  '  Let  every 
one  throwa  stone  on  his  grave.lest  perchance  . .  .  he  may  return  toearth  '  (cited 
by  Salmon,  Infallibility,  p.  302;.  Or  it  marks  the  place  where  the  ghostwalks, 
Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  p.  16.  Tribal  meetings  were  held  at  cairns,  R.  C.  xvi. 
142  ;  and  various  ritcs  performed  there,  ib.  xvii.  143  ;  Hardy,  Holy  Wells, 
p.  42  ;  Marlin.  p.  151  ;  Grimm,  iv.  1744 ;  Lang,  Custom  and  Myth,  p.  203.  But 
Ihey  also  mark  the  sites  of  Christian  mlracles,  Car.  §  60  ;  Co.  E.  §  a  ;  Dec.  §  35  ; 
C.  S.  c.  668.  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  regards  burial  in  a  hovve  or  barrow  as 
distinctively  heathen  :  'iussit  eum  sepeliri,  et  cumulum  terrae  super  corpus  eius 
pcigaito  more  apponi,'  viii.  7. 

*  Silva  Gad.  i.  50;  Loegaire  assigns  his  vvish  to  be  buried  in  this  vvay  as  a 
reason  for  rejecting  Christianity,  V.  Tr.  pp.  74,  308  ;  and  he  vvas  so  buried,  ib. 
p.  566  ;  cf.  R.  C.  xvi.  276  ;  Pagan  Ireland,  pp.  106-7  ;  Martin,  p.  243  ;  Mac- 
culloch,  Western  Isles,  i.  141.  The  embalmingof  a  body  seems  to  be  regardedasa 
heathen  practice,  and  its  effect  has  to  be  undone  by  saying  mass  before  the  body 
can  be  buried  in  consecrated  ground,  Fel.^  p.  246.  This  may  be  connected  with 
the  curious  idea  that  the  nondecay  of  a  body  in  the  tomb  is  the  effect  of  a  curse, 
V.  Tr.  p.«i54.  In  Eyrbyggjasaga,  c.  34,  the  non-decay  of  the  corpse  goes  vvith 
the  'walking'  of  the  spirit:  'varu  allir  menn  hra:ddir  viS  aptgOngur  JJbrolfs,  . .  . 
foru  upp  .  .  .  til  dysjar  hans  ;  brjbta  dysina  ok  finna  JJorblf  par  bfuinn,'  i.  e.  all 


cx  INTRODUCTION 

in  any  of  our  Latin  lives.  Tlie  idea  was  that  in  deathi,  as  in  life,  the 
chief  should  stand  fronting  the  foe ;  and  it  was  believed  that  as  long 
as  he  did  so,  the  foe  could  not  prevail  '.  It  was  a  further  develop- 
nient  of  this  idea  when  the  dead  body  ot  a  king  vvas  taken  into  battle 
in  his  war-chariot '. 

Persons  who  died  suddenly  without  the  sacraments  of  the  Church 
were  not  buried  in  consecrated  ground ' ;  in  some  places  there  were 
separate  cemeteries  for  men  and  women* ;  and  we  hear  of  a  special 
burial  place  for  exiles  and  women  dying  in  child-bed  ^  One  of 
Brendan's  companions  was  buried  at  sea,  and  the  body  remained 
fixed  as  firmly  as  if  buried  in  the  earth  ^.  A  privilege  frequently 
granted  to  saints  is  that  the  royal  line  of  the  tribe  shall  always  be 
buried  in  their  cemetery''.     Linen  shrouds  were  used  for  burial*. 

Of  diseases  the  one  most  frequently  mentioned  is  leprosj',  which 
seems  to  have  been  terribly  prevalent ;  and  the  cure  of  it  is  one  of 
the  most  frequent  miracles  ascribed  to  the  saints ".     The  plague  is 

men  were  terrified  at  Thorolf  s  '  walking^  ' ;  they  go  to  his  cairn,  and  break  it 
open,  and  find  him  there  undecayed.  On  the  other  hand,  the  incorruption  of 
the  body  is  a  sigii  of  special  sanctity,  especially  of  chastity,  Fel.-  p.  244  ;  Bede, 
H.  E.  iii.  8,  iv.  17  (19),  28  (30)  ;  cf.  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  83. 

'  V.  Tr.  p.  566;  Silva  Gad.  i.  50-1  ;  so  the  head  of  Bran  protected  Britain  from 
invasion.  Rhys,  A.  L.  p.  4.  An  interesting  parallel  occurs  in  Laxdaslasaga, 
c.  17  :  '  |)a  vil  ek  mer  lata  grOf  grafa  i  eldhiisdurum,  ok  skal  mik  nii5r  setja 
standanda  )'ar  i  durunum.  Ma  ek  ^k  enn  vendiligarr  sja  yfir  h)'byli  min,'  i.  e. 
I  will  that  they  shall  dig  my  grave  at  the  door  of  my  hall,  and  bury  me  up- 
right;  then  shall  I  be  able  the  more  carefully  to  oversee  mv  homestead. 

2  Tr.  Th.  p.  551''  (§  13) ;  L.  S.  p.  46  ;  R.  C.  xv.  296  ;  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  47^ 

3  Mochoem.  §  18  :  special  cemeteries  for  unbaptized  children  may  be  found  in 
all  parts  of  Ireland  to  this  day. 

*  e.  g.  at  Inis  Murray,  cf.  Wakeman's  Inis  Murray,  p.  50 ;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  28 ; 
Martin,   p.  49. 

6  C.  B.  S.  p.  63.  «  Br.  i.  §  73. 

'  Ci.  S.  §  9  ;  Coem.  §  31  ;  Col.  E  §  23  ;  Maed.  §  26  sub  fin.  ;  Mochoem.  5§  16, 
32  ;  C.  S  c.  663  :  C.  B.  S.  pp.  63,  85.  Thus  Clonmacnois  was  the  burial  place 
of  the  kings  of  Connaught  and  of  the  Southern  Hy  Neill  (Meath),  Ci.  C.  §28; 
Ferns  for  Leinster,  Maed.  §  43;  Glendalough  for  kings  of  Ireland  and  Britain, 
Br.  Cocmgen,  c.  11.  where  it  is  said  that  Glendalough  was  one  of  the  four  best 
'  Romes  '  in  Ireland  ;  the  use  of  the  word  roni,  riiatn.  in  the  sensc  of  cemetery, 
comes,  as  this  passage  shows,  from  the  practice  of  bringing  earth  from  the  sacred 
city  for  the  consecration  of  burial  places  ;  Las.  §  24  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  86*^ ;  cf. 
L.  Land.  pp.  3,  80  (1,83). 

*  Fint.  §  20  note. 

'  Ab.  5  39  ;  Aed,  5  10  ;  Ber.  §  16  ;  Bo.  §  15  ;  Car.  §  23  ;  Com.  §5  14,  54  ; 
Cron.  §  6  ;  Fech.  §  13  ;  Las.  §§10,30;  Maed.  §§  26,  31  ;  Mochua,  §§  5,  6 ;  Mol. 
§  15  ;  Rua.  §§  19.  22  ;  Sam.  §  3 ;  C.  S.  c.  674  ;  c.  823  (§  10,  not  in  M\  c.  831 
(§9),  c.  919  (§§9,  II  ,  c.  927  l§8) ;  L  S.  pp.  28,  123;  V.  Tr.  p.  228;  Tr.  Th. 
pp.  412"  (§  19),  529"  (§  22),  s^^l-  («  58),  537''  (5,  80,  538'-  (§  89),  540»  (§  104) ; 
Capg.  ii.  354.  A  place  called  '  Vallis  Leprosorum ',  Lib.  Land.  p.  217  1227); 
cf.  Capg.  ii.  94.  St.  Carthach"s  hospital  for  lepers  (Car.  §59^  has  been  men- 
tioned  above.  There  are  stories  of  Christ  appcaring  in  the  form  of  a  Icper, 
Irish  Moling.  §38;  Brussels  MS.  2324,  p.  67  ;  Dublin  Franciscans,  A.  ix.  3. 
p.  30 ;  Renncs  MS.  f.  83'' ;  Capg.  i.  3O9  ;  ii.  569.      This  may  be  based  on  the 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxi 

more  than  once  alluded  to '.  We  have  scen  that  its  visit  c.  665  vvas 
ascribed  to  the  cruel  prayers  of  St.  Fechin  ^. 

On  schools  and  education  something  vvill  be  said  in  connexion 
vvith  the  monastic  system. 

B.  Of  ecclesiastical  matters,  as  might  be  expected,  we  receive 
many  interesting  iilustrations. 

The  centre  of  the  ecclesiastical  system  is  the  monastery '.  The 
abbot  is  often  the  head  not  of  a  single  monastery  but  of  a  group 
of  monasteries  all  owning  the  same  founder*  or  obeying  the  same 

legend  that  He  who  'had  no  form  nor  comeliness  '  was  actuallya  leper  ;  which 
may  also  accouiit  in  part  for  the  fact  that  lepers  were  evidently  regarded  as 
a  privileged  class.  Their  demands  were  as  unreasonable  as  those  of  the  poets, 
and  many  inslances  are  given  of  their  frowardness,  the  most  notable  being  the 
c.xtraordinary  story  given  in  the  notes  to  Fech.  §  13,  cf.  the  Irish  hfe,  R.  C.  xii. 
342  ;  C.  S.  c.  228  (§  7.  ;  Tr.  Th.  pp.  530  (§§  33-4),  533»  §  55 :,  537"  i;§  -^g) ; 
Rcnnes  MS.  f  77''.  Some  of  the  stories  are  very  repuljive,  but  there  may  be 
a  folk-tale  explanation  underlying  them,  like  the  stories  of  loathsome  animals 
restored  to  human  form  when  kissed  or  licked,  Macculloch,  Childhood,  pp. 
256-7  ;  cf.  Oss.  Soc.  V.  1 10-12  ;  and  on  the  prevalence  of  leprosy  in  Ireland,  ib. 
pp.  72  3  :  F.lder  Faiths,  i.  98.  Bathing  in  human  blood  was  supposed  to  be 
a  cure,  Keating,  ii.  322  ;  cf.  the  legend  of  the  healing  of  Constantine.  Z.  C.  P. 
iii.  227  ;  Fel."  p.  46  ;  LBr.  5",  and  elsewhere.  Syphilis  seems  also  to  have 
been  prevalent.  if  we  niay  judge  from  the  frequent  mention  of  the  class  called 
in  Irish  *  clarainech ',  lit.  '  board-faced ',  Fel.^  p,  222;  L,  H.^  i.  119;  V.  Tr. 
p.  8  iin  Welsh  '  gwyneb-clawr ',  C  B.  S.  p.  104.  a  parallel  miraclei;  in  Latin 
'  habens  tabulatam  faciem  ',  Car.  §  24  ;  Maed.  5  16  ;  '  oculorum  sedibus  nasique 
eminentia  carens,  totam  faciem  in  modum  tabule  complanatam  gerebat,'  C.  S. 
c.  783  (§  8") ;  '  sine  nare  et  sine  oculis  natus,'  C.  B.  S.  p.  122.     See  Addenda. 

'  In  Irish,  '  buide  connaill  '  (see  Bede  ii.  194-6  and  the  references  there 
givenl;  Dec.  §§23,  24;  Rua.  §  8  note  ;  Finnian  of  Clonard  is  said  to  have  sacri- 
ficed  himself  for  the  people,  '  ar  na  heplitis  uili  don  buidhi  chonnaill,'  i.  e.  that 
they  might  not  all  die  of  the  plague  (this  would  be  in  549 !  ;  cf.  the  curious  story 
of  Eimine  Ban  printed  in  Anecdota  from  Irish  MSS.  i.  40-5,  and  translated  by 
myself  in  Eriu,  iv,  39  ff.  In  Adamn.  ii.  46,  iii.  8,  the  plague  is  ascribed  to  the 
dircct  agency  of  demons.  In  the  Br.  MacCreiche.  cc.  9,  14,  are  some  very 
curious  passages  in  which  the  plague  appears  in  a  bodily  shape  as  a  monster 
(peist  or  cruiiit  which  is  destroyed  by  the  saint.  Possibly  some  of  the  many 
stories  of  the  destruction  of  monsters  are  to  be  explained  in  this  way  ;  see 
below,  p.  cxxxi.^c. 

*  Fech.  §  12  ;  the  same  story  in  L.  H.^  i.  25 

'  On  the  monastic  constitution  of  the  Irish  Church  see  Bede,  ii.  133-5  Tthe 
Maronite  system  seems  to  have  resembled  the  Irish,  Duchesne,  Origines,  p.  66], 
cf.  Wasserschleben,  Irische  Kanonensammlung.  pp.  xxxv  ff.  135-6;  Bury's 
Patrick.  pp.  375  If.  In  our  lives  also  (,cf.  Bede  u.  s.)  the  Pope  is  'abbas 
Romanus'.  Enda,  §  20  ;  C  S.  c.  242  §15  (altered  to  '  papa  '  in  M~i;  and  David 
and  Gildas  contend  for  the  '  abdaine  Bretan  ',  the  abbacy  ;i.e.  supreme  eccle- 
siastical  authority)  of  Britdin,  L.  S.  p,  75  ;  while  the  devil  is  the  abbot  of  Hell, 
L.  U.  33'  ad  calcem    =  R.  C.  iv.  252). 

*  When  we  hear  of  the  enormous  number  of  monks  under  a  single  abbot  we 
must  remember  that  they  were  not  necessarily  all  in  the  same  monastery  ;  cf. 
Mochoem.  §  9  ad  fin.,  of  Bangor  :  '  in  quo  el  in  celiis  sub  S.  Comgallo  tria  millia 
monachorum  fuisse  perhibentur'  ;  cf.  Br.  i.  §  71  note  ;  Mun.  ^  26  ^1500  monks'  ■ 
L.  S.  p.  79  13000")  The  larger  monasteries  were  continually  throwing  off  new 
swarms,  an  ecclesiastical '  uer  sacrum  ',  which  settled  at  a  greatcr  or  less  distance 


cxii  INTRODUCTION 

rulc'.  Theirinmates  forni  tlie  monastic  'familia'  or '  muintir',  and  the 
district  comprising  theni  forms  the  monastic  'parochia',  'fairche', 
or  diocese'.  But  the  monasteries  thus  grouped  were  not  always 
locally  adjacent,  they  might  be  in  diflferent  provinces '  or  even 
divided  by  the  sea*.  And  they  might  include  monasteries  of  both 
sexes'.  A  meeting  of  the  related  communities  is  called  'synodus 
monasteriorum ',  and  appears  to  exercise  criminal  jurisdiction,  in- 
cluding  the  powcr  of  life  and  death  ^     No  doubt  many  of  our  saints 

frora  the  parent  hive,  Bo.  §  lo  ;  Com.  5  13  and  note  ;  C.  S  c.  906  (§  6)  :  '  unde 
emissis  sanctorum  uelut  apum  examinibus,  multorum  genitor  exstitit  cenobio- 
rum  '  ;  cf.  ib.  c.  569  (of  Bangor) ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  189.  Another  way  in  vvhich 
monasteries  might  come  to  be  grouped  logether  would  be  by  the  lesser  com- 
munities  commending  tliemselves  to  the  more  powerful  ones.  Many  of  the 
stories  cited  above,  pp.  xci,  xcii,  probably  reflect  proce.sses  of  tliis  Ijind. 

'  Of  special  monastic  rules  founded  by  Irish  saints  our  lives  mention  Brendan's 
(Br.  i.  §  10,  partly  collectcd  from  other  rulcs,  partly  dictated  by  an  angel,  '  usque 
hodie  .  .  .  manet '  I  ;  Cocmgen's  .^Coem.  §  48,  '  sua  regula 'i  ;  I\Iolua's  i.Lug.  §47); 
Comgalls  ^Mun.  §  4  ad  fin.);  Moclita's  1  C.  S.  c.  905,  ^4).  Documents  profess- 
ing  to  be  such  rules  exist.  Some  of  them  are  in  metre  ;  most  of  them  are  rather 
coilections  of  moral  and  religious  aphorisms_  than  monastic  rules  properly  so 
called.  Several  have  been  printed,  Ailbe,  Kriu,  iii.  92  ;  Ciaran  ij  which\  ib. 
ii.  227  ;  Comgall,  ib.  i.  191  ;  Cormac,  ib.  ii.  62  ;  Patrick,  ib.  i.  216  ;  Anonymous, 
ib.  i.  192,  ii.  229  ;  Mochuda,  LBr.  261"  1  Irish  Ecclesiastical  Record,  Vol.  I)  ; 
Maelruain  of  Tallaght,  a  Culdee  rule,  prose  and  verse,  both  printed  in  Reeves, 
Culdees,  pp.  82  fi".  (Gir.  Camb.  mentions  Culdees.  Opp.  v.  80"!. 

'  Bede  u.  s.  C.  S.  c.  320  (|  4,  omitted  by  M)  ;  Br.  i.  §§2,  ii  notes  ;  Car.  5|  11, 
13,  16,  32  ;  Ci.  C.  §  28  ;  Enda,  §  27  ;  Moling,  §  6  ;  Lug.  §  25  ;  Mun.  §  16  ;  '  fairche  ' 
is  simply  '  parochia'  in  an  Irish  dress.  Within  the  '  fairche'  dues  werc  coliccted. 
In  the  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  72,  the  saint  says  :  '  O  Eirne  go  Sionainn  .  .  .  fairche  mo 
chiosa',  i.  e.  from  the  Erne  to  the  Shannon  is  the  '  parochia  '  of  my  tribute.  We 
have  a  rent  or  tribute  paid  in  becr,  Maed.  §  14  {V). 

^  Thus  Mochuda  at  Rahin  still  has  Kerry  as  his  '  parochia  ',  Car.  5  20 ;  Bangor 
has  cells  and  monasteries  '  non  solum  in  regione  Ultorum,  set  per  alias  Hybernie 
prouincias',  Com.  §  13;  e.  g.  in  South  Leinster,  Mun.  §5  14,  16;  wheie  the 
parallel  passages  in  thc  S'  tcxt  should  be  consulted.  llence  it  was  easj'  to  send 
a  sick  monk  to  another  mona.stery  of  the  order  for  change  of  air,  Com.  §  19  note. 
The  intrusion  of  a  saint  from  another  locality  was,  however,  apt  to  excite  tribal 
and  provincial  jealousies,  Car.  §58  ;  Dec.  §§  14,  18.      See  Addenda. 

*  The  most  salient  instance  is  that  of  the  Columbite  monasteries  in  Ireland  and 
Britain  ;  see  Rceves'  Adamnan,  AppendicesG,  H.  Molua  ^Dulua)  is  representcd 
as  saying  that  he  had  to  rule  communitics  in  bolh  islands,  C.  S.  c.  650.  Of  the 
later  cases  of  monastcries  of  diiferent  orders  held  by  the  same  abbot  I  have 
spoken  above,  p.  xcii. 

'  We  have  monasteries  of  womcn  undcr  the  supervision  of  the  bishop,  Aed 
§  16  ;  Ci.  S.  I  8  ;  Moling,  §  23  ;  Tig.  ^  18.  St.  Moninna,  '  episcopum  adiens, 
sub  eius  tutela  .  .  .  habitauit,  uirginibus  ct  uiduis  quam  pluribus  ibi  congrcpatis,' 
C.  S.  c.  169  (§  8).  AIso  undcr  saints  who  wcre  not  bishops,  Ab.  §  32  ;  C.  S. 
cc.  201-2  ,§  22!:,  898  '  §§  15,  16).  In  somc  of  thcse  cases  malc  and  fcmale  com- 
raunities  werc  close  together,  cf.  Magh  Rath,  p.  10.  The  proximity  sometimes 
caused  scandal,  C.  S.  c.  898,  and  serious  moral  dangcr,  Ci.  S.  ^  24.  Boetius 
(Buite)  wisely  placed  Ihe  two  classes  of  monasteries  far  apart  from  onc  another, 
Bo.  §  10. 

"  Col.  E.  §  22  note,  from  S  ;  it  is  notcworthy  that  in  M  thc  jurisdiction  is 
cxerciscd  by  the  secular  arm. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxiii 

were  also  bishops,  but  they  exercised  their  jurisdiction  as  abbots, 
iiot  as  bishops*. 

I  have  spoiten  above  of  the  monastic  enclosure.  Within  this  were 
thc  common  buildings,  the  church  or  churches,  and  oratories,  the 
rcfectory,  and,  a  little  apart  from  the  other  buildings,  the  schooP. 
Resides  these  there  were  the  separate  cells'.  We  find  a  special 
cell  for  older  monks',  for  ascetics',  for  a  single  anchorite  ^.  The 
'edes'  of  Coemgen's  monks  seem  to  have  been  movable';  they 
inust  therefore  have  been  either  of  wood  or  wattle.  In  many  cases 
the  cells  would  be  of  the  beehive  type.  We  seem  to  have  traces 
of  a  body  of  penitents  living  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  monks'. 

One  of  the  most  important  biiildings  was  the  guest  house  or 
hospice',  for  the  reception  of  strangers.  The  principle  that  Christ 
Himself  was  received  in  the  person  of  the  stranger  was  strongly 
insisted  on '".  On  this  account  the  best  site  vvas  chosen  for  the  guest- 
house,  and  special  lands  were  assigned  for  its  maintenance  ".  The 
national  character  for  hospitality  ",  and  the  dread  of  being  satirized 
for  niggardliness  ",  made  the  Irish  saintsextremely  touchy  as  to  their 
reputation  in  this  respect".  Cronan  had  to  move  his  monastery 
because  it  was  so  inaccessible  for  travellers''';  St.  Attracta  vovved  not 
to  settle  except  where  seven  roads  met  '^. 

'  It  looks  like  the  reflexion  of  a  later  time  when  we  find  bishops  jealous  of 
Mochuda's  monastic  settlement,  Car.  §  14.  The  grovvth  of  anything  like  dioceses 
was  much  later.  and  they  were  at  first  coincident  with  the  tribal  boundaries, 
cf.  e.  g.  Misc.  Celt.  Soc.  p.  141  note  ;  Three  Fragments,  p.  86  note.  We  have  a 
monastery  as  '  sedes  episcopi  ',  Tig.  §  12  ;  cf.  Reeves,  Culdees,  p.  29.  It  is  the 
mark  of  a  still  later  time  vvhen  we  find  allusions  to  the  mutual  jealousy  of  monks 
and  secular  clergy,  Car.  §  20  ad  fin.  ;  cf.  ib.  §  53.  Late  also  is  the  mention  of 
Canons  at  Ferns,  Maed.  5  58  M,  see  above,  p.  Ixxv,  note  4  ;  at  Ardmore,  Dec.  §  a6. 
Canons  are  mentioned.  C.  B.  S.  pp.  82-4,  168,  258. 

'  '  monasterio  aliquid  secretum  adiacet  monasteriolum  quod  scola  dicitur,' 
C.  S.  cc.  893-4. 

'  'per  totas  cellas,'  Cain.  §  22.  '  Ci.  C.  §  31. 

^  Mun.  I  6.  «  Mun.  §  28 ;  C.  S.  c.  178  (§  24). 

*  Coem.  §  25. 

'  C.  S.  c.  404  (§  22  ;  less  clear  in  M  ;  cf.  Adamn.  i.  21,  30,  ii.  39).  For  an 
admirable  description  of  a  monastery  of  the  Irish  pattern  see  Reeves,  Adamn, 
pp.  334  ff.  ;  cf.  Mun.  §  17  ;  Aur.  Leg,  p,  880  ;   R.  C.  v.  437  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  34. 

'  '  liospicium,'  Cain.  §  23;  Car.  §  15;  Cron.  §  17;  Mun.  §  12;  '  domus 
hospitum,'  Rua,  |  23  ;  cf.  Capg.  i.  211  ;  in  Ir.  '  tech  noiged',  house  of  guests. 
It  is  callcd  '  castelium  hospitum'.  C.  S.  c.  459  (^§  29,  at  Clonmacnois),  which 
probably  implies  that  it  had  a  '  caisel '  or  stone  enclosure  of  its  own. 

""  Br,  i,  §  32;  Cron.  §  19;  cf.  Lug.  §  51. 

"  Lug.  §  28  ;  in  the  parallel  passage,  S'  §  34,  these  lands  are  called  erlluch 
(Ir.  erdach,  airddach,  refection),  i.  e.  mensal  lands. 

"  Ab.  §  1.  13  See  above.  pp.  cii,  ciii. 

"  See  the  curious  stories,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  40  (§  122),  78  (§  150). 

'5  Cron.  §  17  ;  Car.  §  61. 

"  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  278'  (§  5)  ;  so  in  the  secular  law  the  houses  of  the  '  briuga 
cetach'  and  the  '  briuga  leitech  '  must  be  near  the  junction  of  three  roads,  Laws, 
V.  76,  78  ;  cf.  Ir.  Moling,  §  2  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  167. 

rLUHMER  h 


cxiv  INTRODUCTION 

Guests  were  met  in  procession  and  conducted  to  the  church ' ; 
their  feet  were  washed^  ;  they  were  escorted  on  their  way,  and  a 
guide  sent  with  them  when  they  departed'.  The  ordinary  fasts  were 
relaxed  in  honour  of  visitors*;  and  a  distinguished  guest  would  be 
asked  to  celebrate  ^. 

In  the  occupations  of  the  inmates  manual  labour  held  a  large  place, 
nor  was  the  abbot  himself  exempt  from  this '.  There  was  a  regular 
scheme  of  rotation '  for  the  performance  of  the  various  duties,  in- 
cluding  the  church  services*.  Then  there  was  study",  and  the 
transcription  of  manuscripts.  Many  of  the  saints  were  themselves 
noted  scribes^".  There  is  a  pretty  story  how  a  bird  dropped  a  feather 
to  supply  Molaisse  with  a  pen " ;  and  the  beautiful  account  of 
CoIumba"s  last  days  :  '  As  he  was  copying  the  Psalter,  he  came  to 
that  verse  where  it  is  written  :  "  They  who  seek  the  Lord  shall  want 
no  manner  of  thing  that  is  good  '^."  "  Here,"  he  said,  "  at  the  end  of 
the  page  I  must  stop ;  the  rest  let  Baithine  copy'1"'  CoIumba"s 
reputation  as  a  scribe  is  further  illustrated  by  the  story  that  it  was 
a  quarrel  about  a  copy  of  a  manuscript  which  occasioned  his  with- 
drawal  from  Ireland  ".  Monastic  scribes  or  scribes  attached  to  special 
saints  are  mentioned  '^  But  sometimes  a  monastery  had  no  scribe 
of  its  own,  and  had  to  borrow  one  from  another  community"*.    That 

'  Br.  i.  §  30  ;  Reeves,  Adamn.  p.  345.  The  foreseeing  the  arrival  of  guests 
before  they  come  is  one  of  the  most  frequent  miracles  ascribed  to  saints  ;  see 
below,  p.  clxx.  Women  were  apparently  received  in  the  hospitium  of  a  male 
monastery,  Mun.  §  12. 

'  Ba.  §  14  ;  Br.  i.  §  30  ;  Ci.  C.  §  23;  Com.  §  31  ;  Ita,  §  20.  Pre-eminence  in 
this  act  of  charity  is  promised  as  a  special  privilege  to  a  community,  '  buaid 
fosaici,*  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  7  i  on  osaic^  fosaic  =  obsequium,  see  Bede,  ii.  238), 

^  Ci.  S.  §  31  ;  '  ut  moris  est,*  ib.  note ;  Coem.  §  38  ad  fin. 

*  Mohng,  §  18  ;  Rua.  §  21  ;  Adamn.  i.  26  ;  cf.  Ci.  C.  §  31. 
'  Br.  i.  §  84  ;  Moclioem.  §  25. 

'  Aed,  §  33  and  note  ;  Br.  i.  §  61  ('  monachus  labore  manuum  suanim  nutritur 
et  uestitur');  Car.  §49  (baking")  ;  Col.  E.  §§  15,  16;  Com.  §5  16,  22;  Enda, 
§5;  F"int.  §§4,7;  Mochoem.  §26;  Moling,  §§  9,  25,  29  ;  Lug.  5  51  (cf.  S' §  621; 
Mun.  §§  17,  28;  C.  S.  c.  200  (§  2o"l,  c.  276  (§  38,  not  in  M),  c.  646  (§  3)  ;  C.  B.  S. 
pp.  34-5.  127  ;  Capg.  ii.  200.  How  severe  the  labour  often  was.  especially 
under  a  harsh  abbot,  is  shown  by  Car.  §  20;  Kint.  §  4,  and  the  pathetic  story 
in  Col.  E.  §  16  and  note  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  127. 

'  '  circuitus.'  Coem.  §  8  ;  Ir.  tirachell,  L.  S.  p.  85  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  77'' ;  cf.  '  in 
die  suo',  C.  S.  c.  272  (§  29).  This  rotation  included  the  boys  of  the  school, 
C.  S.  cc.  ira/a-l  ;  L.  S.  pp.  59,  85  ;  Three  Fragments,  p.  74. 

*  'unusquisque  sacerclotura  in  die  suo  orterfhat,'  Fint.  §  14  note. 

'  I  have  already  called  attention  lo  Samthann*s  wise  counsel  as  to  the 
union  of  study  and  devotion,  above,  pp.  lxx.\vii,  xciv. 

i"  Adamnan,  Ger.  §  15  ;  Colman  Ela,  C.  S.  c.  439  (§  42,  not  in  M)  ;  Daig, 
c.  894  i  §§  5.  61,  c.  900  i§  27)  ;  Baithine,  c.  878  (§  14) ;  Adamn.  i.  23 ;  Cianan, 
Fel."  p.  244  ;  Gildas,  C.  B.  S.  p.  66  ;  cf.  Book  of  Mulling,  p.  11. 

"  Las.  §  18.  '^  Ps.  xxxiii.  (xxxiv.)  11. 

"  Adamn.  ii.  23.  "  Reeves,  Adamn.  pp.  248-9. 

'*  Fel.^  pp.  90,  168,  302  ;  and  frequently  in  the  Annals. 

"  Ail.  t  33  ;  Cron.  §  9  ;  Las.  §  11.  Manuscripts  were  borrowed  as  wcll  as 
scribes,  Las.  §§  11,  18. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxv 

thc  task  of  teaching  this  art  was  not  an  easy  one  is  shown  by 
the  story  of  the  boy  whosc  handwriting  looked  hke  the  work  of 
a  bird's  claw'.  In  Brittany  we  find  a  secular  prince  renowned  as 
a  scribe'. 

Thcn  there  was  the  task  of  teaching  in  the  monastic  school  where 
this  existed.  The  most  celebrated  monastic  school  was  that  of 
F"innian  of  Clonard  ' ;  and,  as  we  have  seen,  chronology  was  strained 
to  brcaking  point  in  order  to  represent  all  the  chief  saints  of  Ireland 
as  his  pupils.  We  hear  of  schools  at  Bangor  under  Comgall*,  at 
Devenish  under  Molaisse",  at  Ros  Ailithir  under  Fachtna",  at  Kilmore 
under  Columba',  and  elsewhere*.  When  Ciaran  went  to  Clonard 
he  took  his  ovvn  cow  with  him  for  his  support ",  while  other  stories 
represent  the  scholars  as  taking  it  in  turn  to  beg  for  the  support  of 
the  school '".  A  wax  tablet  was  used  for  teaching  the  rudiments 
of  reading  and  writing",  the  Psalms  seem  to  have  been  the  earliest 
subject  of  instruction  '*,  and  seven  appears  to  have  been  regarded  as 
the  age  at  which  education  should  commence''.  Then  there  was 
tlie  daily  round  of  devotion  comprised  in  the  celebration  ■ '  of  the 

'  Com.  §  29.  '  R.  C.  V.  44t-5- 

'  Ci.  C.  §§  15-17  ;  Lug.  55  25-7  ;  Rua.  §  i  ;  C.  S.  c.  164  (5  5),  c.  200  (§5  19,  20, 
a  description  of  Finnian's  school  and  its  members),  c.  209  (§  34),  c.  446  (§  4). 
Women  appear  to  have  been  taught  in  it.  Ci.  C.  §  16. 

*  C.  S.  c.  227  (§  5).  "  C.  S.  c.  891  (§  i\  c.  894  (§  s). 
'  Mochoem.  §  4.  '  Mun.  §  5. 

*  C.  S.  c.  646  (§  3).  A  non-monastic  school  seems  mentioned  in  C.  B.  S. 
p.  258.  On  Schools  in  Ircland  see  M.  and  C.  ii.  76-7,  79-81,  92-3,  149  ;  Joyce, 
Social  History,  i.  408  ff. 

'  Ci.  C.  §  15  ;  a  similar  instance  C.  B.  S.  p.  258.  An  educational  endowment 
of  ten  cows  annually,  Ann.  Ult.  1169  a.  d. 

'"  C.  S.  cc.  446-7  (§  5)  ;  Three  Fragments,  p.  74.  In  the  life  of  Colman  mac 
Luachain  is  an  interesting  case  of  a  monastery  being  allowed  to  compound  for 
various  services  by  appropriating  one  of  its  subordinate  cells  as  a  school, 
Rennes  MS.  f.  89«. 

"  '  ceraculum,'  Maed.  §§  7,  39  (glossed  by  '  liber'  and  '  uolumen  '  in  V.  text"  ; 
one  with  bronze  corners,  'ceraculum  cum  capitibus  ereis,'  is  cited  as  specialJv 
sumptuous,  C.  S.  c.  405  (§  24,  not  in  M)  ;  cf.  Vies  de  St.  Malo,  p.  37  :  '  scripsit 
ei  elementa  in  tabula  cerea  '  ;  '  tabula  cerata,'  ib.  p.  132.  The  latter  is  exactly 
the  Irish  '  clar  ciartha  ',  L.  S.  p.  110  ;  on  such  a  tablet  was  probably  written 
the  alphabet  which  Comgall  had  made  for  ihe  youthful  Molua,  Lug.  §  16. 

•2  Cain.  §  35  note  ;  Ci.  C.  §§  4.16  ;  Maed.  §  39  ;  C.  S.  ce.  166  (§  2\  190  (§  2^, 
446  (§  4^,  916  (^§  3\  For  the  use  of  the  Psalter  in  ascetic  practices  see  Ab. 
§  32  ;  it  is  sung  aiitiphonally  on  a  joiiriiey,  Car.  §  9  ;  cf.  Bede,  ii.  137  ff. 

"  Dec.  §  5  ad  Bn. ;  L.  S.  p.  85  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  25-8.  183  ;  in  Br.  i.  §  4  the  age 
seems  to  be  five. 

'*  I  use  this  word  deliberately.  In  these  lives  the  Latin  words  celebrare, 
celebratio,  and  in  the  Irish  lives  the  Irish  words  celebraim,  celebrad.  if  used 
without  qualification,  refer  almost  wilhout  exception  to  the  canonical  hours, 
and  not,  as  in  later  usage,  to  mass  ;  Cain.  §  22  {o(  none,  where  R  misunder- 
Stands  it  of  mass)  ;  Com.  §  33  (cel.  horas)  ;  Maed.  f  36  ^tierce)  ;  Mochoem.  §  16 
(tierce  and  none)  :  Mun.  §  4  (tierce  and  sext)  ;  C.  S.  c.  180  (§  27,  mattinsi ;  ib. 
c.  910  (§  la,  nocturnas  cel.  laudes).     'Celebrare'  alone  of  mass  occurs  Ail. 

h  2 


cxvi  INTRODUCTION 

canonical  hoiirs  of  prayer'.  We  have  mention  of  the  reading  in 
refectory'',  of  the  rule  of  silence  and  use  of  sign-language',  of  the 
observance  of  the  anniversaries  of  days  notable  in  tlie  history  of 
the  community*.  Monks  were  sent  out  on  special  missions,  as  for 
instance  to  collect  funds  for  the  monastery^,  sometimes  in  com- 
panies",  sometimes  singly'.  On  the  return  from  such  a  mission  the 
monk  prostrated  himself  before  the  abbot,  and  gave  an  account  of 
his  doings*.  Absolute  obedience  was  the  rule';  if  a  monk  was 
rebuked,  however  unreasonably,  his  duty  was  to  prostrate  himself, 
and  remain  in  that  posture  until  bidden  to  rise".  Several  stories 
relate  how  the  attempt  to  carry  out  this  rule  under  humanly  im- 
possible  conditions  was  rewardcd  by  miraculous  interposition ". 
The  need  of  confession  was  strongly  insisted  on'-;  there  was  a 
traditional  saying  that  a  person  without  a  confessor  was  like  a  body 
without  a  head  '^ 
The  life  was  a  very  hard  one.    Apart  from  voluntary  asceticism", 

§  19  note,  and  perhaps  in  Mochoem.  §  15  (so  understood  by  tlie  Irish  Iranslator). 
We  have  *  celebrare  missam  '  Fint.  §  14  notc  1  R\  where  M  and  S  both  have 
'otTerre'.  which  is  the  usual  word.  The  regular  Irish  word  for  mass  is  *  oifrenn', 
l.iter  *  aifrenn  ',  from  Latin  '  offerendum  ' ;  cf.  *  fri  oifrcnd  7  ceilebrad  ',  Magh 
R.ath,  p.  10  ;  in  Welsh  '  offeren  '. 

'  Besides  the  references  given  in  the  last  note  we  find  '  uigiliae '  used  as 
equivalent  to  *  matutinae ',  C.  S.  c.  181  ;  complines,  ib.  c.  185  (§  32^;  tierce  is 
said  after  mass,  Mochoem.  §  16  ;  it  is  also  said  in  ttie  harvest  field,  Maed.  S  36 
(^cf.  Baumer,  Breviaire,  i.  227)  ;  the  canonical  liours  are  said  on  a  journey,  Mun. 
§  4  ;  or  when  fishing,  Acc.  Sen.  p.  82.  The  most  elaborate  references  to  them 
are  found  in  the  Brendan  story  at  four  points  of  the  N  B.  :  (i)  in  the  Paradise 
of  Birds  (Br.  i.  §  27,  vespers,  uigiliae  or  mattins,  tierce,  sext,  none'  ;  1  ii)  in  the 
monastery  of  the  '  Familia  '  of  Ailbe  (^Br.  i.  §  33,  vespers,  compline);  (iii)  in 
tiie  island  of  the  three  choirs  [Br.  i.  §  48,  sext.  none.  vespers  '  uigiliae  matuti* 
nales ') ;  (ivi  in  the  island  of  Paul  the  Hermit  (Br.  i.  §  76,  ticrce,  sext,  none). 
The  last  is  the  only  case  in  which  the  term  '  celebrare  '  is  used.  In  i^i)  and  (iii) 
the  psalms  used  at  the  diflerent  offices  are  given.  I  am  not  liturgiologist  enough 
to  say  whether  these  correspond  with  any  known  'cursus  psalmorum'.  I  have 
iiot  been  able  to  identify  it.  The  whole  description  is  of  course  highly  romantic. 
In  Br  ii.  $  21  we  have  'matutine'.  A  general  term  for  the  canonical  hours  is 
'  opus  Dei',  Br.  i.  §  27  ;  Maed.  §  36;  cf.  Baumer,  Brev.  i.  227  ;  also  •  horae  regu- 
lares',  C.  S.  c.  903.  Molua  prescribcs  the  division  of  the  day  into  three  parts,  the 
first  for  prayer,  the  second  for  study,  and  the  third  for  manual  labour,  Lug.  §  51. 
»  Br.  ii.  §  26.  =  Br.  i.  §§  30.  32-3  ;  C.  S.  c.  186. 

*  Co.  E.  §  29.  <■  Ger.  §  10  ;  cf.  Sam.  §  16.  «  Lug,  §  18. 

~  Coem.  §  43:  *  monachum  niisit,  secundum  morera  antiqui  temporis,  solum.' 
'  Car.  I  43. 

'  Cain.  §  21  (command  to  drown  his  child)  ;  Car.  5§  49-5'  ;  the  traditional 
example  of  prompt  obedience  was   to   leave   the   letter  o   half  written  when 
summoned,  Cain.  §  3  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  127.     This  is  cxpressly  laid  down  in  the 
Culdee  Rule  of  Kilros  (.Culross),  Holstenius,  Codex  Regularum  (,1759),  ii.  65. 
'"  Coem.  §  8  ;  Com.  §  13  note. 
"  Com.  §5  23,  24,  48;   Maed.  §  12;   Lug.  5  ig. 
'■  Lug.  §  30  :  cf.  ib.  §  38  ;  Maed.  §  20  ;  Ba.  §  14  :  Fint.  5  ai. 
"  Fcl.^   pp.  64,    180-2.      Penitentials,  '  h- ges    penitentiae,'   are  referred   to, 
Adamn.  i.  22  ;  ii.  39  ;  excommunication,  Mochoem.  §  17  ;  C.  S.  c.  874  (§  6). 
"  Car.  §  47  ;   Fint.  §§  4,  5,  19 ;  Mun.  §  6  ;  that  death  resulted  in  some  cases 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxvii 

provisions  often  failed ' ;  and  the  life,  hard  at  the  best,  was 
harder  under  a  harsh  and  unsympathctic  abbot  -.  The  abbot's 
authority  was  unhmited ;  even  to  ring  a  bell  for  service  without  his 
express  direction  is  regarded  as  a  serious  offence''.  The  appointment 
of  abbot  was  often  regulated  on  the  analogy  of  the  secular  tribe  or 
clan.  The  evidence  is  most  abundant  in  the  case  of  lona ',  but  we 
have  traces  of  the  same  thing  in  our  lives*.  And  as  in  the  secular 
tribe  the  successor  or  tanist  was  elected  in  the  lifetime  of  the  reigning 
chief,  so  it  was  in  the  monastery.  The  prior  was  not  unfrequently 
appointed  with  the  right  of  succeeding  to  the  abbacy,  and  called 
tanist-abbot*.  Of  this  also  we  havc  instances  in  our  lives'.  On  this 
officer,  who  appears  under  various  names*,  even  more  than  on  the 

from  these  austerities  is  not  unlikely,  Br.  i.  §77;  Cain.  §  29;  Col.  E.  §  6  ; 
Com.  5  la.  Some  thought  that  the  sufferings  vvhich  Comgall  endured  in  his 
last  days  were  a  punishment  for  the  rigour  of  his  nile,  Com.  §  56.  In  Mo!ua's 
monastcry  fasting  till  none  seems  to  have  been  the  rule,  C.  S.  c.  285  (§  63,  not 
in  M)  :  'quare  non  comedis  ?  quia  hora  nona  est ' ;  cf  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  127  : 
'ad  crepusculum.'  For  a  w.irning  against  excessive  asceticism  see  Ita,  §  10 
and  note;  cf.  British  Saints,  i.  319,  a  passage  very  contrary  to  ordinary 
mcdiaeval  sentimenL 

'  Co.  E.  §§  4,  9;  Com.  §  40  (a  beautiful  and  pathetic  story)  ;  Cron.  §  14  ; 
Fint.  §  7  ;  C.  S.  c.  834  (§  I9>. 

•  I  have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  difference  between  Munnu  and  Molua 
in  this  respect,  p.  l.xxxvi.  See  also  the  references  in  the  last  note  but  one,  and 
Adamn.  i.  29. 

'  Cain.  §  22  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  128 :  '  patris  licentiam  uel  ad  nature  requisita 
adquirunt.' 

*  See  the  pedigree  in  Reeves'  Adamnan,  p.  342.  AII  the  early  abbots  of 
lona  except  tvvo,  or  possibly  three,  are  of  the  race  of  Conall  Gulban. 

'  Car.  §  45  ;  in  V.  Tr.  p.  338  this  right  is  expressly  limited  by  the  condition 
that  there  shall  be  some  one  of  the  founder's  kin  who  is  vvorthy  of  the  office  ; 
Br.  Maedoc,  c.  72  ;  contrast  C.  S.  c.  676  :  '  ne  quis  cognatorum  eius  .  .  .  occa- 
sione  hereditatis  regimen  ecclesie  sue  sibi  usurparet,'  cf.  Bede,  ii.  262-3.  The 
development  of  the  hereditary  lay-abbot  or  '  erenagh  '  (Ir.  '  airchinnech')  lies 
outside  the  scope  of  the  present  introduction.  In  the  metrical  '  Naemsenchus ' 
In  the  books  of  Ballymote  and  Lecan,  the  saints  themselves  are  grouped 
according  to  their  families  ;  so  in  Rawl.  B.  484  fT.  84  ff. 

'  'Tanaise  abb,"  Ann.  UIt.896;  or  'the  abbofs  tanist',  tanaise  abbaid,  ib.  890 
{tanaisc  alone  in  this  sense,  Chron.  Scot.  p.  164).  The  corresponding  Latin 
phrase  is  '  secundus  abbas '  {iattaise  meaning  literally  '  second '),  and  this 
appears  in  Irish  as  secnab  ;  which,  however,  means  simply  prior,  and  does  not 
imply  the  right  of  succession  as  tanaise  does  ;  cf.  Sim.  Dun.  i.  22 :  '  monasterium 
secundus  ab  abbate  praepositi  iure  gubernabat '  ;  ib.  p.  119:  '  secundus  ab 
abbate,  maior  scilicet  prior  constituitur';  cf  Enda,  §  18.  I  cannot  agree  with 
Reeves  that  the  tanist-abbot  was  only  appointed  on  the  incapacity  of  the  abbot 
(Adamn.  p  364),  though  that  might  often  be  a  motive.  \Ve  find  a  prior  ap- 
pointed  in  the  abbot's  absence,  C.  B.  S.  p.  68  (cf.  Br.  i.  §  14),  or  to  take  charge 
of  a  subordinate  cell,  C.  B.  S.  p.  88. 

'  Bo.  §  29:  '  secundus  Boecii  abbas  ei  successit ' ;  Br.  i.  §  14  'prepositus, 
qui  postea  fuit  successor  suus' ;  Enda,  §  18. 

«  Prior,  Car.  §  51 ;  Ci.  C.  §  23  ;  Mochoem.  §  9  ;  Co.  E.  §  19  (  =  yconomus  S). 
Prepositus,  Ab.  §  49  ;  Ber.  §  7  ;  Br.  i.  §  14  ;  Car.  §|  45,  48  ;  Lug.  §  22  (  =  iconi- 
mus  S)  ;  yconimus,   Maed.  §§  12,   13;   Lug.  §  21  ;   Maed.  §  40  (=  dispensator 


cxviii  INTRODUCTION 

abbot,  depended  the  daily  lives  of  the  monks'.  He  seems  to  have 
assigned  them  their  various  tasks^,  and  to  have  exercised  his  au- 
thority  with  no  little  harshness.  Indeed  the  tyrannical  'oeconomus' 
is  a  standing  type  in  these  Hves'.  Anotherimportant  officer  was  the 
cellarer  or  cook,  whose  duty  it  was  to  provide  for  the  bodily  wants  of 
the  brethren,  the  guests*,  and  the  poor''. 

The  hospice  or  guest-house  had  itsown  special  officer" ;  and  there 
were  minor  functionaries',  and  various  craftsmen  and  artificers 
attached  to  the  monastery*. 

S  R) ;  dispensator,  j'Conomus,  Enda,  5  5  ;  equonimus  C.  S.  c.  192  (§  6  =  pre- 
positus,  R  =  secnab,  Irish  lifc.  In  C.  B.  S.  p.  190  the  economus  is  distinct 
from  the  prepositus).  In  a  female  monastery  we  have  priorissa,  Sam.  §§  12,15, 
and  dispensatrix,  ib.  §  2. 

'  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  the  Wurzburg  MS.  of  St.  Paul's  epistles  '  guber- 
rationes '  ( i  Cor.  xii.  28)  is  glossed  secndapid,  while  in  Gal.  iv.  i  this  word 
glosses  '  actores  '  {o\Kovdy.oi). 

'  e.  g.  Ber.  §  7  ;  Maed.  §  40;  and  many  other  of  the  references  in  the  last 
note  but  one.  Hence  he  is  called  'dispensator  operum',  Adamn.  i.  37,  He 
also  managed  the  stock  and  other  property  of  the  community,  Ab.  §  49  ;  Ber. 
§  7 ;  Lug.  §  22  ;  superintended  the  construction  of  new  buildings,  &c.,  Enda, 
§  5  ;  Maed.  §  48. 

3  Cain.  §  4  ;  Car.  §  51  ;  Maed.  §5  12-13  ;  C.  S.  c.  192  (§  6) ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  38. 
In  the  '  Aibgitir  Crabaid  ',  or  alphabet  of  ascetic  devotion,  one  of  the  things  to 
be  avoided  by  a  perfect  man  is  '  toirisem  fri  secnabaid ',  i.  e.  opposition  to  the 
prior,  which  seems  to  imply  that  the  temptation  to  it  was  great,  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  449. 
We  hear  of  an  actual  war  ('  bellum ')  at  Ferns  between  the  abbot  and  the 
'equonimus',  Ann.  Ult.  782. 

'  cellarius,  Co.  E.  §  4  ( =  cocus  S,  procurator  fratrum  R) ;  Rua.  §  14  (=  cocus 
S,  dispensator  R)  ;  so  Ail.  §  13.  (In  Rua.  §  10  minister  coquine  =  cocus  S, 
dispensator  cocus  R.)  cellarius,  Br.  i.  §  31  ;  Ci.  S.  §  30  ;  Cron.  §  19  ;  C.  S. 
c.  834  (§  I9\  c.  916  (§  3),  c.  920  (§  13)  ;  custos  cellarii,  Colg.  A.  S.  p.  610,  §  17 
(really  p.  520) ;  cocus,  Com.  §  34  ;  Fint.  §  7  ;  Maed.  §  22  V.  In  Coem.  §  8  we 
have  several  '  coqui '  under  a  '  magister  coquine  '.  In  Ci.  S.  §  10  the  Irish  lives 
wrongly  translate  '  prepositus  monasterii  '  bj'  cea/loirand  coic.  The  '  economus  ' 
and  '  cocus '  are  clearly  distinguished,  C.  B.  S.  pp.  38,  131. 

^  Br.  Ruadan,  c.  6  ;  Capg.  ii.  353. 

'  '  magister  hospitum,'  Car.  §  47  ;  Coem.  §  38  ;  Mun.  §§  21,  24  ;  '  elimosi- 
narius  et  magister  hospitum,'  Ci.  C.  §  23  ;  '  magister  hospitalis,'  Co.  E.  §  17 
(=  dispensalor  fratrum,  R;  uir  cui  cura  hospitum  et  pauperum  erat,  S) ; 
'  minister  hospitum,' Ail.  §  42;  '  mansorius,'  Ba.  §  14  (^^  ferligis,  in  Irish  life, 
lit.  man  of  housekcepiiig  or  hospitality,  a  rcgular  title  fur  this  officer  in  Irish 
monasteries  ;  also  '  airchindech  tige  oiged ',  i.  e.  chief  of  the  guest-house,  Chron. 
Scot.  p.  310).  In  a  fcmale  monastery  '  portaria  hospitalis',  C.  S.  c.  168,  who 
clearly  had  the  charge  of  relieving  the  poor.  In  the  Cain  Adamnain,  §  53.  the 
secnap,  coic,  and  fertigis  are  evidcntly  the  three  chief  monastic  officers.  It  will 
have  been  noticed  also  that  the  titlc  *  dispensator  '  is  variously  applied,  bcing 
used  synonymously  with  '  magistcr  hospitalis  ',  with  '  economus  ',  and  with 
•  cocus  '.  Probably  the  last  is  its  proper  meaning,  but  in  diflcrent  monasteries 
the  various  duties  may  have  been  diffcrently  distributed,  and  in  the  smallcr 
ones  a  single  otficer  would  have  to  discharge  many  functions.     See  Addcnda. 

''  custos  cemoterii,  Br.  i.  §  62  ;  decanus  monastcrii,  ib.  ;  custos  monasterii 
(who  rings  the  bell  for  service),  Cain.  §  22. 

'  molendinator,  Car.  §  44 ;  faber,  Coem.  §  14  ;  Com.  §  36  ;  Mun.  §  28  ; 
coriarius,  ib.  §§  23,43  ;  hortolanus,  Bo.  §§  16,  28;  Adamn.  i.  18;  N.andK.  p.  148  ; 
armentarius,  Ber.  §  8  ;  Fint.  §  9 ;  see  p.  xcviii,  note  a. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxix 

We  have  seen  that  the  tyrannical  oeconomus  is  a  typical  character 
in  these  lives.  Another  recurrent  type  is  the  conceited  and  tactless 
'conuersus',  who  is  too  scrupulous  to  eat  on  fast  days  the  food 
partaken  of  by  others',  or  who  by  ill-timed  criticism  and  curiosity 
prevents  the  consummation  of  a  miracle*.  The  ill-tempered  and 
testy  monk  was  also  probably  not  an  uncomnion  character';  and 
detraction  and  quarrels  were  not  unknown*. 

The  story  of  Ruadan  and  the  cursing  of  Tara  shows  how  the  right 
of  asylum  clainied  by  the  monasteries  might  bring  them  into  conflict 
with  the  secular  povver*. 

Next  to  its  monastic  constitution  *  asceticism  is  perhaps  the  most 
characteristic  mark  of  the  early  Irish  Church.  We  have  seen  how 
the  two  met  together  in  the  hard  discipline  of  the  cloister,  but  it 
meets  us  at  many  points  and  in  many  forms,  and  had  a  fierce  attrac- 
tion  for  the  passionate  Celtic  temperament.  Martj-rdom  in  the  literal 
sense,  red  martyrdom '',  to  use  the  native  phrase,  \ve  do  not  find  in 
the  history  of  early  Irish  converts,  for  reasons  vvhich  vvill  be  traced 
later,  but  all  the  more  eagerly  did  they  embrace  the  other  kinds*. 
The  worst  excesses  vve  do  not  find  recorded  in  these  lives.  Finnchua 
of  Bri  Gobann  is  said  to  have  swung  himself  for  seven  j-ears  on  iron 
hooks  like  an  Indian  Fakir',  and  there  are  various  stories  of  saints 
with  animals  devouring  their  flesh'".    What  we  do  chiefly  hear  of 

'  Br.  i.  §  94  ;  Ci .  S.  §  30 ;  Enda,  §  30  ( '  laicus, '  i.  e.  a  lay  brotherl ;  Las.  §  33 
{•  neophilus'; ;  Rua.  521  and  notes ;  cf.  Adamn.  i.  21  ^a  penitent; ;  C.  S.  c.  422 
(_§  12,  ihese  are  not  stated  to  have  been  'conuersae  '). 

*  Co.  E.  §  4  (this  ofiTender  is  not  called  'conuersus*,  but  he  was  *  nuper 
ueniens  et  imperitus  '  Sj  ;  Cron.  §  19  ;  Maed.  §  48  (_'  relaicus '  in  V  §  47,  see 
Glossary)  ;  Sani.  §  4  ('  nuper  de  seculo  conuersa  ')  ;  cf.  Car.  §  63.  On  the 
admission  of  new  members  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  128.  iVIonks  from  other  monasteries 
could  not  be  received  without  the  consent  of  their  own  abbot,  Adamn.  i.  6.  The 
noviciate  lasted  a  year,  Ber.  §  6. 

'  Br.  i.  §  100. 

'  Br.  i.  §  102  note  ;  Car.  §  44  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  132. 

*  Rua.  §§  15-18;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  pp.  49-56,  95-6,  140.  There  was  a  secular 
analogy  Ibr  this  right ;  '  ba  comairce  laime  derce  nach  bruiden,'  i.  e.  every 
Bruiden  lor  Hostel)  was  a  shelter  for  the  red  hand  (man-slayer),  R.  C.  xxi.  314  ; 
of  these  there  were  said  to  have  becn  si.x  in  Ireland,  like  the  six  cities  of  refuge, 
ib.  396-7. 

'  There  is  an  interesting  account  of  the  imporlance  of  Clonmacnois  as  a 
monastic  model  in  L.  S.  p.  118  ;  cf.  Ci.  C.  §  21  ;  Enda,  §  26.  For  the  importance 
of  Bangor  cf.  Keating,  i.  52. 

'  An  ancitnt  Irish  homily  distinguishes  three  kinds  of  martyrdom,  vvhite  or 
bloodless,  which  consists  in  abnegation,  fasting,  and  labour  ;  blue  martyrdom, 
which  consists  in  mortification  of  the  will,  penitence,  and  amendment  ;  and  red, 
or  literal  martyrdom,  Zeuss-Ebel,  G.  C.  pp.  1006-7,  or  Zimmer,  Glossae  Hib. 
p.  2l6. 

»  Cf.  L.  S.  p.  304. 

»  L.  S.  p.  88  ;  Mart.  Don.  Nov.  25  ;   Fel.=  p.  246. 

'"  L.  S.  p.  89  Finnchua) ;  Fel.-  p.  42  (^lta,  not  in  our  life  of  her) ;  ib.  44 
(Maignenn,  and  Fursa) ;  V.  Tr.  p.  242  i^Fiacc). 


cxx  INTRODUCTION 

is  prolonged  and  extraordinary  abstinence".  The  fasting  at  tlic 
foundation  of  a  new  ecclesiastical  settlement-  is  found  also  in  Bede^, 
where  it  is  due  to  the  ascetic  influence  of  the  Irish  Church  in  North 
Britain.  But  fasting  was  not  merely  a  form  of  religious  asceticism, 
it  was  a  regular  legal  mode  of  extorting  satisfaction  when  it  was 
refused,  the  sanction  being  the  dread  of  the  opposing  party  lest  the 
death  of  the  plaintiff  with  all  its  consequences  should  be  laid  at  his 
door*.  The  classical  instance  is  the  contest  of  Ruadan  with  King 
Diarmait'\  Here  each  side  fasted  against  the  other,  and  the  saints 
tricked  the  king  into  relaxing  his  fast".  But  there  are  other  instances 
recorded  in  our  lives'.  By  an  extension  of  this  idea  fasting  is 
regarded  as  a  means  of  putting  pressure  on  the  Deity*,  and  is  used, 
not  merely  to  obtain  a  divine  decision",  but  to  find  out  the  authors 
of  crimes"',  and,  more  extraordinary  still,  to  obtain  the  destruction 
of  superfluous  population",  or  the  death  of  a  saint  whose  influencc 

*  Ab.  §  22  (where  also  the  Irish  *  cross-vigiP  [crosfigil]  is  mcntioned,  on  which 
see  Bede,  ii.  269,  270  ;  cf.  R.C.  xii.  22)  ;  Com.  §  14;  Ita,  5§  5,  6,  10  ;  Br.  i.  |  14 
and  note  ;  Br.  ii.  §  4.  Sampson  of  Dol  is  said  to  have  eaten  only  three  *  obla- 
tiones '  (i.  e.  wafers  such  as  were  used  in  the  Eucharist)  during  Lent,  Capg. 
ii.  354  ;  Maedoc  to  have  abstained  altogether  from  food  and  drink  during  Lent 
'secundum  exemplum  Moysi  et  Helic,  ymmo  .  .  .  Filii  Dei ',  §  33.  This  passage 
is  interesting  as  bearing  on  the  threefold  Lent  of  the  Irish  (cf.  Bede,  ii.  197-8). 
These  three  Lents  are  definitely  appropriated  in  this  way,  Fel.^  P*  42  :  '  corgiis 
Eli  isin  gemrad  .  .  .  corgus  Isu  i  n-errach  .  .  .  corgus  Moysi  is  t-samrad,'  i.e.  the 
Lent  of  Elias  in  winter  (Advent),  the  Lent  of  Jesus  in  the  spring,  the  Lent  of 
Moses  in  the  summer  (after  Pentecost)  ;  cf.  *  in  tribus  quadragesirais  anni  ', 
Wasserschleben,  Irische  Kanonen,  p.  187.  But  thc  threefold  Lent  was  not 
exclusively  Irish,  see  Hampson,  Medii  Aeui  Kalendarium,  ii.  3,  49,  239,  259, 
324.  In  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  76,  that  saint  is  said  to  have  kept  eight  I-ents  in  the 
3'ear  against  tbe  eight  deadly  sins.  This  is  no  doubt  merely  the  writer"s  fancy, 
but  it  shows  what  the  Irish  ideal  was.  Unfortunately  tliis  asccticism  was  some- 
times  simulated.  St.  Guthlac  '  dicebat  se  intcr  Scottortim  populos  pseudo- 
anchoritas  diuersarum  religionum  simulatores  uidisse ',  Memorials  of  St.  G., 
p.  49  :  and  sometimes  provoked  a  rcaction  :  '  utinam  post  longa  ieiunia  sobrii 
fuerint,'^Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  172.  Animals  are  made  to  fast,  as  in  the  book  of 
Jonah,  Eriu,  i.  120. 

'  Ail.  §  29  ;  Ba.  §  12  ;  Dec.  §  22  ;  Mochoem.  5  14.  '  H.  E.  iii.  23. 

*  Cf.  Br.  i.  §  15  ;   'alioquin  hic  moriemur  fame  et  siti.* 
»  Cf.  Ann.  Ult.  816. 

'  Rua.  §  17  ;  a  similar  story  in  regard  to  Adamnan  and  Irgalach  son  of 
Conang  in  Three  Fragments,  p.  100. 

'  Com.  5§  45,  47  ;  Dec.  §  19  ;  Maed.  5  35  ;  cf.  C.  S.  c.  314  (5  26) :  '  si  ieiuna- 
ueris  septies,  non  ind»Ige"bi  ]tur  tibi  census  '  (Kin.  C.  §  19  note) ;  Chron.  Scot. 
pp.  274,  310  12;  Ann.  Clonm.  p.  196;  British  Saints,  i.  17-21.  Maedoc  and 
Colman  mac  Luachain  enjoin  their  monks  always  to  cnforce  their  dues  in  this 
way,  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  18;  Rennes  MS.  f.  87'';  cf.  Lyall,  p.  210.  The  same 
method  is  used  against  the  Tuatha  Dc  Danann,  Acc.  Scn.  p.  11. 

®  This  is  not  exclusively  Irish  ;  it  is  Jcwish,  v.  Schilrer,  Gcsch.  d.  jfld.  Volkes, 
ii.  412;  and  Indian,  Lyall,  pp.  20-1.  113.  That  it  was  deemed  dangerous  to 
ofTend  one  whose  asccticism  gave  him  special  influcnce  with  Heavcn  appears 
from  Magh  Rath.  p.  18. 

»  Enda,  §  19.  ">  Theft,  Co.  E.  §  28  ;  Murdcr,  Br.  Mochuda,  c.  3. 

"  Gcr.  5  12. 


CONTENTS  OF  TIIE  LIVES  c.xxi 

excited  jealoiisy '.  With  this  are  closely  connected  the  (to  our  ears) 
blasphemous  stories,  in  which  the  saints  are  representcd  as  extorting 
terms  from  the  Deity,  and  saying  what  they  will  or  will  not  accept 
at  His  hands^,  or  as  upbraiding  Ilim  because  He  does  not  conform 
to  all  their  wishes'. 

Another  ascetic  characteristic  of  our  saints  was  their  rigorous 
avoidance  of  the  other  se.x.  This,  according  to  a  wcll-known  docu- 
ment,  was  a  niark  of  the  second  but  not  of  the  first  order  of  Irish 
saints*.  This  view  is  expressed  in  the  recurrent  story  of  a  saint 
hearing  the  sound  of  a  cow  or  sheep  and  fleeing,  because  the 
presence  of  cattle  involved  the  presence  of  women".     But  this  again 

'  F^l.-  p.  204  ;  to  obtain  the  destruction  of  an  object  of  pagan  worship  is 
more  defensible,  ib.  p.  n8. 

*  Ail.  §37:  Enda,53i:  'ieiunium  non  soluam  donec  trespetitionesoptineam' ; 
Maed.  §  33;  V.  Tr.  pp.  na  ff.  ;  cf.  Com.  §  31  ;  Mun.  §  19;  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  300,  v.  36  ; 
L.  H.-  i.  6  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  44  ;  Br.  Bairre,  c.  7  ;  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  10.  Perhaps  the 
most  singular  instance  is  in  Br.  Ciaran  of  Saigir,  c.  30.  A  monk  of  Ciaran's 
had  committed  homicide  ;  '  go  ffiiair  se  a  anam  a  h-ifurn  ;  7  adubairt  go  m-beith 
se  fein  i  n-ionadh  an  mhanaigh  i  n-ifurn,  muna  saorthaoi  do  e  ;  7  do  saoradh,' 
i.  e.  aud  he  i^Ciaran)  obtained  his  soul  from  hell,  saying  that  he  would  take  the 
monk's  place  in  heil,  if  he  were  not  released  to  him  ;  aiiU  he  was  reUased.  In 
St.  Malo.  p.  117,  is  a  curious  story  of  an  attempt  to  compel  a  saint  to  help  by 
means  of  almsgiving. 

'  Moehoem.  §  24  (cf.  Capg.  ii.  571-2  forthe  boongranted) ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.i  18-19. 
This  is  quite  the  spirit  of  the  heathen,  who  whips  or  drowns  his  idol  if  it  dis- 
pleases  him  ;  and  the  images  of  the  saints  inherit  the  same  treatment,  Grimm, 
i.  20,  63,  ii.  767,  iv.  1282,  1288-9;  "^f  Hdt.  iv.  94,  184.  The  proces-verbal  of 
a  formal  deposition  of  a  patron  saint  is  given,  R.  C.  v.  137-8;  cf.  Aur.  Leg. 
p,  27.  '  In  Messina,  on  this  great  night  of  the  dying  year,  a  number  of  men — 
so  it  is  said — who  had  lost  their  money  at  the  Sicilian  game  of  sette  e  mezza, 
came  out  furious  from  one  of  the  big  cafes  just  as  the  Bambino  was  passing. 
Maddened  by  their  losses,  they  set  upon  the  Bambino.  They  insulted,  they 
spat  upon,  they  threw  down  and  trampled  over  the  Bambino.  These  men  were 
Messincse,  and  three  days  later,  in  less  than  a  minute,  Messina  was  blotted 
out,"  Mr.  R.  Hichens  in  Daily  Telegraph,  Jan.  12,  1909;  cf.  Lyall,  Asiatic 
Studies,  p.  81.  Conversely  the  Chinese  Government  decrees  rewards  and 
honours  to  deities  and  heroes  who  have  given  satisfaction,  ib.  pp.  136  ff. 

*  De  tribus  ordinibus  Sanctorum  Hiberniae,  C.  S.  cc.  161-4,  and  elsewhere. 
Of  the  first  order  it  is  said  :  '  mulierum  administrationem  et  consortia  non 
respuebant,  quia  super  petram  Christum  fundati  uentum  temptationis  non  time- 
bant.*  Of  the  second  :  '  mulierum  consortia  ac  administrationes  fugiebant,  atque 
a  monasteriis  suis  eas  excludebant.'  This  second  order  comprised  several  of  the 
saints  whose  lives  are  included  in  these  voUimes,  Enda,  Colman,  Comgall,  Aed, 
Ciaran,  Brendan,  Cainuech,  Coemgen,  Lasrian,  Lugaid  (Molua\  and  Bairre. 
Some  curious  and  not  very  edifying  stories  are  told  of  the  tests  to  which  the 
chastity  of  Irish  saints  was  successfully  exposed.  These  also  have  mythological 
afiinities.  I  have  found  no  trace  in  Ireland  of  the  abuse  which  appears  to  have 
existed  in  Brittany,  of  allowing  women  to  distribute  the  Eucharist,  R.  C. 
XV.  92-3. 

*  '  In  hoc  loco  non  ero  ;  ubi  enim  ouis,  ibi  mulier,  ubi  mulier,  ibi  peccatum, 
ubi  peccatum,  ibi  diabolus,  et  ubi  diabolus,  ibi  infernus,'  C.  S.  c.  273  (§  32,  not  in 
M  ;  cf.  Coem.  §31  :  'mulieresf^  Hac«  longe  eranta  suo  monasterio"),  c.  271  (§§27, 
28,  not  in  M)  ;  cc.  882-3  (5  "3)  ;  Mun.  §  10  ;  cf.  Ail.  §  30 ;  Lug.  §  28.  One  of 
the  precepts  of  the  school  of  Sinchell  was  '  mna  do  mbrimgabail ',  i.  e.  complete 


cxxii  INTRODUCTION 

is  not  merely  due  to  Christian  asceticism ;  and  the  cxclusion  of 
women  from  sacred  places'  has  many  heathen  analogies^  For  good 
or  for  evil  women  were  regarded  as  very  powerful  'medicine'  or 
magic.  A  woman's  milk  at  her  first  conception  cures  bhndness'; 
on  the  other  hand  St.  Ita  regards  women  as  specially  obnoxious  to 
the  attacks  of  demons'. 

Of  another  ascetic  trait  of  the  Irish  Church,  its  love  of  pilgrimage, 
I  have  spoken  elsewhere^  It  receives  many  illustrations  from  our 
lives''.  That  the  quest  of  Brendan  in  the  earlier  form  in  which  it 
appears  in  the  Vita,  as  a  search  for  a  place  of  retirement  amidst  the 
ocean  waves,  as  against  the  later  conception  in  the  Nauigatio  of 
a  voyage  to  discover  the  Earthly  Paradise  or  Land  of  Promise',  has 
an  historical  basis,  is  proved  not  merely  by  the  number  of  Irish 
anchorites  in  the  islands,  including  Iceland^  who  were  slaughtered 
or  expelled  by  the  Scandinavian  wikings",  but  also  by  the  case  of 
Cormac  ua  Liathain  recorded  by  Adamnan  :  '  qui  tribus  non  minus 
uicibus  eremum  in  oceano  laboriose  quesiuit,  nec  tamen  inuenit".' 

Pilgrimage  was  often  enjoined  as  a  penance".     In  all  cases  a  vow 

avoidance  of  women,  Hib.  Min.  p.  41.  Of  Maignenn  it  is  said  that  he  never 
looked  at  a  woman  ;  *  ar  ecla  in  diabail  comaidechta  do  fliaiccsin  d6,'  i.  e.  for 
fear  of  his  seeing  her  attendant  devil,  Silva  Gad.  i.  37  ;  cf.  Grimm,  ii.  875. 

'  L.  S.  pp.  72,  90  ;  Mart.  Don.  p.  400  ;  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  80-2,  134  ;  Capg. 
i.  217-18,  238,  443;  ii.  145  ;   they  were  e.xcluded  from  half  of  Lismore,  Car. 

§65- 

"  Bertrand,  Religion,  p.  90;  MaccuUoch,  Childhood,  pp.  317-18;  the  pro- 
hibition  e,xtcnded  to  fcmale  animals,  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  216;  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  80, 
Conversely  no  male  could  live  in  the  Isle  of  Eriskay,  Goodnch-Freer,  Outer 
Isles,  p.  242. 

^  Mochoem.  §  4  ;  Aur.  Leg.  p.  96.  This  specific  is  effective  even  in  the 
infernal  regions,  Luzel,  Legendes  chretiennes  de  la  Basse-Bretague,  i.  192-3. 

*  Ila,  §  24.  Women  crossing  a  river  prevent  the  salmon  from  coming  up  it, 
Marlin,  Western  Isles,  p.  7.  On  women  and  fountains  something  will  be  said 
laler,  p.  clii. 

^  Bede,  ii.  170-I. 

^  Ab.  §  19 ;  Coem.  §  12  ;  Maed.  §  1 1  V  ;  Lug.  §  37  ;  Mun.  §  25  ;  C.  S.  c.  284 
(§  62) ;  c.  459  C§  28 ) ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  5. 

'  Z.  C.  P.  v.  125,  130-2. 

'  The  '  papar'  of  the  Prologue  to  Landnama  B(5k,  with  their  '  ba;kr  Irskar 
bjollur  ok  baglar',  i.  e.  Irish  booUs,  bells,  and  bachalls.  Ailbe  wished  to  retire 
'  ad  insulam  Tile  in  occiano  positam  ',  Ail.  §  41. 

'  e.  g.  the  massacrc  of  Donnan  of  Egg  and  his  fifty  companions,  whose  names 
are  enumerated  LL.  359";  cf.  Mart.  Don.  Apr.  17. 

'"  Adamn.  i.  6;  ii.  42;  iii.  17,  and  Rcevcs'  notes.  Somc  of  the  incidents  are 
strikingly  like  those  of  the  Brcndan  story  ;  cf.  June  21  in  Mart.  Don..  Fel.,  and 
0'Gorman  ;  L.  S.  p.  28.  His  pedigree  is  in  LL.  351'';  LBr.  19":  BB.  221''; 
Rawl.  B.  503  f.  51';  I.aud  610  f.  40".  For  sojourn  of  saints  in  thc  westcrn 
islands  of  Ireland  ci".  C.  S.  c.  167  (§  3).  On  ascetics  in  islands  cf.  Baumer, 
Histoirc  du  Briviaire,  i.  107  notes.  In  this  they  had  been  anticipatcd  by  thcir 
healhen  predecessors,  Rhys,  A.  L.  p.  369 ;  Oss.  Soc.  v.  65-6  note  ;  Bertrand, 
Kcligion.  p.  261. 

"  Br.  i.  §  82 ;  Cocm.  §  38  ;   Dec.  §  6  ;  Mochoem.  §  18  sub  fin. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxxiii 

of  pilgrimage  reqiiired  thc  consent  of  the  ecclesiastical  superior', 
who  often  wisely  diseouraged  indiscreet  zeal  in  this  respect^  The 
lives  also  iilustrate  that  home-sickness  so  characteristic  in  all  ages 
of  the  Irish  exile,  which  it  sonietimes  required  a  miracle  to  cure'. 

Another  point  to  which  attention  may  be  cailed  is  the  strong 
sabbatarianism,  to  use  a  modern  word,  of  the  Irish  saints*.  Of  the 
Paschal  question  sometliing  has  been  already  said ';  of  the  related 
question  of  the  tonsure  we  do  not  hear^.  The  tendency  of  the  later 
iives  to  emphasize  the  connexion  with  Rome  has  also  been  alluded 
to'.  This  is  combined  with  an  almost  complete  ignorance  of  any 
individual  Popes.  Celestine  is  known  because  he  was  the  Pope  who 
sent  Palladius  and  was  said  to  have  sent  Patrick*.  And  Gregory 
the  Great  occurs  fairly  frequently'.     A  non-existent  Clement  occurs 

'  Ber.  §  25;  Fint.  §  12. 

*  Coem.  ll  12,  21,  29,  30:  Com.  §  13  ;  C.  S.  cc.  423-4  (5  13,  not  in  M)  ;  cf. 
Samthann's  fine  saying  :  '  Si  citra  mare  Deus  inueniri  non  posset,  utique  nos 
transfretaremus,'  §  24;  cf.  also  L.  S.  p.  ai  ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  48;  Bede,  ii.  281-a. 
On  the  missionary  labours  of  these  Irish  exiles  see  Bede,  ii,  170-1  ;  Reeves, 
Eccl.  Ant.  pp.  134-5.  Peregyiutts  became  practically  a  technical  word  on  the 
Contincnt  to  denote  an  Irish  missionary,  Wasserschleben,  Irische  Kanonen, 
p.  xlvi,  cf.  ib.  xli ;  on  the  Irish  monasteries  on  the  Continent,  ib   xlviii. 

3  Com.  §§  4,  42;  Fint.  §  13;  cf.  the  pathetic  story  in  Adamn.  i.  48  ;  and  the 
saying  in  Oided  mac  n-Uisnig  :  '  is  ferr  duthchas  ina  gach  ni  .  .  .  uair  ni  aibinn 
do  neoch  maithes  da  med,  muna  fhaice  a  duthchas,'  i.e.  better  is  one's  native 
land  than  aught  else,  for  there  is  no  pleasure  to  any  one  in  prosperity,  however 
great,  unless  he  see  his  native  land,  Ir.  T.  II.  ii.  126.  One  of  the  precepts  of  the 
school  of  Sinchell  was :  '  ailithre  cen  tintud,'  i.  e.  pilgrimage  without  returning, 
Hib.  Min.  p.  41. 

*  Aed,  §  30;  Co.  E.  §  12  ;  C.  S.  c.  282  (§  51,  not  in  M") :  V.  Tr.  pp.  iga,  aaa  ; 
Silva  Gad.  i.  53  ;  Br.  Berach,  c.  25.  There  is  a  special  tract  in  Irish  called  Cain 
Doninaig,  or  tiie  Law  of  Sunday,  cf.  Eriu,  ii.  189  ff.  For  the  mill  which  would 
not  grind  on  Sunday,  see  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  216. 

°  Above,  p.  xlvi,  note. 

*  That  the  so-called  Celtic  tonsure  was  possibly  druidic  in  origin  see  below, 
p.  clxvi,  note  i ;  V.  Tr.  p.  509.  It  is  interesting  to  find  the  coronal  tonsure  prac- 
tised  by  Mochuda  at  Lismore,  Rennes  MS.  f.  78'-  :  '  ro  tescta  a  foilt,  7  ro  berta 
corne  ina  cendaib  la  Mochutu  \i.  e.  iheir  hairwas  cut,  and  crowns  shaved  on  their 
heads  by  Mochuda")  ;  for  we  have  already  seen  reason  to  regard  him  as  a  partisan 
of  the  Roman  Easter  ;  cf  Enda,  §  6.  An  additional  name  seems  sometimes  to 
have  been  given  at  the  conferring  of  the  tonsure,  Ba.  §  4.  The  passage,  Maed. 
§  1 1  V,  which  seems  to  speak  of  the  tonsuring  of  a  secular  cbief,  I  do  not  wholly 
understand. 

'  Ail.  §  22  and  note ;  cf.  Decl.  |  15.  In  the  Br.  Irish  life  of  Maedoc,  c.  14, 
a  visit  to  Rome  is  interpolated,  where  our  lives  (§  1 1,  M  and  V)  take  him  stra^ght 
to  Britain.  Saints  are  carried  miraculously  to  visit  Rome,  Ber.  §  25  ;  Maed. 
§  38;  Tr.  Th.  p.  539"  (§  91)  ;  Fel.*  p.  40.  Cadoe  professes  lo  have  visited 
Rome  seven  timcs,  C.  B.  S.  p.  56.  A  proposed  pilgrimage  to  Rorae  is  divinely 
forbidden,  C.  S.  c.  194  (§  9),  and  Finnian  is  promised  that  an  altar  to  be  built 
by  him  shall  rank  with  Rome  as  a  place  of  pilgrimage.  Glendalough  had  the  same 
privilege,  Br.  Coemg.  c.  i;  cf.  Br.  Berach.  c.  30;  Lib.  Land.  pp.  3-4(1-2), 80  (831. 

'  Ail.  §  2  note  ;  Ci.  S.  §§  3,  7  ;  Decl.  §§  9,  18. 

»  Ab.  §§  17,  20;  Ba.  §§  7,  10,  13;  Co.  E.  §  15;  Lug.  §§  40,  47,  54;  C.  S. 
e- 794  (§  8),  c.  831  (§  II). 


cxxlv  INTRODUCTION 

in  the  S  life  of  Ailbe  ' ;  a  John,  vvho  might  be  John  V  or  John  VI  in 
the  S  life  of  Flannan'^. 

More  interesting  and  more  actual  are  the  relations  with  Britain. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  one  channcl  through  which  the  know- 
ledge  of  Christianity  came  to  Ireland  was  Britain ' ;  and  we  have 
already  noticed  one  way  in  which  thc  knowledge  was  spread,  namely 
by  Christian  captives  carried  ofl"  in  Irish  raids  on  Britain.  But  there 
were  also  many  voluntary  sojourners  of  British  origin  in  Ireland. 
We  hear  of  Britons,  including  a  British  bishop,  at  Clonfert*;  of 
British  monks  at  Rahen  °,  Lynally*,  Taghmon',  Clonard*,  Ferns', 
Tallaght'";  of  a  British  priest  in  Hare  Island  in  Lough  Ree",  of 
British  'peregrini'  at  Tulach  Bennain'^  Several  of  these  stories 
show  that  this  British  element  was  sometimes  a  source  of  trouble; 
and  something  may  be  allowed  for  national  prejudice  and  jealousy  ". 
Many  of  the  saints  in  the  Irish  Calendar,  with  St.  Patrick  at  their 
head,  are  said  to  have  been  of  British  origin  "  ;  and  many  British 
saints  are  said  to  have  studied  and  resided  in  Ireland  ;  Cadoc  under 
Mochuda  at  Lismore  ",  Gildas"',  Carantoc  ",  Cybi",  Petroc'',  Samp- 
son^".  There  were  relations  of  confraternity  between  Llancarvan 
and  Clonard  ;  and  Llancarvan  had  property  on  the  Liffey". 

More  important  from  our  point  of  view  are  the  relations  of  Irish 
saints  with  different  parts  of  Britain.     Of  Cornwall  unfortunately 

•  Ail,  §§  13-15  notes ;  perhaps  a  remiiiiscence  of  Clement  of  Rome;  cf. 
C.  B.  S.  p.  352  note. 

2  C.  S.  c.  651  ;  cf.  the  ignorance  of  the  Frankish  kings  shown  in  Breton  lives 
of  saints,  R.  C.  xi.  20. 

^  Another  being  Western  Gaul ;  see  Zimmer's  very  interesting  essays  in 
Sitzungsb.  d.  preuss.  Akad.  1909. 

'  Br.  i.  §  91.  This  is  not  surprising  considering  Brendan's  own  connexion 
with  Brilain.  According  to  the  Irish  sources  Brendan's  sojourn  in  Britain  was 
undertaken  as  a  penance  after  his  seven  years'  voyage  ;  but  according  to  the 
lives  of  St.  Malo  he  was  abbot  of  Llancarvan  before  the  famous  quest,  which 
started  from  thence,  Deux  Vies  inedites,  pp.  37,  46,  132,  139.  A  British  bishop 
named  Gabrin  is  mentioned  as  residing  at  Gael  in  Fir  Rois  (in  Oriel),  L.  S. 
p.  139  ;  cf.  Mart.  Don.  June  24. 

5  Car.  §  45.  '  Co.  E.  §  14.  '  Mun.  5  28. 

8  C.  -S.  c.  195  (§  II).  »  C.  S.  c.  438  (§  40,  not  in  M). 

'"  Fel.''  p.  226  ;  cf.  Lib.  Land.  p.  18  (i6),  an  unnamed  monastery. 

"  Ci.  C.  §  25  and  note.  '^  C.  S.  c.  229  (^§  9). 

'^  Cf.  the  words  addrcssed  by  two  British  suppliants  to  Brigit :  *  infirmos 
gencris  tui  sanas,  nos  autem  quasi  aducnas  ncgligis,'  Tr.  Th.  p.  529''  (§  25). 

'*  e.  g.  Sanctan,  L.  H.^  i.  129  ;  Mochta,  C.  S.  c.  903  ;  cf.  Mart.  Don.  pp.  2,  46, 
200,  204.  342,  346,  for  a  family  of  British  saints  in  Ireland. 

"■  C.  B.  S.  pp.  35  6.  ■«  ib.  p.  59. 

"  ib.  pp.  97-8,  100;  his  name  in  Ireland  is  Cernach,  and  his  Acts  are  said  to 
havc  had  a  wide  circulation  Ihere. 

'*  ib.  pp.  184  6.  "  Capg.  ii.  317. 

^"  ib.  353  ;  Lib.  Land.  p.  17  (15).  Sampbon,  tliough  best  known  as  Bishop  of 
Dol  in  Brittany,  belonged  by  birth  and  education  to  Greater  Britain. 

2'  C.  B.  S.  pp.  78-9. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxxv 

we  liear  but  little;  Cairnech  is  said  to  have  been  a  Cornish  Briton', 
the  qucstion  of  the  identity  of  the  Cornish  Pieran  with  one  of  the 
Irish  Ciarans  has  already  been  discussed',  and  we  have  seen  that 
Petroc  visited  Ireland.  But  considering  the  close  connexion  of  Corn- 
wall  and  Soiith  Wales',  and  the  constant  intercourse  between  Ireland 
and  South  VVales,  we  are  justified  in  assuming  that  intercourse  with 
Cornwall  was  not  wanting,  and  this  is  confirmed  by  the  group  of 
Irish  dedications  which  we  meet  with  in  Cornwall*.  In  South 
Wales  the  two  chief  centres  of  attraction  were  Llancarvan  under 
St.  Cadoc,  and  Menevia'  under  St.  David.  Finnian  of  Clonard,  the 
principal  teacher  of  the  Irish  saints,  was  himself  a  pupil  of  Llan- 
carvanS  as  was  Cainnech'.  Maedoc  was  a  pupil  of  St.  David^s', 
as  were  Modomnoc '  and  Scuithin  '" ;  while  we  hear  of  Finnian  of 
Clonard  ",  Declan  ''',  Bairre'',  and  Senan  "  as  visitors  there.  We  have 
seen  that  the  sojourn  of  Boetius  or  Buite  in  '  Italy'  probably  refers 
to  a  sojourn  in  the  neighbourhood  of  St.  David's'^  St.  David  himself 
is  said  to  have  been  baptized  and  fostered  by  Ailbe '". 

'  '  do  Bretnalb  Corn  do,'   Fel.  p.  132;   i.e.  he  was  of  Ihe  Cornish  Britons. 
This  may  be  an  inference  from  his  name,  Cairnech  =  Coirnech,  i.  e.  Cornish. 
'  Above,  pp.  H,  lii.  '  C.  B.  S.  pp.  9,  23,  64.  66-7,  129,  183. 

♦  See  the  map  of  Irish  dedications  in  Cornwall  in  British  Saints,  i.  80 ;  cf 
ib.  30  ff.  Note  also  that  it  was  in  Cornwall  that  the  three  Irish  ascetics  came 
to  land  in  Alfred's  reign,  Chron.  Sa.x.  a.  D.  8gi. 

'  Cell  Muine,  in  Irish.  For  an  Irish  hermit  in  S.  Wales  cf  C.  B.  S.  pp.  35, 
261  ;  e.xi!e  *  inter  Brittones',  as  a  penance,  Adamn.  i.  22. 

*  C.  S.  cc.  191-5  (where  Cadoc  is  called  Cathmael) ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  36,  39,  44, 
85,  88. 

'  Cain.  §5  3-5  ;  here  Cadoc  is  called  Docus  (cf.  note  16  below). 

"  Maed.  §5  11-19,  32  ;  Lug.  §  38  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  124, 130-1,  133.  In  the  Felire, 
Mar.  23,  is  another  Maedoc  who  is  called  '  mind  n-Alban',  i.e.  the  diadem  of 
Alba. 

'  C.  B.  S.  pp.  133-4.  '"  it>.  p.  131- 

"'  C.  S.  c.  191  (§  4).  '2  Dec.  §  15. 

"  Ba.  §  9  note  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  132.  '<  L.  S.  p.  62. 

"  Above,  p.  XXXV.  It  should  be  noted  that  with  the  exception  of  Cainnech 
and  Boetius  all  the  saints  connected  with  South  Wales  are  saints  of  southern 
Ireland. 

'*  Ail.  §  19 ;  Colg.  A.  S.  p.  426'*  (§§  5.  6"):  '  ab  Helueo  Momonenslum  episcopo*; 
'  ab  Belue  Meueuiensium  episcopo.'  C.  B.  S.  p.  I2t  (^!)  In  the  lives  of  Ailbe  the 
incident  takes  place  in  Brittany,  in  the  lives  of  David  in  Britain.  The  lives  ot 
David  also  take  Patrick  to  South  Wales.  in  oider  tiiat  he  may  prophesy  of,  and 
make  way  for.  David,  ib.  pp.  1 18-19.  ^'  the  second  order  of  Irish  saints  it  is 
said  :  '  Hii  ritum  celebrandi  missam  acceperunt  a  sanctis  uiris  de  Britannia, 
scilicet  a  sancto  Dauid,  et  sancto  Gilda,  et  a  sancto  Doco,'  C.  S.  c.  162.  In  the 
lives  printed  in  these  volumes  Gildas  occurs  only  Br.  i.  §§  83-5.  I  do  not 
therefore  discuss  his  obscure  personality.  The  idenlification  of  Auerech,  ib.  §  86 
(Ailech,  M,  S^  ,  is  very  uncertain.  It  has  been  identified  with  Aletum  iu  Brittany 
(Lanigan,  Moran)  and  Alyth  in  Perthshire  (  Reeves)  ;  but  it  is  conclusive  against 
both  that  S*  and  R  distinctly  call  it  an  island.  It  may  be  one  of  the  western 
islands  of  Scotland,  where  Brendan  has  left  manj'  traces  on  the  local  nomen- 
clature,  Forbes,  Calendars,  pp.  286-7.  But  it  may  be  one  of  the  Holmes  in  the 
Severn  estuary  ;  v.  Index  Locorum,  s.  v.  Auerech. 


cxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

The  saints  of  the  north  of  Ireland  tended  to  gravitate  towards 
Whitern,  or  Rosnat,  as  it  is  called  in  Irish  sources';  for  instance 
Enda^  Tigernach ',  Eogan  of  Ardstraw*,  and  Finnian  of  Movilla^ 
Further  north  there  was  a  constant  intercourse  vvith  lona  and  its 
dependent  monasteries ",  while  the  nuinerous  dedications  to  Irish 
saints  in  Scotland',  especially  in  the  Western  Islands,  show  that  the 
sea  was  no  barrier  to  them. 

Of  direct  intercourse  between  Ireland  and  the  lesser  Britain  or 
Brittany  we  do  not  hear  very  much*. 

It  remains  to  notice  a  few  liturgical  matters ;  though,  as  already 
stated,  I  malve  no  pretence  to  pose  as  a  liturgiologist. 

The  Eucharist  is  constantly  mentioned " ;  a  devout  layman  receives 
it  on  days  of  special  observance '" ;  Comgall's  monks  wished  to 
administer  the  sacrament  daily  to  him  during  tbe  days  preceding 
his  death ",  implying  that  daily  reception  was  not  the  rule  under 
ordinary  circumstances.  The  sacrament  was  not  only  reserved,  but 
carried  on  the  person  "  in  a  vessel  called  '  Chrismale'''.  The  chalice 
was  mixed  ",  and  the  water  for  this  purpose  is  consecrated  '^    The 

'  Also  Futerna,  LH.'  i.  22  ;  and  Magnum  Monasterium. 

*  Enda,  §§  6,  7,  20.  '  Tig.  §  4  ;  C.  S.  c.  915  (§  i). 

'  C.  S.  c.  915  (§  I).  s  Capg.  i.  445. 

"  Aed,  §  36;  Br.  i.  §  87  ;  Cain.  §5  20,  21,  22,  cf.  C.  S.  c.  387  (§  52,  not  in  M) ; 
Ci.  C.  §§  31,  33  ;  Com.  §§  22,  31  ;  Fint.  §  2t  ;  Ila,  §  24  ;  Mun.  §  7  ;  Rua.  §  29  ; 
Sam.  §  23. 

^  See  above,  pp.  xxiv,  xxxi,  xxxiii,  xxxvi  f.,  xliii,  xlix,  Iv,  Ivii  f.,  Ixv,  Ixx. 
Ixxv,  Ixxviii,  Ixxxi,  ixxxiv,  Ixxxviii,  for  instances.  The  use  of  Scotia,  &c.  ,inthe 
modern  sense  of  Scotland,  is  a  mark  of  latcness,  Ber.  §  14  ;  C.  S.  cc.  644  ff.  ; 
C.  B.  S.  p  56  The  life  of  Flannan.  worthless  in  most  other  respects,  is  interesting 
as  recording  the  influence  of  Molua  of  Kiilaloe  '  apud  Orcades  et  usque  ad  insulas 
Gallorum  ',  i.  e.  the  Insi  Gall  (Isles  of  the  [Scandinavian]  Strangers)  or  Hebrides  ; 
and  the  colonies  of  monks  sent  thither  by  Flannan  and  his  father,  C.  S.  cc.  646, 
656,  676. 

^  C.  B.  S.  pp.  i8g,  igo. 

'  sacriiicium  ofterre,  accipere,  Mochoem.  |§  16,  18 ;  sac.  sanctum,  Col.  E. 
§  18  ;  Fint.  §  20  ;  sac.  sacrum,  Col.  E.  §  23  ;  Lug.  §  52 ;  sac.  diuinum,  Com.  §  57  ; 
Cron.  §  29  ;  sac.  dominicum,  Fint.  §  22  ;  Lug.  §  52  ;  sac.  laudis,  Mochoem.  §  25  ; 
communio  dominica,  Com.  §57  ;  Ita,  §  20;  com.  corporis  et  sanguinis  Christi, 
Lug.  §  52;  corpus  et  sanguis  Christi,  Com.  §  sg  ;  oblatio  corporis  et  sanguinis 
Christi,  Mol.  §g;  corpus  Domini,  Br.  i.  §72;  immolare  agnum  immaculatum, 
Br.  i.  §  49.  When  administered  to  the  dying  it  is  called  diuinum  uiaticum, 
Fint.  §  20,  Mun.  §  29  ;  salutis  uiaticum,  Br.  i.  §  72  [cf.  ib.  §  73,  '  tanquam  sui 
itineris  fidus  ductor') ;  eternum  uiaticum,  Ba.  5  '5 :  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  62. 

'"  '  sollemnibus  diebus,'  Co.  E.  §  23  ;  in  modern  phrase,  on  days  of  obligation. 

"  Com.  §57.  "^  Lug.  §52  and  note. 

"  Com.  §  22  ;  Mochoem  §  18  ;  cf.  C.S.  c.  286.  Ducangc  gives  other  examples 
from  Irish  sources,  s.  v.  Probably  it  was  regardcd  as  wliat  the  Irish  called 
a  '  path-protcction ',  i.  e.  a  sort  of  charm  ensuring  safety  on  a  journey,  on 
which  sce  below,  p,  clxxix.  "  Tig.  §  6. 

"  Of  Molings  watercourse  it  is  said,  'unda  de  eo  consecrata  est  in  obla- 
tionem  corporis  et  sanguinis  Christi,'  Mol.  §  g  ;  the  •  aqua  consecrata  '  of  Lug. 
f  23  is  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  mass,  but  might  refer  to  the  cnnsccra- 
tion   of  the  font  on  Easter  Eve  ;  and  the  candle  may  be  the  Paschal  candle. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxxvii 

words  of  administration  are  given  ' ;  and  niass  vestments  are  men- 
tioned'.  The  office  for  the  dead  is  called  'psalmos  canere".  The 
names  of  departed  saints  were  entered  in  the  missal  for  com- 
memoration  at  the  time  of  mass*.  A  priest  must  not  celebrate  in  the 
presence  of  a  bishop  except  vvith  his  e.xpress  permission  '.  We  hear 
of  altar  vessels  of  glass  °.  VVe  have  seen  that  the  second  order  of 
saints  were  said  to  havc  received  their  '  ritus  celebrandi  missam '  from 
Britain'.  And  the  remembrance  of  a  non-Roman  (probably  Gallican) 
form  of  mass  seems  involved  in  the  statement  that  Ailbe  sent  disciples 
to  Romc  to  bring  back  a  new  '  ordo  celebrandi ' '.  The  ritual  of 
Kildare  seems  to  have  been  so  markedly  non-Roman  in  character, 
that  to  account  for  it  the  special  legend  vvas  invented  that  it  had  been 
obtained  from  the  submarine  city  of  Plea  ^. 

Salt  was  used  in  baptism '" ;  brackish  vvater  was  not  to  be  used  ". 
Confirmation  followed  immediately  on  baptism  ^^ 

The  cult  of  relics  was  in  fuU  force  "  with  its  attendant  evils  of  relic- 

Senan  had  a  special  fount.iin  from  which  water  for  mass.  '  usce  oifrind,'  was 
brought,  L.  S.  p.  65 ;  fire,  water,  and  salt  are  enumerated  as  necessary  for  mass, 
C.  B.  S.  p.  199. 

'   Br.  i.  I  49.  ^  missalia  indumenta,  Ita,  §  20.  '  Fint.  §  20. 

*  '  nomen  magistri  tui  Kerani  ante  nomen  magistri  nostri  precedet  nobiscura 
in  libro  offerendi  [in  Canone  R] '  C.  S.  c.  460  (§  29). 

'  Ail.  §  19  note  (=  C.  S.  c.  245)  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  120. 

'  Ail.  §  17  ;  Br.  i.  1 32  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  94  ;  Br.  Bairre,  c.  lo.  Glass  chalices  have 
been  found  in  the  catacombs,  Archaeology  and  Authority,  p.  414.  A  legend  of 
a  glass  altar  in  Keating,  iii.  106  ;  infra,  p.  cxU  note  3.  Squan  patens  are 
mentioned,  V.  Tr.  p.  313. 

'  Above,  p.  cxxv,  note  16.  Brendan,  on  celebrating  mass  in  Gildas'  monastery, 
finds  that  themissal  provided  forhim  is  'Grecis  conscriptum  literis  ',  Br.  i.  §  84  ; 
S^  says  that  it  was  '  grece  scriptum ',  ib.  note.  The  former  is  possible ;  cf. 
Reeves,  Adamn.  pp.  xiv,  xx  B.,  for  specimens  of  Latin  written  in  Greek  letters. 
For  the  converse  practice  of  writing  Greek  in  Latin  letters  there  was  only  too 
much  reason  in  the  general  ignorance  of  Greek  ;  cf.  e.  g.  Muratori,  Liturgia 
Romana.  i.  540-1. 

'  Ail.  §  37  note ;  cf.  C.  S.  c.  655.  We  hear  of  a  'missa  Patricii ',  V.  Tr. 
p.  322.  On  the  struggle  between  the  Roman  and  Gallican  rites  in  Brittany 
v.  K.  C.  xi.  3. 

'  L.  H.-  i.  113  ;  Fel.'  p.  64  ;  Brigit  had  wished  to  obtain  the  Roman  ordo,  but 
was  prevented  each  time  by  a  miracle.  But,  according  to  Ultan's  Life  of  Brigit, 
§  91  (,Tr.  Th.  p.  s^g**)  she  did  ultimately  obtain  it,  though  on  the  first  occasion 
her  messengers  falsified  the  copy.  This  '  falsified  '  copy  probably  represents 
the  pre-Roman  '  use '  of  Kildare. 

">  Decl.  §31.  11  Bo.  52. 

"  C.  S.  c.  165  ;  we  seem  to  have  baptism  by  aspersion,  Rennes  MS.  f.  76"  : 
'  copan  usci  tucad  tar  cend  an  meic,'  i.  e.  a  cup  of  water  was  poured  over  the 
head  of  the  boy.  Trine  immersion  is  mentioned.  C.  B.  S.  pp.  27,  122.  There 
is  a  curious  instance  of  baptism  of  an  unborn  child,  V.  Tr.  p.  327.  A  new  settle- 
ment  was  also  consecrated  with  holy  water  and  salt,  R.C.  v.  443. 

"  Cf.  Ab.  §  50  :  '  plus  contristati  sunt  quod  corpus  eius  a  se  ablatum  est,  quam 
quod  ipse  de  hac  uita  migraret."  So  a  community  tries  to  retain  a  visitor  of 
saintly  reputation,  '  ar  nir  ail  doib  a  thaissi  do  brid  do  uaitnib,'  i.  e.  because  they 
were  unwilling  that  he  should  take  his  relics  away  from  them,  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  35  ; 
cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  75 ;  '  In  Afghanistan  certain  villagers  .  .  .  arranged  to  strangle 


cxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

mongering  '  and  'pious'  thefts'.  It  is  rare  to  find  a  protest  like  that 
of  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois  against  this  abuse'.  We  also  hear  of 
translation  of  relics*  ;  and  they  were  carried  on  the  person  as  a 
defence  against  enemies^  But  besides  the  bodily  remains  of  saints 
various  articles  connected  with  them  were  treasured  as  relics  of  great 
potency,  bells  and  bachalls'',  boolcs',  articles  of  clothing',  a  stone 
pillow',  tools  and  utensils'",  &c.  Such  relics  were  constantly  carried 
about  on  the  circuits  niade  for  the  collection  of  the  dues  payable  to 
the  monastery,  and  served  as  title-deeds  to  justify  the  exactions  ",  and 

a  saint  who  abode  among  them,  in  order  to  secure  his  tomb  within  their  lands,' 
Lyail,  Asiatic  Studies,  p.  22. 

'  Mochoem.  §  33  ;  Liig.  §  49  ;  cf.  the  extraordinary  stories  of  relics  exacted 
trom  a  living  saint,  Cain.  §  6;  Fel.^  pp.  70,  156  ;  cf.  Rennes  MS,  f.  80'' :  '  ata 
ordu  Colmain  isin  ulaid  a  n-dorus  an  tigi  n-abad,  7  biid  timthirecht  angel  ann 
cach  aidchi  luoin.'  i.e.  there  is  a  thumb  of  Colman  in  the  monument  at  the  door 
of  the  abbofs  house,  and  there  is  wont  to  be  attendance  of  angels  there  every 
Monday  night. 

^  '  corpus  sanctissimum  furari,'  Ab.  §  49  ;  cf.  Hdt.  i.  67-8. 

^  Ci,  S.  §  32  ;  L.  S.  p.  132  ;  see  above,  p.  1. 

'  Co.  E.  §  37  ;  Com.  §  58  ;  C.  S.  c.  355  (§  4^) :  '  ne  essent  [reliquie]  inter 
peccatores,'  perhaps  to  remove  them  out  of  the  reach  of  the  Scandinavian 
marauders,  which  was  a  frcquent  cause  of  the  translation  of  relics  in  all  countries 
exposed  to  thcir  ravages.  Here.andAed  §30note,  the  saint  objected.  Translation 
is  also  discouraged,  C.  S.  cc.  676,  678  ;  Capg.  ii.  542,  606.  It  was  justified  by  tlie 
example  of  Joseph's  bones  being  carried  out  of  Egypt  :  '  ut  daret  cxemplum 
mutandi  reliquias  in  temptationibus  et  transmigrationibus,'  Irische  Kanonen, 
p,  56  ;  cf.  ib,  205-6,  See  on  the  whole  subject  Bede,  ii.  157-8  ;  Saxon 
Chronicle,  ii.  192  ;  Life  and  Times  of  Alfred,  p.  144  ;  Saintyves,  pp.  30-51.  In 
regard  to  Irelandsee  Zimmer,  Celtic  Church  (E.  T."),  pp.  120  fT.  ;  Stokes,  V.  Tr. 
pp.  cxciii  f.  Fiachna,  king  of  Dal  n-Araide,  is  said  to  have  bceii  a  great  pro- 
moterofthe  cult,  Com.  §52.     For  the  enshrining  of  relics  cf.  Ann.  Ult.  799,800. 

*  C.  S.  c.  197  (§  14) ;  probably  as  a  '  path-protection  ',  v.  s.,  or  as  a  tarnkappe. 
Much  of  the  cult  paid  to  relics  is  of  this  fetichistic  character, 

'■  On  these  two  classes  of  relics  see  below,  pp.  clxxiv  fV. 

'  Cain.  §  41  note  ;  Cron.  §  26  ;  Dec.  §  26  ;  Enda,  ^  19  ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  31  ;  L.  S. 
p.  121  ;  cf.  the  famous  '  Cathach  '  of  Columba,  Reeves,  Adamn.  pp.  249  f., 
319  ff. ;  cf.  R.  C.  xxiii.  404. 

'  Aed,  §  16  ;  Cain.  5  32  ;  Ci.  C.  §  29  ('quasi  diadema  sanctuni,'  v.  Glossary'  ; 
Enda,  §  ig;  Silva  Gad.  i.  21  ;  C,  S.  cc.  176,  184. 

'  Ci.  C.  5  32. 

"^^  Co.  E.  §  17  :  Fech.  §  12  ;  C.  S.  cc.  176,  184  (these  relics  repulse  an  invading 
foe) ;  R,  C.  ix.  20,  xii.  346  ;  V,  Tr,  p,  86, 

''  '  ad  exactionem  tributorum  monasterii,'  Ci,  S,  §  4  ;  in  Br,  Maedoc.  f.  211", 
c.  72,  the  saint  is  represented  as  saying  ;  '  fagbaim  an  m-bachaiU  .  .  .  d'  fagail 
mo  chiosa,'  i.  e.  I  bequeath  the  bachall  for  the  exaction  of  my  tribute.  This 
is  the  meaning  nf  the  phrase  which  occurs  frequently  in  Anii  Ult.,  '  commotatio 
martirum  nr  reliquiarum,'  e.  g.  733,  742,  775,  784,  792,  793  (cf.  note  4  above)  ; 
see  also  810,  817.  These  circuits  were  called  '  cuairt ',  wliich  i.ftcn  comes  to 
inean  the  dues  collectcd  on  such  a  circuit,  or  even  dues  absululely,  without 
refcrence  to  any  circuit  whatever.  Here  again  the  hcalhen  druid  and  poet  pre- 
ceded  the  Christian  saint  ;  see  below,  pp.  clxv  fT.  Fiac,  afterwards  Hishop  of 
Sletty,  was  pupil  of"  Dublhach,  chicf  poet  of  Ircland  ;  'dochoidside  tbr  cuairt  i 
Connactaib  .  .  .  is  ancl  tanic  Fiac  7  a  chuairt  leis,'  i.  e.  Fiac  went  011  circuit  in 
Connaught  ;  .  .  .  at  that  moment  he  returned  and  his  ducs  with  him,  V.  Tr. 
p.  402.     A  circuit  without  mention  of  relics,  C,  B.  S.  p.  194, 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  LIVES  cxxix 

potent  forces  to  repel  injustice  '.  Another  use  to  vvhich  these  relics 
were  constantly  put  was  that  of  taking  solemn  oaths  upon  them  ".  To 
violate  an  engagement  thus  sworn  to  was  an  outraging'  of  the  saint 
and  his  relics,  and  was  sure  to  bring  down  condign  vengeance  on  the 
ofiender.  It  was  customary  to  appoint  certain  families  as  hereditary 
guardians  or  stewards*  of  these  relics.  In  course  of  time  these 
famiUes  came  to  regard  such  objects  as  their  absolute  property ;  and 
in  this  way  niany  of  them  have  from  time  to  time  come  into  the 
market,  and  found  their  way  into  private  and  public  collections  ^ 


PART  V.     HEATHEN    FOLK-LORE   AND   MYTHO- 
LOGY   IN    THE    LIVES    OF   CELTIC    SAINTS 

Over  the  north  doorway  of  the  cathedral  of  Cloyne  is  a  stone 
bearing  some  rude  sculptures  vvhich  are  believed  to  represent 
heathen  symbols  of  life.  The  same  thing  is  said  to  be  observable  on 
the  tower  of  the  church  of  Saint  Clement  at  Rowdill  in  the  Harris ". 
This  is  a  type  and  an  embodiment  in  stone  of  a  process  which  may 
be  noted  wherever  vve  can  trace  to  any  extent  the  history  of  the 
introduction  of  Christianity  among  heathen  peoples;  the  incorporation, 
namely,  into  the  structure  of  the  newer  creed  of  fragments  of 
materials  — 'stones  not  of  this  building  ' — taken  from  the  old.  Nor  is 
the  process  confined  to  Christianity.  Aboriginal  tribes  in  India  or 
Africa  which  have  nominally  adopted  Brahmanism  or  Mohammedan- 
ism  retain  their  primitive  fetichism  under  a  thin  veneer  of  the 
superior  religion,  and  their  humble  deities  are  represented  as 
subordinate  manifestations  of  some  higlier  God'.  So  the  earlier 
faiths  and  customs  of  the  Peruvian  tribes  survived  under  the  sun- 
worship  of  the  Incas '.     Nay,  we  shall  see  reason  to  believe  that  in 

'  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  68  :  '  is  iatt  so  na  secht  minna  batar  'n-a  n-armaib  cathaigthe 
ag  Maedog  i  n-agaid  ecora  slechta  Aedha  Finn,'  i.  e.  these  were  the  seven  relics 
which  were  Maedoc's  arms  of  battle  against  the  injustice  of  the  race  of  Aed 
Finn. 

'  'ad  coniurationes  principum,'  Ci.  S.  §  4.  Hence  the  verb  'minnaim'  from 
'  minn ',  a  reHc,  comes  to  mean  simply  to  tai<e  an  oath. 

^  '  sarugud,'  which  becomes  quite  a  technical  expression  ;  see  above,  p.  cv  ; 
and  Zimmer,  Sitzungsb.  d.  preuss.  Akad.  1909,  pp.  72  ff. 

*  '  maeir.' 

'  See  Miss  Stokes,  Early  Christian  Art,  pp.  59-62,  96-101  ;  Christian  Inscrip- 
tions,  ii.  91-2,  103,  107,  109,  iia,  114,  116  ;  Book  of  Hulling,  p.  2. 

'  Goodrich-Freer,  Outer  Isles,  p.  384 ;  cf.  Fel.^  186  (a  heathen  stone  placed 
in  the  church  of  Clogher) ;  Grimm,  i.  108-9,  '"?  P-  xxxw 

■"  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  chap.  v;  A  Lang,  Custom  and  Myth,  pp.  215-16, 
264. 

»  Lang,  Myth  and  Ritual,  i.  76  [74]. 


cxxx  INTRODUCTION 

Celtic  heathenism  itself,  druidism,  its  most  persistent  element,  was  a 
survival  from  an  older  pre-Aryan  system.  But  this  tendency,  observ- 
able  almost  everywhere,  is  specially  noticeable  in  the  history  of  Irish 
Christianity.  Nowhere  was  there  less  conflict,  as  far  as  we  can 
judge,  between  the  old  and  the  new.  The  Irish  Church  in  Ireland 
has  no  martyrs '.  What  Harnack  says  of  Asia  Minor  might  be  applied, 
without  the  alteration  of  a  single  word,  to  Ireland.  '  Heathenism 
was  absorbed  without  any  violent  conflict  -.  It  disappears,  in 
order  to  reappear,  proportionately  strong,  in  the  Church.  Nowhere 
else  did  the  conquest  and  "  uprooting  "  of  heathenism  cause  so  little 
difficulty.  It  was,  in  fact,  not  uprooted,  only  modified ".  It  is 
possible  that  in  Ireland  this  result  may  have  been  partly  due  to  the 
clan  system.  Where  the  chief  was  converted,  the  clan  in  most  cases 
would  follow  ;  and  conversion  in  masses  involves,  almost  necessarily, 
the  retention  of  a  large  measure  of  heathenism.  Even  in  the  case  of 
individual  conversions,  it  would  often  be  some  single  point  in  the  new 
doctrine  which  first  brought  conviction*,  and  it  would  only  be 
gradually,  if  at  all,  that  the  rest  of  the  man's  mental  furniture  would 
adjust  itself  to  the  new  element.  A  Jew  who  in  the  early  days  of 
Christianity  became  convinced  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the 
Messiah  of  Hebrew  propliecy,  did  not  realize  at  once,  perhaps  in  this 
life  never  fully  realized,  all  that  such  a  conviction  implied  in  the  way 
of  surrender  of  Jewish  customs  and  prejudices. 

The  same  thing  appears  in  the  attitude  of  the  clergy  towards  the 
native  secular  literature.  Nowhere  did  the  Church  show  greater 
tolerance.  To  the  clergy  we  largely  owe  the  preser\'ation  of  what 
we  still  possess  of  that  literature.  The  two  principal  MSS.,  the  Book 
of  the  Dun  Covv  and  the  Book  of  Leinster,  both  owe  their  existence 
to  clerical  influences.  The  former  was  written  by  a  scribe  of  Clon- 
macnois  in  the  first  half  of  the  eleventh  century",  and  the  special 
recension  of  the  principal  secular  tales  contained  in  it  is  probably  due 
to  Flann,  the  Lector  of  the  School  of  Monasterboice '.  In  the  writing 
and  compilation  of  the    latter,  which    belongs  to  the  middle  of  the 

•  'unde  et  omnes  sancti  terrae  istius  confessores  sunt,  et  nullus  martyr. 
Quod  in  alio  regno  Christiano  difficile  erit  inuenire,'  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  174  ; 
cf.  ib.  179.  The  present  Dean  of  St.  Patrick's  informed  me  tliat  when  recently 
subjects  were  being  selected  for  a  stained-glass  window  to  be  erected  in  tlie 
cathedral,  they  had  to  go  abroad  to  find  an  Irish  saint  (Kihan)  to  represent 
the  ndble  army  of  martyrs  ;  cf.  Dec.  §  3  :  '  poterant  ibi  esse  sine  persecucione.' 

'  Apart  from  the  contests  betwecn  saints  and  druids,  of  which  something  will 
be  said  later,  we  liear  singularly  few  dctails  of  any  opposition  to  Christianity. 
See,  however,  Dccl.  §  25  ;  C.  S.  c.  226,  §  4. 

'  Mission  u.  Ausbreitung  (1903),  p.  462. 

•  Harnack,  u.  s.,  p.  63. 

•  Maclmuire  mac  Ccileachaic,  v.  L.  U.  Introduction. 

°  Sec  Zimmer's  Kssay  already  alluded  to  abovc,  p.  xci,  esp.  pp.  678  fT. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     cxxxi 

tvvclfth  ccntury,  two  higli  ecclesiastics  were  concerned'.  I  have 
already  cxpressed  niy  opinion  as  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  legend 
of  the  long  search  by  the  poets  of  Ireland  for  a  complete  copy  of  the 
famous  epic  story  of  thc  Cattle  Raid  of  Cooley.  But  it  is  interesting 
hcrc  to  note  an  alternative  account  of  the  way  in  which  a  complete 
vcrsion  of  the  tale  was  obtaincd,  which  the  writer  of  the  legend 
gives  with  cvident  sympathy :  '  Some,  however,  assert  that  it  was  to 
Senchan  that  the  story  was  related  [by  Fergus],  after  fasting  on  the 
saints  of  the  race  of  Fergus.  Anci  itwoiild  noi  be  siirprising  ifit  were 
so' '.  It  seemed  quite  natural  to  the  writer  that  pressure  should  be 
hrought  to  bear  on  the  saints  of  Fergus'  family,  to  get  them  to  obtain 
the  necessary  information  from  their  great  ancestor,  who,  as  one  of 
the  chief  actors  in  the  story,  could  naturally  furnish  a  fuU  account 
of  it. 

Later  dogmas  obliged  the  Irish  ecclesiastic  to  consign  the  great 
heroes  of  the  Ulster  cycle  to  perdition',  though  Conchobar  was 
saved  by  his  supposed  sympathj*  with  our  Lord  at  the  time  of  the 
Crucifixion*,  and  an  attempt  was  made  to  turn  Cuchulainn  into  an 
unconscious  prophet  of  Christ^.  But  as  a  rule  this  side  of  the 
question  is  conveniently  ignored. 

Even  more  friendly  appear  the  relations  of  the  clergy  to  the  second 
or  Fenian  cycle  of  Irish  tales.  The  longest  production  of  this  cycle, 
the  Dialogue  of  the  Ancient  Men ',  owes  its  name  to  the  fact  that  it  is 
set  in  the  framework  of  a  dialogue  between  Patrickand  Cailte,  one  of 
the  few  survivors  of  Finn's  companions.  Patrick  rescues  Caike"s 
relatjves  and  Finn  himself  trom  the  pains  of  hell ' ;  and  is  constantly 
made  to  express  delight  at  Cailte's  tales,  and  to  request  that  they  may 
be  written  down'.  Even  after  a  very  risky  narrative,  Patrick's  only 
comment  is,  'That's  a  complicated  story^'      Equally  marked  was 

'  See  Atkinson"s  Introduction,  pp.  7-8  ;  Todd,  Gaedil  and  Gaill,  pp.  ix  ff. 

'  LL.  245'' ;  printed  in  Zimmer,  u.  s.,  pp.  433  ff. ;  Windisch,  T.  B.  C.,  pp.  liii  ff. 
This  alternative  version  resembles  that  given  in  the  late  tale,  'Imthecht  na 
Tromdaime,'  Oss.  Soc.  v.  124  ff.  But  whereas  in  LL.  Senchan  fasts  on  the 
saints  of  Fergus'  seed,  in  the  later  version  the  saints  of  Ireland  generally  fast 
on  the  Deity  to  force  Him  to  allovv  Fergus  to  appear. 

^  Zimmer.  K.  B.  i.  248  ff.  ;  Sitzungsber.  der  preuss.  Akad.  xlix,  iioo  ff. 

*  See  above,  p.  xxix.  note  4  ;  Oitte,  p.  8. 

'  LL.  123"  ;  Cormac's  Glossary,  p.  31  :  'et  alii  dicunt  co  ro  chret  Cuchulainn 
o  sin,'  i.  e.  and  some  say  that  Cuchulaiiin  believed  from  that  time  forward. 

'  Accallam  na  Senorach,  printed  by  CGrady  in  Silva  Gadelica,  and  by  Stokes 
in  voi.  iv  of  Irische  Texte. 

'  ed.  Stokes,  p.  117,  cf.  ib.  p.  31. 

*  ib.  pp.  9,  18,  25.  189.  210,  217. 

'  ib.  p.  104  ;  of  the  Irish  secular  stories  it  may  be  said  generally  that  they 
are  non-moral  rather  than  immoral  ;  a  moral  standard,  especially  in  regard  to 
the  relations  of  the  sexes,  can  hardly  be  said  to  exist.  '  The  (olk-tale  .  .  .  is 
singularly  immoral  or  non-moral,'  Macculloeh,  Childhood,  p.  12. 

i  2 


cxxxii  INTRODUCTION 

Patrick's  approval  of  the  native  minstrel.  '  What  guerdon  dost  thou 
demand  ? '  he  asks  of  Cas  Corach.  '  Heaven  for  myself,  for  that  is 
the  best  guerdon  ;  and  grace  on  my  art,  and  on  those  vvho  follow  it  after 
me  till  doom^'  And  just  as  Cuchulainn  was  made  to  prophesy  ot 
Christ,  so  Finn  prophesies  of  various  saints^  In  other  ways,  too, 
saints  are  brought  into  secular  stories',  sometimes  with  a  fine 
contempt  for  chronology  and  morality*. 

But  if  in  these  and  other  ways  the  ecclesiastics  modified  the  secular 
literature,  which  they  largely  helped  to  preserve,  much  greater  was 
the  influence  of  the  secular  story  on  the  ecclesiastical  legends.  This 
influence  may  take  the  form  either  of  direct  importation,  or  of 
conscious  imitation,  or  of  unconscious  permeation.  For  the  student 
of  mythology  and  early  modes  of  thought  the  third  class  is  the  most 
interesting,  and  we  shall  be  largely  occupied  in  discussing  it.  But 
the  other  two  classes  show  more  clearly  the  attitude  of  the  Church 
towards  the  native  traditions.  Of  direct  incorporation  we  have 
already  noticed  two  instances,  the  horrible  story  of  triple  incest  at 
the  beginningof  the  life  of  Declan,  and  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Aed 
Slane  in  the  S  life  of  Aed  Mac  Bricc.  The  birth  stories  of  Aed  Mac 
Bricc  himself  and  of  Molaisse  of  Devenish  '  are  merely  borrowed 
from  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Fiacha  Muillethan  with  change  of  name*. 
The  story  of  Bairre  and  Scuithin  meeting  on  the  sea'  is  only  an 
ecclesiastical  version  of  the  meeting  of  Bran  and  Manannan  mac  Lir*. 

'  ed.  Stokes,  p.  99.  Uttcrly  alien  from  the  spirit  of  the  older  Ossianic  literature 
is  the  late  poem,  printed  Oss.  Soe.  iii.  230  ff. .  in  which  Patrick  is  represented  as 
forbiddin^  the  aged  Oisin  even  to  think  of  Finn,  on  the  ground  that  such  reraem- 
brance  is  sinful ;  cf.  e.  g.  pp.  258,  280.  288,  290. 

^  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  52,  69,  74-5.  This  also  appears  in  the  later  Irish  Hves,  Br. 
Coemgen,  c.  2  ;  Br.  Maed.  c.  6 ;  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  544  ;  Fel.'  p.  clxxii ;  R.  C.  xiii.  11. 
Hanmer,  according  to  Keating,  i.  48,  made  Finn  a  Dane,  anticipating  Zimraer's 
theory,  K.  B.  i. 

'  R.  C.  -x.  72  (Brendan  of  Birr,  into  the  Maelduin  story) ;  xxi.  i6a ;  xxiii.  402  ; 
Oss.  Soc.  V.  84  ;  Magh  Rath,  pp.  18,  24-6  and  notes. 

*  See  above,  p.  cvi.  Ollier  instances  of  ecclesiastical  matter  imported 
into  secular  tales  are  T.  B.  C.  p.  355  (Sim6n  driii,  i.  e.  Simon  Magus^ ;  Ir.  T.  III. 
ii.  190  (St.  Paul) ;  Magh  Lena,  p.  4  (Pharaoh's  drcams  borrowed);  Kcating, 
ii.  346  (golden  calf  borrovved) ;  small  christianizing  touches  may  often  be 
noticed,  e.  g.  LL.  114''  21,  115"  4,  117''  6,  123"  4. 

"^  Aed,  §  r  ;  Las.  §  4  :  cf.  Tr.  Th.  p.  $2i''  (§  4). 

"  LL.  290"  42  ff.  ;  Zimmer,  Gott.  gol.  Anz.  1891,  p.  169.  A  birth  delayed  for 
two  years  by  witchcraft,  Hy  Many,  p.  118. 

^  Mart.  Don.  Jan.  2;  Fel.^  p.  40;  C,  B.  S.  p.  131. 

»  Bran,  i.  16  ff.  The  pathetic  story  of  Columba  and  the  white  horse  which 
carried  thc  milk  pails  of  the  monastery,  Adamn.  iii.  23,  is  very  like  the  story  of 
Cuehulainn's  horse,  the  Liath  Macha.and  his  master,  LL.  119''  3  ff,,  122"  ff.  ;  but 
tltcy  are  probably  indcpendent  versions  of  the  same  folk-tale  ;  cf.  Iliad,  xvii, 
426  ff.  The  story  of  thc  origin  of  the  name  of  Cu  Cerca,  which  scems  of 
ecclesiastical  origin,  Cbir  Anmann,  No.  214,  is  evidcntly  modelled  on  the  similar 
story  about  Cuchulainn,  T.  B.  C.  p.  129;  L.  U.  61".  For  the  incorporation  of 
folk-talcs  into  sacrcd  books,  cf.  Macculloch,  Childhood,  p.  452.     Sec  Addenda. 


HEATIIEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxxxiii 

And  just  as  we  have  seen  saints  transplanted  into  secular  tales, 
so  do  \vc  find  characters  from  the  latter  appearing  in  the  hves  of 
saints '.  But  this  alien  material  was  gradually  submitted  to  a  process 
of  ecclesiastical  editing,  vvhich  toned  down  or  omitted  its  most  charac- 
teristic  features,  or  tried  to  justify  thcm  by  finding  ecclesiastical 
parallels  for  them  '.  And  so  we  find  classes  of  legends  as  to  which 
we  may  be  in  some  doubt  whcther  they  owe  their  cxistence  to  secular 
traditions  and  folk-lore,  or  to  the  miracles  of  the  canonical  and 
apocr}'phal  scripturcs.  Such  are  stories  of  raising  the  dead  \  turning 
water  into  vvinc,  wallcing  on  the  vvater,  multiplying  food,  miraculous 
povver  of  speaking  languages,  and  so  forth.  Often  vve  can  feel  pretty 
sure  that  in  spite  of  the  ecclesiastical  assimilation,  the  substratum 
comes  from  popular  tradition  *. 

Celtic  heathenism  seems  to  have  consisted  of  tvvo  main  elements  ; 
a  system  of  nature  vvorship  vvith  departmental  gods,  of  vvhom  the 
sun  and  fire  god  vvas  the  chief ;  and  a  system  of  magic  or  druidism. 
Of  these  the  former  vvas  a  development  of  the  religion  vvhich  the 
Celts  brought  vvith  them  from  the  original  home  of  the  Arj'ans, 
vvherever  that  may  have  been ;  the  latter  was  the  religion  of  the 
pre-Aryans'   vvhom  they  found  occupying  the  lands  vvhich  they 

'  e.  g.  Mongan  and  Cormac  mac  Airt,  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  304  ff.,  v.  52.  The  idea  of 
'grad  ecmaisi '  or  abscnt  love,  ib.  v.  26,  is  also  borrowed  from  the  secular  tales, 
in  which  it  is  common  for  young  women  to  fall  in  love  with  a  hero  vvhom  they 
have  never  seen  '  ar  a  airscelaib  *,  because  of  the  reports  about  him.  The  same- 
ness  of  the  miracles  in  the  lives  of  saints  is  largely  due  to  the  sameness  of  the 
folk-tales  to  which  they  are  related,  Delehaye,  Legendes,  pp.  8,  29-30 ;  Saint- 
yves,  p.  230  ;  British  Saints,  i.  7  ;  MaccuUoch,  u.  s.,  p,  466.  We  have  seen 
above  that  the  form  of  the  secular  tales  has  not  been  without  influence  on  the 
lives,  p.  xxxiv,  note  6. 

-  See  above,  p.  xxiii,  and  cf.  e.  g.  Bo,  §  r6  ;  Enda,  §  4  ;  Maed.  §  a  note.  So 
in  the  case  of  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  India  mentioned  above,  p.  cxxix,  an 
orthodox  Brahmanic  interpretalion  is  found  for  their  primitive  superstitions. 

^  One  or  two  special  cases  of  interest  may  be  mentioned  here  ;  in  the  Brussels 
lifeof  Berach.c.  29,  adecapitated  man  is  raised  by  havinga  rush, '  simin  luachra  ' 
put  round  his  neck,  and  tiiis  kind  of  rush  is  called  '  Berach's  rush'  to  this  day. 
In  the  Brussels  life  of  Grellan,  c.  3.  that  saint  raises  a  dead  child  as  follows  : 
'  dorat  tri  sriabha  forsan  ccorp  d'ingin  a  ordan,  gur  scrett  an  lenabh,"  i.  e.  he 
made  three  stripes  on  the  body  with  the  nail  of  his  thumb,  so  that  the  child 
screeched  ;  and  he  was  called  Eogan  Sriab,  or  Eogan  Stripe,  ever  after ;  cf. 
Macculloch,  u.  s.,  pp.  80  fl". 

*  Of  course  there  are  purely  biblical  rairacles,  e.  g.  druids  who,  like  Balaam, 
ean  only  bless,  not  curse,  Tr.  Th.  p.  416"  ;  the  healing  of  a  bloody  flux  by 
Petroc,  Capg.  ii.  319.  But  in  cur  lives  they  are  not  so  common.  Maed.  5  49 
looks  as  if  it  were  copied  from  2  Kings  iv.  29  ;  but  the  vvonder-working  bachall 
is,  as  we  shall  see,  a  recurring  feature  of  popular  tradition,  pp.  clxxiv  tf. 

'  Bertrand,  Religion,  pp.  43.  123.  So  in  the  Scandinavian  world  the  Finns, 
a  pre-Ar3'an  race,  are  the  chief  professors  of  magic,  so  that  Finn  and  sorcerer 
are  practically  synonymous  ;  see  Cleasby-Vigfusson,  s.v.  Finnar.  It  is  interesting 
to  find  that  the  Tuatha  Dc  Danann  were  said  to  have  learnt  their  magic  arts  in 


cxxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

invaded,  and  whom  they  largely  absorbed.  The  literature  shows 
that  the  latter  element  was  the  more  permanent.  Indeed  in  a  sense 
it  may  be  said  never  to  have  dicd  out.  It  appears  plainly  and 
directly  in  the  legends  both  secular  and  ecclesiastical.  The  Christian 
teachers  never  took  the  iine  of  denying  the  reality  of  its  existence. 
It  was  gentile  or  diaboiic  itnowledge,  powerfully  ranged  against 
themselves.  But  the  other  element  is  a  matter  of  inference.  Its 
direct  exposition  was  made  impossible  by  the  acceptance  of  Chris- 
tianity.  The  impact  of  the  stronger  creed  shattered  it  into  fragments ; 
but  many  of  the  fragments  floated  down  the  stream  of  time,  and 
recombined  in  fantastic  shapes  around  the  persons  of  pagan  heroes 
and  Cliristian  saints,  who  are  not  therefore  necessarily  non-existent 
or  non-historical'  because  theyhave  formed  the  nucleus  round  which 
mythological  elements  have  gathered  ;  any  more  than  the  sponge 
is  non-existent,  because  it  has  served  to  attract  the  particles  of  silex 
which  have  turned  it  into  flint.  Many  controversies  between  rival 
schools  of  niythology  would  be  reconciled,  if  this  were  borne  in 
mind.  But  the  fact  that  traditions  and  attributes  originally  belonging 
to  heathen  deities  have  become  attached  to  Christian  saints^  accounts 
for  the  unedifying  and  incongruous  character  of  many  of  these 
stories,  one  or  two  of  which  have  been  alluded  to  already'.  In  this 
way  the    doubtful   honesty'    and   doubtful  veracity",   the  immoral 


the  North  :  'dollotar  a  sil  a  n-innsib  tuaiscertachaib  an  domain  do  foglaimm 
druidechta  7  geintliuchta  7  fessa  diabuil,  comtar  eolaig  as  cech  ceird,  7  ite 
Tuatha  De  Danann  iarum,'  i.  e.  liis  [Bethach's]  seed  went  to  the  northern 
islands  of  the  world  to  learn  druidism  and  gentilism  and  diabolic  science,  so 
that  they  were  knowing  in  respcct  of  every  craft;  and  these  are  the  later 
Tuatha  De  Danann.  Rawl.  B.  512,  f.  79"*.  Elsewhere  a  druid  goes  to  Icarn  his 
craft  in  Armorica  (Lethal,  Ir.  T.  III.  192. 

'  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  i.  52,  200  ;   ii.  207  ff.,  324  ff. ;  Delehaye,  pp.  212-16. 

2  Saintyves,  pp.  248-9,  283.  285  (M.  Saintyves'  book  is  largely  an  exposition, 
somewhat  exaggerated  in  my  opinion,  of  this  thesis)  ;  Bertrand,  u.  s.,  p.  32; 
Harnack,  u.  s.,  p.  152.  The  coexistence  of  the  two  systems  side  by  side  seems 
illustrated  by  a  curious  story  in  the  Rennos  MS.  (.  87  r"  ;  Cinaeth,  chief  of 
Offally,  wcnt  on  a  love  adventure  attendcd  by  his  *druth'  or  jester  ;  when 
they  quitted  their  horses  thc  chicf  commended  his  to  thc  carc  of  St.  Colman 
mac  Luachain,  the  jester  consigned  his  to  Oengus  mac  an  Oic  ;  the  lattcr  was 
stolen,  the  former  escaped.  That  the  saint  should  have  aided  and  abetted  such 
an  adventure  was  not  particularly  to  his  credit. 

'  Xcnophanes'  old  complaint  is  largely  applicable  here  (apud  Sext.  Emp. 
ix.  193,  citcd  Monro's  Odysscy,  p.  386) : 

irayTa  Biois  a.vi9T}Kav  "OfiTjpos  6^  'HtJioSos  Te 
oaaa  irap'  av&pwvoiaiv  uvfi5(a  nal  ipijyos  (aTtv. 

*  Acd,  §  20;  Ci.  S.  §§  13,  31. 

^  MoIing's  famous  cquivocation  on  the  word  'luan',  §§  19,  20  and  notes 
(above,  p.  Ixxxii"),  is  a  classical  instancc  ;  Col.  Wood-Martin  gives  Irom  popnl.ir 
tradition  a  similar  tale  of  St.  Patrick,  and  an  instance  from  sccular  folk-lore, 
Elder  Faiths,  i.  345-6,  377. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxxxv 

miracles'  and  incestuous  origins^,  the  mutual  jealousy  and  spite- 
fulness',  the  maledictions  and  vindictiveness  of  Celtic  saints*  to  a 
grcat  extent  find  their  cxplanation. 

Unfortunately  the  maledictory  character  of  Celtic  saints  cannot  be 
wholly  explaincd  as  mythological  *.  It  is,  however,  probably  inherited 
largely  from  the  druids,  and  will  be  dealt  with  in  that  connexion 
later  in  this  section  (pp.  clxxiii  f.). 

The  elemental  part  of  Celtic  heathenism  has  a!so  left  its  trace  in 
certain  customs,  such  as  tlie  practice  of  going  deisil  or  righthandwise 
to  show  honour  or  bring  good  luck",  while  going  tuaithbel,  lefthand- 
wise   or   '  widdershins ',  is    unlucky '.     This  is   certainly   a   relic   of 

>  Ci.  S.  5  8 ;  Ita,  §  i6  eomitted  by  R) ;  C.  S.  c.  389  (§  56,  omitted  by  M) ; 
c-  343  (§  15.  omitted  by  M)  :   Rennes  MS.  f.  87". 

'■^  Tlie  case  of  Cuimine  Foda  ^C.  tlie  tal! )  is  the  most  prominent ;  I  have 
already  spoken  of  the  extraordinary  Irish  life  of  this  saint.  above,  p.  cvi,  note  5  ; 
cf.  also  LH.-  i.  16;  Fel.-'  p.  242  ;  LL.  286''  44.  Other  instances  occur  Ba.  5  i  ; 
Moling,  §  I  note  ;  Capg.  ii.  105;  Delehaye,  pp.  71-2.  We  have  seen  that 
Decl.  §  I  is  taken  bodily  from  the  secular  literature,  in  which  this  sort  of 
incident  is  common,  LU.  54";  Acc.  Scn.  p.  16;  Ir.  Nenn.  pp.  104.  182  (both 
Ihese  concern  saints)  ;  F.  M.  i.  82  note  ;  Keating,  ii.  178,  214  ;  cf.  Saintyves. 
p.  264;  Pagan  Ircland,  p.  93  ;  Bran,  ii.  44-5.  I  cannot,  in  face  of  the  examples 
given  above,  agree  with  Mr.  Nutt  that  these  stories  'would  be  profoundly 
repujfnant  to  .  .  .  Christian  compilers  and  scribes  '.  Giraldus  says  roundly  of 
the  Irish  '  non  inccstus  uitant ',  Opp.  v.  164.  He  is  a  bad  authority,  no  doubt; 
but  if  he  came  across  any  of  the  above  traditions,  he  might  be  excused  for 
thinking  so  ;  cf.  also  Luzel,  Legendes  Chretiennes,  i.  265. 

'  Ci.  C.  §  33  ;  we  have  already  noted  the  legend  that  Ciaran's  life  was  cut 
short  by  the  prayers  of  his  rival  saints  ;  Mochua,  |§  4,  5  ;  Mun.  5  25  ;  Capg. 
ii.  203  ;  L.  S.  p.  126  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  83'' ;  saints  counteract  each  other's  petitions 
and  promises,  like  the  Homeric  gods  who  supported  Greek  and  Trojan  respec- 
tivcly,  Mochoem.  §§  28,  30;  Tr.  Th.  p.  409'';  R.  C.  xiii.  88,  iio;  cf.  the  striking 
scene  from  Gautrekssaga,  c.  7,  cited  by  Grimm,  Mythology,  ii.  858-9. 

*  Bede,  ii.  260. 

'  Ab.  §  53  ;  Cron.  §  24  ;  Las.  §  10  ;  L.  S.  pp.  89,  93,  348  (even  angels  observe 
the  same  rule,  ib.  p.  67)  ;  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  18.  It  is  very  curious  that,  on  the 
ground  of  this  heathen  custom.  the  writer  of  the  life  of  Caillin  tries  to  turn  the 
druid  Cathbad  into  a  prophet  of  Christianity  :  '  deisiul  fognid  gach  fis  7  gach 
faistine,  fodaig  ro  creided  do  Crist,'  i.  e.  righthandwise  he  made  every  divina- 
tion  and  prophecy,  because  he  believed  in  Christ,  Book  of  Fenagh,  p.  254.  The 
evidence  is  almost  endless  :  see  e.  g.  Book  of  MuUing,  pp.  170-1  and  reff. ; 
LU.  55",  63°  24  ;  LL.  119''  20,  123"  8  ff.,  18  ff.  ;  Cormac,  Glossary,  p  38  (Trans. 
PP- 137-8) ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  52  ;  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p  230  ;  Martin,  pp.  7, 
16,  20,  116-17,  248. 

*  This  does  not  occur  in  the  Latin  lives,  though  it  does  in  some  of  the  Irish 
lives,  Br.  Maedoc,  cc.  18,  58,  69,  78  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  83'' ;  and  in  the  secular 
literature,  R.  C.  xv.  315  ;  cf.  LL.  119",  49.  Another  relic  of  elemental  worship  is 
the  practice  of  taking  the  elements  as  pledges  for  the  performance  of  covenants, 
&c.  This  does  not  occur,  so  far  as  I  have  noticed,  in  the  lives.  but  it  occurs  in 
the  Ciiin  Adamnain,  §  22,  combined  by  a  curious  bit  of  syncretism  with  the 
guarantee  of  the  saints.  The  securities  for  the  observance  of  this  law  were : 
'grian  7  esca,  dule  De  arcenae,  Petar,  Pol,  Andieas  jc ',  i.  e.  sun,  moon,  and 
the  other  elements  of  God,  Peter,  Paul,  Andrew,  &c.  It  is  extremely  common 
in  the  secular  literature,  LU.  118''  (=  R.  C.  vi.  165,  V.  Tr.  p.  566)  ;  R.  C.  xvi. 
32  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  126  ;  Magh  Rath,    p.  a  ;  Petrie's  Tara.  p.  34  ;  Rawl.  B.  503  f. 


cxxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

sun  worship,  and  is  of  course  not  exclusivcly  Ccltic  ;  as  neithcr  are 
those  midsummer  or  St.  John's^  fires  on  which  there  is  a  praetically 
endless  literature. 

It  is  in  accordance  with  the  pre-eminence  of  the  Celtic  Sun  and 
Fire  God  that  the  solar  should  be  the  most  prominent  mythological 
influence  in  Celtic  hagiology.  Those  of  our  saints  which  exhibit 
traces  of  this  influence  are,  as  we  have  already  seen,  Aed,  Boetius 
(Buite),  Cainnech,  Carthach,  Ciaran  of  Saigir,  Coemgen,  Colman 
Ela,  Comgall,  Fechin,  Finan,  Fintan,  Ita,  Lasrian  (Molaisse),  Maedoc, 
Mochoemoc,  Mochua,  Moling,  Molua  (Lugaid),  Samthann,  and  Tiger- 
nach  '^.  We  have  also  seen  that  in  some  of  these  cases  the  attraction 
is  probably  due  to  the  name.  Lug  is  the  Celtic  Sun  God  himself; 
Aed  is  one  of  the  names  for  fire ;  Buite  means  heat,  Lassar  (dim. 
Laisren)  means  flame,  Samthann  may  have  been  etj-mologized  as 
summer-fire  (sam-thene)  ^.  In  other  cases  no  special  reason  can  be 
given.  Locality  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  it,  the  habita- 
tion  or  shrine  of  the  saint  having  been  at  or  near  the  seat  of  some 
old  heathen  worship  ;  or  approximation  in  the  dates  of  their  respective 
festivals  *. 

^a' ;  Kcating,  ii.  230,  240,  244;  cf.  Iliad,  ili.  104,  276  fT.,  xiv.  271  ff.  A  fine 
examplc  from  the  Icelandic  Code  is  cited  Orig.  Island.  i.  314  ;  '  nu  lieldr  iOrS 
griJom  upp,  en  himin  var&r  fyr  ofan,'  i.  e.  now  may  earth  uphold  the  peace,  and 
heaven  above  be  its  warranty. 

•  i.  e.  St.  John  the  Baptist,  June  24  (for  the  bonfires  on  this  day  cf.  Aur.  Leg. 
pp.  363,  569).  In  the  Irish  Calendar,  however,  the  sun  festival,  Beltene,  was  on 
May  I,  Rhjs,  H.  L.  pp.  519  f.  Of  the  belief  that  these  sacred  fires  preserved 
cattle  from  disease  we  have  an  instance,  C.  B.  S.  p.  30.  The  Celtic  wheels  and 
crosses  are  probably  another  relic  of  sun  worship ;  see  on  both  subjects 
Bertrand,  Religion,  Le^ons  viii-xiv. 

"  See  above,  Part  II.  It  is  worth  noticing  how  often  saints  of  solar  character 
are  associated  together,  Aed,  §  33  ;  Cain.  §§  14,  16,  27  ;  Car.  §§  18,  ig  ;  Coem. 
§§  17,  27  ;  Co.  E.  §  3  ;  Fint.  §§  3.  5,  13  ;  Las.  |§  20,  24  ;  Mochoem.  §§  8-10, 
25  ;  Moling,  §  7  ;  Mochua,  §§  2-5  ;  Macd.  §§  8,  49  ;  Lug.  §§  31,  43.  The  most 
striking  instance  of  this  is  the  education  of  Molua  by  Comgall,  Lug.  §§  15-24. 
Of  course,  many  of  these  conjunctions  may  be  quitc  historical. 

'  Other  saints  with  names  suggcstive  of  solar  charactcristics  not  included  in 
this  collection  are  Molaisse  of  Leighlin,  and  his  namcsake  of  Inismurray ; 
Daig,  son  of  Cairell  (C.  S.  cc.  891  ff.  :  'hoc  nomen  .  .  .  magnam  Jlatiimani 
sonat,'  §2,  cf.  §§  II,  16).  Brigifs  name  is  fancifully  etymologized  '  breo- 
saiget',  i.  e.  fiery  arrow,  Cormac,  p.  8;  Fel,'  p.  xlv ;  and  certainly  her  legend 
exhibils  many  traits  of  this  kind,  Tr.  Th.  pp.  527-8,  533-4,  537^  539"  (§§  5-8. 
60,  84,  92-3)  ;  British  Saints,  i.  265-6.  Brigit  has,  morcovcr,  heathen  name- 
sakes,  e.  g.  Brigit  banfile,  i.  e.  '  the  poetess  '  mother  of  the  three  gods  of  poetry, 
R.  C.  xxvi.  30-1  ;  and  her  two  hojnonymous  sisters,  goddesses  respectively  of 
the  healing  and  mechanical  arts,  Cormac,  u.s.  Rhys,  H.  L.  pp.  74-7.  This  iden- 
tity  of  name  is  a  great  occasion  of  transfercnce  of  myths.  A  classical  instance 
is  that  of  Hippolytus,  Lightfoot,  Apostolic  Fathcrs,  I.  ii.  453  ;  cf.  Saintyves, 
pp.  339,  341.  In  the  group  of  Neptunic  saints  I  liave  suggested  that  a  popular 
etymology  connccting  Abban  with  abann,  a  river,  may  have  been  at  work. 

*  The  policy  of  Christianizing  heathen  seats  of  worship  and  placcs  of  pil- 
grimagc  has,  of  course,  becn  very  widely  adopted,  and  on  this  also  thcre  is  an 


HEATIIEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY   cxxxvii 

The  association  of  soiar  saints  witli  persons  wiiose  namcs  suggcst 
similar  associations  is  also  worth  noticing.  Thc  most  striking  in- 
stance  of  this  is  in  the  S'  life  of  Molua  where  it  is  said  that  Comgall 
had  fifty  monks,  ali  named  Lugaid '.  Comgall  was  ordained  by 
a  bishop  Lugaid",  as  was  Coemgen'.  Cainnech's  father  was  a 
Lugaid*;  Molua  had  a  brother  Lugair^  Fechin's  mother  was  named 
Lassar",  Daig's  sister  had  the  same  name'. 

Of  miracles  apparently  solar  in  origin  which  recur  with  greater 
or  less  frequency  wc  may  enumerate  the  following* :  fiery  manifesta- 
tions  at,   or   prior  to,  birth    or   during  childhood',    heavenly   light 

extensive  literature.  cf.  Bede,  H.  E.  i.  30,  and  my  notes  ;  Harnack,  Mission, 
pp.  340-1,  475.  This  is  especiallj'  the  case  with  sacred  wells  and  trees  ;  see 
below.  pp.  cxlix,  clii  ;  cf.  Saintyves,  p.  331. 

'  Lug.  §  17  note  ;  other  instanccs  of  groups  of  saints  with  the  sarae  name 
occur.  Ail.  §  13  ;  Car.  5  50.  A  very  curious  inslance  occurs  in  the  Irish  life  of 
Molaisse,  where  the  saint  descends  to  the  infernal  regions,  and  delivers  '  Manann 
the  leper  and  thrice  fifty  namesalves  of  his ',  Silva  Gad.  i.  21.  This  is  a  very 
common  feature  in  the  secular  tales,  e.  g.  LU.  127''  16  ff.  ;  LL.  123"  48  fT.,  256" 
31-2,  259"  46  ff. ;  T.  B.  C.  pp.  851  ff.  ;  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  150;  Magh  Rath,  pp. 
28S-92. 

'  Com.  §§  II,  13.  '  Coem.  §5  10-12. 

*  Cain.  §  I  ;  cf.  ib.  34,  Dalua,  hypocoristic  for  Lugaid  ;  Luigdech,  Lug.  5  38 
notc  ;  Lugtigern  ( =  Lug,  the  Lord),  Ita,  §  31  ;  Mochoem.  §  10  ;  Findlug  (=  Fair 
Lug),  Car.  §  34. 

'  Lug.  §  I  ;  cf.  Car.  §  34.  ^  Fech.  §  i ;  cf.  Co.  E.  §  12  note. 

'  C.  S.  c.  898  (§  16) ;  cf.  Lasrianus,  Car.  §§  34,  39 ;  Ita,  §  31  ;  Aed,  Ci.  S.  §  9 ; 
Aedan,  Car.  §§  6,  25,  34,  35.  I  add  a  few  references  to  the  secular  literature 
where  these  names  are  probably  significant.  Lugaid,  Cbir  Anm.  Nos.  58,  159, 
199.  All  these  have  epithets  suggestive  of  fire.  Lugaid  lamderg,  or  the  Red- 
handed,  Mesca  Ulad,  p.  18  ;  so  Cuchulainn  is  called  '  dorn-chorcra  ',  i.  e.  purple- 
tisted,  ib.  p.  4.  On  Lugaid  sriabderg,  or  the  Red-striped,  see  above,  p.  Ixii  ; 
cf.  R.  C.  xii.  127.  Aed  Abrat,  Ir.  T.  i.  210-11.  A  group  of  these  names  in  the 
genealogy  of  Corca  Laide,  Misc.  Celt.  Soc.  p.  24,  cf.  ib.  6,  32.  According  to 
Cormac,  Glossary,  p.  2  (Trans.  p.  5),  Aed  is  a  fire  goddess,  like  Vesta. 

^  I  place  first  references  to  solar  saints  contained  in  these  volumes  ;  then 
references  to  solar  saints  in  other  collections  ;  e.g.  Columba  of  Terryglass,  C.  S. 
cc.  445  ff.  ;  Daig  mac  Carill,  ib.  cc.  891  ff.  ;  Finnian  of  Clonard,  ib.  cc.  189  ff. 
(Irish  life,  L.  S.  pp.  75  ff.)  ;  Fintan  of  Dunbleisc,  C.  S.  cc.  225  ff.  ;  a  most  inter- 
esting  life  of  this  class  is  the  Irish  life  of  Finnchua  of  Brigown,  L.  S.  pp.  84  ff., 
which  also  shows  strong  Scandinavian  influence;  the  great  Columba  him- 
self,  though  for  him  we  have  historical  evidence  better  than  for  any  other  Irish 
saint,  has  also  attracted  elements  of  this  kind  ;  cf.  Adamn.  i.  28  ;  ii.  7  ;  iii.  3-3, 
17-18,  23;  on  Brigit,  see  above,  p.  cxxxvi,  note  3.  I  place  iast  [in  brackets] 
references  to  non-solar  saints  in  whose  lives  similar  miracles  occur,  and  among 
these  I  mark  vvith  an  asterisk  those  cases  where  the  main  attributes  of  a  saint 
are  of  a  different  character,  e.  g.  those  of  a  water  deity.  Similarly  we  stiall  find 
miraclesof  the  latter  type  in  the  lives  of  solar  saints.  We  need  not  be  surprised 
that  these  different  elements  should  have  got  mixed  as  they  fioated  dovvn  the 
stream  of  time.  Here  also  local  juxtaposition  may  have  played  a  part  ;  and  on 
the  way  in  which  one  cyele  of  legends  may  attract  and  absorb  other  cycles, 
cf.  Monro's  Odyssey,  p.  3B3. 

'  Bo.  §  2  ;  Car.  §§4,8;  Com.  §§5,  7  ;  Fech.  §  4  ;  Ita,  §  2  ;  Maed.  §  3  ; 
Mochoem.  §  7  ;  Lug.  §§  a,  15  ;  Sam.  §  i  ;  Tig.  §3  (cf.  Saintyves,  pp.  247-8)  ; 
C.  S.  c.  446  (§  3);  Finnian  seems  to  have  been  conceived  of  fire,  C.  S.  c.  189 
LCap.  1.  ai6  ;  Br.  i.  §  3*,  cf.  ib.  |  4  ;  Dec.  §  4*]. 


cxxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

accompanj'ing  the  saint',  fantastic  fire  vvhich  does  no  hurt',  Iuminous 
appearances  at  dealh  or  burial ',  fire  brought  down  from  heaven ', 
or  supernaturally  kindled^,  fire  carried  or  handled  with  impunity", 
the  fingers  of  the  saint  give  light  or  fire',  miraculous  extinction  of, 
or  deliverance  from  fire',  daylight  prolonged  miraculously '",  the 
saint  caught  up  to  heaven",  the  saint  and  his  belongings  un- 
touched  by  rain  or  snow'^,  one  very  common  form  of  the  miracle 
being  that  a  book  incautiously  left  in  the  open,  or  dropped  in  the 
water  by  the  saint,  is  uninjured  by  the  wet'^;  while  the  stream  in 
which  he  performs  his  ascetic  devotions  becomes  hot'*.  It  is  prob- 
ably  significant  that  in  several  cases  it  is  one  of  these  fire  miracles 

'  Com.  §§  15,  ig  and  note  ;  Fint.  §  16  ;  Ita,  523;  Mochoem.  §  12;  Moling,  §3; 
cf.  Cain.  §§  22,  27.  35,  36  note  ;  Fech.  §  13  ;  Fint.  §  21  ;  Las.  §  29  [Adamn.  iii. 
21  ;  cf.  L.  S.  p.  144  ;  Ba.  §  14  ad  fin.']. 

"  Fech.  §  4  ;  Fin.  C.  §§  7,  16  note  ;  Sam.  §§  i,  2;  C.  S.  c.  459  (5  29")  [C.  S. 
cc.  744-5  ;  Capg.  i.  222,  ii.  192  ;  cf.  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  157,  216  ;  Outer  Isles, 
P.  233I. 

0  CoL  E.  §  36  ;  Lug.  §  53  ;  C.  S.  cc.  461-2  (§§  30-1). 

*  Ci.  S.  §§  19.  24.  32  ;  Fin.  C.  §  19 ;  Mochua,  §  4  ;  cf.  Cain.  §  37  ;  Car. 
§  27  ;  Fechin,  §  13  [Ab.  §  34*  ;  Ci.  C.  §  30  ;  Dee.  §  28']. 

»  Aed,  §  29  ;  Ci.  S.  §  33  ;  Com.  §§  43  4  ;  Las.  §§  7.  25 ;  Lug.  §§  3,  23  ;  C.  S. 
c.  897,  §  II  (probably  Cain.  §  ig  belongs  here)  [V.  Tr.  p.  10  ;  Ab.  §  13*]. 

*  Car.  §  49  ;  Coem.  §  5  ;  Col.  E.  §  27  note  ;  Com.  §  39  ;  Fin.  C.  §§  5.  26  note  ; 
Lug.  §  17  ;  C.  S.  c.  8g8,  §  16  ;  L.  S.  p.  87  ;  cf.  Coem.  §  35  ;  Fin.  C.  §  4  [Ail.  §  40'  ; 
Rua.  §  23  ;  St.  Malo,  p.  138  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  29,  186.  261  ;  Delehaye,  p.  57  ;  Aur. 
Leg.  p.  571.     In  V.  Tr.  p.  88  Ihis  is  a  sort  of  ordeal]. 

'  Bo.  §  19 ;  Cain.  §§  35.  39;  Coem.  §  18  note  ;  C.  S.  c.  447  (§  6)  [C.  S.  c.  647, 
§  5  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  126  ;  Tr.  Th.p.  408"  (§  i)  ;  Capg.  i.  379  ;  Colg.  A.  S.  Vita  Scnani, 
March  6,  §  11  ;  Ba.  §  14*  ;  Delehaj-e,  p.  57]. 

'  Cain.  §  6  ;  Ci.  S.  §  24  note  ;  Col.  E.  §  27  note  ;  Fint.  §  6  ;  Las.  §  13  ; 
Moling,  §  17  ;  C.  S.  282  (§  53  not  in  M'  [Dec.  §  35*]. 

'  Cain.  §§  6,  18,  28,  40  ;  Ci.  S.  §  9 ;  Moling.  §  17  ;  cf.  Fin.  C.  §  4  (in  Car.  §  27 
fire  protects  the  saint  from  his  enemies  ;  cf.  Moling,  §  17  sub  finem). 

">  Col.  E.  §  24  ;  Fech.  §  20 ;  Las.  §  11  ;  Lug.  §  35  [Cron.  §  9]. 

"  Aed,  §  16  ;  Bo.  §  17  ;  Las.  §  26  ;  Macd.  §  39  ;  Lug.  §  13.  Notc  that  thcse 
are  all  solar  sainls. 

'2  Aed,  §  6 ;  Bo.  §  7  ;  Cain.  §§  16,  28  note,  42  ;  Ci.  S.  §  8  ;  Com.  §  8 ;  Fin. 
C.  §§  2,  18,  23  note  ;  Las.  §  27  ;  Mollng,  §  19 ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  540"  (§  100) ;  C.  .S. 
c.  449,  §  8;  cf.  Maed.  §  47  [V.  Tr.  p.  124;  Br.  i.  §  83*,  cf.  ib.  §  6  ;  N.  and  K.  p.  321 ; 
Ail.  §  10''  ;  Capg.  i.  208,  ii.  319.  In  the  Irish  life  of  Maignenn,  Silva  Gad.  i.  44, 
and  in  C.  B.  S.  p.  202.  this  immunity  from  rain  was  caused  by  the  saint's 
'  cochall '  or  '  casula  '  ;  and  in  the  lattcr  case  gave  rise  to  the  nicknamc  '  casulam- 
siccus',  the  exact  opposite  of  the  nickname  '  cochall-fliuch ',  or  wet-cowl, 
which  occurs  F.  M.  1145J. 

"  Cain.  §  18  note  ;  Maed.  §  12;  Moling,  §  4  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  39;  Br.  Coemgen. 
c.  9  [Ab.  §  36*  ;  Ci.  C.  §§  23,  27  ;  Aiiamn.  ii.  8,  9  ;  N.  and  K.  pp.  150-  i  ;  C.  B.  S. 
p.  64  :  C.  S.  c.  832  (§  13  ;  Capg.  ii.  173  ;  L.  Land.  p.  97  ^102'  ;  cf.  Acc.  Sen. 
p.  107.  In  V.  Tr.  p.  284  this  is  proposed  as  a  sort  of  ordcal :  '  libros  ucstros  in 
aquam  mittite,  et  illum  cuius  libri  inlessi  euasscrint,  adorabimus.'  Bairre  prevents 
snow  from  melting,  Br.  Bairre,  c.  4*]. 

'•  Ci.  S.  §  29 ;  Coem.  §  18;  Com.  §  46;  Fech.  §  17;  La-s.  §  12  [V.  Tr. 
pp.  497-8.  So  Cuchulainn,  when  he  bathes,  makes  watcr  boil  and  snow  mclt, 
T.  H.  C.  pp.  167-9,217;  LL.  ng"  5  ;  Ir.  T.  i.  220.  Thcrcisa  very  eurioustouch 
in  ihe  lifcof  St.  Malo,  p.  38,  that  he  ncvcr  fclt  cold  cven  in  thc  bitterest  weather]. 


HEATIIEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxxxix 

performed  by  a  pupil  which  caiises  the  master  to  dismiss  him,  as 
being  too  advanced  to  remain  under  tutciage  '. 

Other  miracles  which  are  very  possibly  solar,  and  occur  more 
frequcntly  in  lives  of  that  typc,  are  the  miraculous  opening  of  doors 
and  bars'' ;  and,  closely  connectcd  with  these,  the  nunierousinstances 
of  the  miraculous  release  of  prisoners '.  To  the  same  type  may  be 
referrcd  an  even  larger  class  of  miracles,  in  which  some  noxious 
monster*  is  vanquished  by  the  saint^;  further  those  in  which  corn 
and  other  products  grow  and  ripen  in  a  miraculously  short  space  of 
time",  and  the  stories  of  saints  hanging  their  garments  on  a  sun- 
beam '.  Something  of  the  same  character  seems  to  attach  to  those 
legends  in  which  special  greatness  is  promised  to  an  unborn  child 
if  his  birth  can  be  delayed  till  the  morning,  the  result  generally  being 
attained  by  the  mother  sitting  on  a  stone  which  is  dinted  by  the  head 

'  Coem.  §  5  :  Fin.  C.  §5  7,8;  Lug.  §§  23-4  and  note  ;  cf.  Com.  §  8  [C.  B.  S. 
pp.  30,  186,  261].  The  same  result  produced  by  a  non-solar  miracle,  Aed,  §  4  ; 
Mochoem.  §  10  ;  C.  S.  c.  182  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  83".  A  secular  parallel  R.  C. 
xxvi.  8. 

2  Cain.  §  27  ;  Col  E.  §  35  ;  Com.  §  51  ;  Fint.  §  17  ;  Las.  §§  21-2  ;  Moling, 
§  17;  Fechin,  §  22  i,cf  R.  C.  xii.  334,  348  Irish  lifej  [Br.  i.  §  83*;  Ci.  C. 
§  19  note  ;  Adamn.  ii.  35,  36;  St.  Malo,  p.  72  ;  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  122,  452  ;  sudden 
appearance  within  closed  doors,  V.  Tr.  p.  52,  may  be  due  to  biblical  influence, 
John  XX.  19,  but  it  has  analogies  in  the  secular  literature,  e.  g.  LU.  130''  28 ; 
Bran,  i.  3]. 

"  Aed,  §§  I,  28  ;  Fech.  §  22  ;  Fin.  C.  §§  iSnote,  22  ;  Fint.  §  17  ;  Moling,  §  20  ; 
Mun.  §§  22-3;  Sara.  §§  7,  12,  22  [Ci.  C.  §  19;  C.  S.  c.  104,  §  5  ;  Ab.  §  6*;  St. 
Malo,  p.  118;  cf.  Saintyves,  p.  243;  Aur.  Leg.  p.  689].  Other  instances  of 
captives  released  by  the  intervention  of  the  saints  are  Aed,  §§  23,  25,  27  note, 
34  note :  Ci.  C.  §  20  ;  Ci.  S.  §§  13,  31  ;  Col.  E.  §§  12  and  note,  24,  30  ;  Fin.  C. 
§§  18  note,  22  ;    Ita,  §  32  ;  Maed.  §§  4,  51  ;  Mochoem.  §  31  ;  Tig.  §  15. 

*  Ir.  peist,  from  Latin  bestia. 

'  Coem.  §  18  ;  Las.  §  21  ;  Lug.  §  25  ;  Sam.  §  8 ;  L.  S.  p.  140 ;  Br.  Colman 
Ela,  c.  I ;  Br.  Coemgen,  cc.  a,  8  [C.  .S.  c.  832,  §  13  ;  Adamn.  ii.  27  ;  L.  S. 
pp.  56,  66-7  :  St.  Malo,  pp.  57-8 ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  6,  99 ;  L.  Land.  pp.  24  (23), 
104  (iio")  ;  R.  C.  XV.  441,  V.  448  ;  Capg.  ii.354  ;  Enda,  §  28  ;  Ab.  §§  16,  18,  24*  ; 
the  hundred-headed  '  peist '  in  Ab.  §  18  has  an  exact  secular  parallel,  Oss.  Soc. 
iii.  130.  The  story  in  Rua.  §  25  secms  to  be  taken  from  the  secuiar  literature, 
but  1  cannot  trace  it.  The  hero's  name,  Ferdomuin,  '  man  of  the  deep,'  seems 
to  suggest  some  analogue  of  the  Beowulf  tale.  (There  is  a  Ferdoman,  an 
Ultonian  hero,  Magh  Rath,  p.  84.)  For  other  secular  instances  cf.  Ir.  T. 
i.  297-8  (=  LU.  iii'');  Tain  b6  Fraich,  pp.  146-8,  169  (=  LL.  150«  47  ff.) ; 
R.  C.  xvi.  137  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  68.  I  have  already  cited  the  curious  passage  in 
which  a  '  peist '  is  the  embodiment  of  a  pestilence,  above,  p.  cxi,  note  i  ;  and 
'pestifera  '  is  a  not  unfrequent  epithet  of  these  creatures  :  cf.  L.  Land.  p.  24  (23)  ; 
'  Serpens  .  .  .  gravi  affligens  pestilentia.'  This  also  is  not  inconsistent  with 
the  solar  theory,  cf.  Ihad,  i.  43  ff.  Present  day  foll<-Iore  in  Ireland  is  full  of 
stories  of  these  monsters,  often  said  to  have  been  subdued  by  St.  Patrick  ; 
cf.  Elder  Faiths,  i.  377]. 

'  Car.  §  21  ;  Lug.  §  26 ;  C.  S.  c.  228  (§  7),  c.  272  (§  29)  ;  Br.  Coemgen,  c  16  ; 
cf  Coem.  §  34  ;  Adamn.  ii.  3  [Ba.  §  9*  ;  N.  and  K.  p.  148]. 

'  Tr.  Th.  p.  539"  ^§  32)  ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  pp.  119'',  499" ;  Irish  Penny  Joumal, 
p.  380".  Isolated  miracles  of  a  solar  character  are  Car.  §  28  ;  Cain.  §  26;  Ci.  C. 
§  20  note  ;  Sam.  §§  i,  5;  Fin.  C.  §  14  note  (cf.  L.  S.  pp.  144,  361). 


cxl  INTRODUCTION 

of  the  child'.  This  is  a  trait  borrowed  from  tlie  secular  mythology. 
The  vvords  of  Aed's  niother  are  practically  identical  with  those  of  the 
mother  of  Fiacha  :  '  Verily,  unless  the  child  come  through  my  sides, 
it  shall  not  come  any  other  way  V 

There  is  a  very  curious  piece  of  folk-Iore  in  the  notes  to  the  Felire 
at  Sept.  II.  Sillan,  a  saint  of  Emlagh  in  County  Louth  had  a  hair 
in  his  eyebrow  which  had  this  remarkable  property :  '  every  one 
who  saw  it  in  the  morning  died  at  once.'  Molaisse  of  Leighlin 
pulled  it  out,  perishing  himself  thereby,  but  saving  others.  The  fact 
that  this  deadly  hair  only  produced  its  eftect  in  the  morning,  and 
that  Molaisse  is  a  name  associated  with  flame,  makes  it  probable  that. 
this  also  is  a  bit  of  solar  mythology'. 

It  is  further  worth  noticing  how  often  epithets  and  similes  are 
used  of  these  saints  which,  though  perfectly  legitimate  as  meta- 
phorical  expressions,  yet  suggest  that  they  are  a  gradual  christianiza- 
tion  of  expressions  vvhich  once  had  a  literal  meaning*. 

Another  evidence  of  solar  and  fire  worship  is  to  be  found  in  the 
sacred  fires  kept  perpetually  burning  at  various  Irish  sanctuaries. 
Here  too  an  attempt  is  made  to  give  a  Christian  complexion  to  the 
observance,  the  fire  is  lighted  at  Easter,  and  so  forth  ;  but  of  its 
heathen  character  there  can  be  no  doubt  °.  We  have  evidence  of 
this  custom  in  our  lives",  but  there  is  much  other  evidence  available. 
The  site  of  St.  Mullins  is  recommended  to  Moling  by  an  angel, 
because  there  is  'a  fire  alive  there  for  thirty  years  awaiting  thee ' ', 


'  Aed,  5  I  ;  Las.  §  4  (where  note  the  Christian  caveat  inserted")  ;  cf.  Dec.  §  3. 

^  LL.  290''  (also  in  Laud  610,  f.  95*^^;  otlier  instances,  Coir  Anm.  No.  273  ; 
R.  C.  vi.  175-6  iwhere  note  thc  Christian  touch  inserted). 

^  Fel.^  p.  206;  Fel.^  p.  cxliv  ;  which  is  a  Httle  different  ;  cf.  Grimm,  i.  244. 
Another  curious  httle  bit  of  solar  mytholo.gy  is  the  tradition  that  the  inhabitants 
of  the  small  island  of  Fuda  in  the  Outer  HeDrides  were  invincible  by  day,  but 
powerless  after  sunset,  Outer  Islcs,  p.  185. 

*  Bo.  §  17  (' sicut  sol  meridianus ')  ;  Com.  §  5;  Fin.  C.  §  29  ;  Tig.  §  14  ; 
Coem.  §  21  v'  flammisorationum  cius  urimur');  Col.  E.  §  i  ('  illuminatio  diuina'5; 
Fech.  §§  2,  4,  17;  Las.  §  i  ;  Fint.  §  21  (' facta  est  iacies  eius  quasi  ignis ')  ; 
Mochoem.  §  7  ;  Sam.  §  5.  This  comes  out  more  strongly  still  iii  thc  Irish  sourccs. 
Molaisse  of  Ucvenish  is  '  a  red  flaming  blaze  ',  '  a  living  fire  ablaze  ',  Silva  Gad. 
i.  18,  34:  Fecliin  is  a  man  '  of  the  brightness  of  summer ',  and  his  mother  is 
'  Lasair  the  blazing  ' ;  he  was  lo  his  earthly  parents  '  as  light  to  darkness  ',  K.  C. 
xii.  320,  322  ;  Moling  is  '  a  blazing  flame  ',  R.  C.  xiii.  102  ;  his  countenancc  is 
'  as  red  as  purple  flame  ',  xxvii.  276,  cf.  ib.  272.  Molaisse  of  Inismurray  is  '  in 
cluimderg',  i.  e.  the  rcd-plumcd,  Harl.  5280,  f.  46^;  Molaisse  of  Leighlin  is 
Massar  di  tlienid  ',  a  flame  of  fire,  LL.  372''  12  (=  Mart.  Don.  Apr.  18). 

'  Cf.  Kcating,  ii.  246-8  ;  of  coursc  in  primitive  times  there  was  a  vcry  practical 
reason  for  prcserving  certain  fires  wilh  rcligious  carc,  viz.  the  difliculty  of  re- 
kindling ;  cf.  MaccuIIoch,  Wcstern  Isles,  i.  208. 

«  Ci.  C.  §  30 ;  Ci.  S.  §  33 ;  cf.  Lug.  §  3.  Wc  have  a  sacred  fire  prcserved  in 
a  ccmetery,  C.  B.  S.  p.  30. 

'  Irish  Moling,  §  31. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxli 

Tlic  Irish  iife  of  Maignenn  mcntions  three  pcrpetiiai  fires '  at 
Kinvara,  Kilinainham,  and  Inismurray ^.  Patriclc  proniised  to  the 
futiire  monastery  of  Berach  '  living  firc  in  it  till  thc  end  of  the 
vvorld ' '. 

It  has  already  been  noticed  in  Part  II  that  in  the  case  of  several 
saints  the  solar  character  is  combined,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Greek 
Apollo*,  with  that  of  a  patron  of  animals,  domestic'  orwild".  Of 
the  latter  character  the  most  charming  instance  is  Ciaran  of  Saigir 
with  his  woodland  monlis,  brother  Fo.x,  and  the  rest.  And  the  story 
how  the  Fox  stole  his  abbofs  shoes,  and  the  Badger,  as  being  slcilled 
.in  woodcraft,  wassent  to  fetch  him  baclc,  and  how  brother  Fox  aslced 
forgiveness  and  did  penance  by  fasting  is  one  of  the  most  delightful 
things  in  hagiological  literature '.  Often  does  the  saint  interpose 
to  save  a  hunted  animal  from  its  pursuers",  or  renders  fierce  animals 
tame',  or  feeds  starving  wolves  out  of  the  herds  which  he  tends^". 

'  'tene  beo  bithbeo,'  lit.  fire  living  ever-living. 

'  Silva  Gad.  i.  42  ;  on  the  last-named  cult  see  Wakeman's  Antiquities  of 
Inismuriay,  p.  55. 

^  Br.  Berach,  §  4;  the  promise  of  the  angel  to  Maedoc  that  Drumlane  should 
have  'one  of  the  three  most  lasting  fires  in  Vi  Briuin  '  secms  to  refer  rather  to 
the  virtue  of  hospitality,  for  this  was  to  be  '  ar  betachad ' ,  i.  e.  for  entertainraent, 
Br.  Maedoc,  c.  57.  According  to  Acc.  Sen.  there  were  three  perpetual  fires  in 
Ireland,  Cashel,  Kildare,  and  CoIumcille's  (^?  Durrow),  p.  148  and  note.  On 
St.  Brigit's  fire  at  Kildare  cf.  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  120-2  ;  no  male  was  allowed 
to  entcr  within  its  precincts.  This  fire  was  extinguished  by  order  of  the  Arch- 
bishop  of  Dublin  in  1220,  Brit.  Saints,  i.  266.  A  very  interesting  trace  of  solar 
worship  is  preser\-ed  by  Cormac  in  his  glossary,  p.  25  Trans.  p.  94;,  s.  v.  iiicielba, 
which  is  explained  as  '  names  of  idol  altars,  by  reason  of  what  they  used  to  mark 
on  them,  namely,  forms  ^delba»  of  the  elements  they  adored,  uerbi  gratia /oriita 
solis  in  altare\  With  this  may  be  compared  the  curious  note  in  the  Egerton 
copyof  Amra  Coluimcille  of  a  priest  in  Tirconell  who  built  a  church,  '7  dorigni 
alt(iir  glainidhe,  7  dorigne  delb  grene  7  esco,'  i.  e.  and  made  an  altar  of  glass, 
and  the  form  of  the  sun  and  moon,  R.  C.  xx.  428. 

'  Cf.  the  herds  of  the  sun,  Odyss.  i.  8,  xi.  to8  ff.,  xii.  127  fT.,  263  flT.,  322-3. 

'  Aed,  §  9  ;  Bo.  §§  20,  24  ;  Ci.  S.  §  21  ;  Coem.  §  7  1  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  5)  ; 
Moling,  §§  16,  21 ;  Fel.-  p.  88  (cf.  Ciaran  of  Saigir)  [cf.  ib.  256,  where  Mac  Oige 
seeras  to  be  a  sort  of  analogue  of  Pan,  Columba  still  bears  this  character  in 
the  Hebrides,  Outer  Isles,  pp.  222,  232,  238.  In  the  secular  literature  luchna 
Echbcl  has  the  sarae  function,  R.  C.  xv.  308  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  36]. 

*  Bo.  §5  13,  14  ;  Cain.  §  36  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  i.  64) ;  ib.  §  42  ;  Ci.  S.  §§  a,  10,  11  ; 
Coem.  §§  9,  16,  19,  24,  27  ;  Maed.  §§  5,  7,  12,  22,  25,  30;  Moling,  §§  22-4,  27  ; 
Lug.  §  33  [Ab.  §§  7,  31,  35'  ;  Ail.  §§  I,  44']. 

'  Ci.  S.  §§  5-7  ;  cf.  C.  S.  c.  456  (§  23)  [a  similar  story  in  the  Anglo-Saxon 
life  of  St.  Neot,  see  my  Life  and  Times  of  Alfred,  p.  55].  The  fox  appears  in 
his  traditional  character  also  Mol.  §§  23,  24  ;  cf.  Coem.  §  38;  Fint.  §  9  [L.  S. 
p.  121,  cf.  C.  S.  c.  918,  §  6].  Other  cases  of  aniraals  being  regarded  as  monks 
are  Cain.  §  36  [Ab.  5  49*]. 

'  Cain.  §  43;  Coem.  §  19;  Maed.  §  7  [Ail.  §  44*;  L.  S.  p.  121  ;  C.  B.  S. 
pp.  164,  186;  L.  Land.  p.  129  1^137)];  on  the  other  hand  Columba  slays  a 
hunted  boar  with  a  word,  Adamn.  ii.  26. 

'  Aed,  §§  9,  10  note  ;  Bo.  §  14  ;  Cain.  §§  4,  8  ;  Coem.  §  27  ;  Maed.  §§  12,  30  ; 
Brigit,  cc.  32,  109  [Mun.  §  13  ;  cf.  C.  S.  c.  937]. 

'"  Coem.  §  9 ;  Maed.  §§  5,  22  ;  cf.  §  25  [Ab.  §  7* ;  Ci.  C.  §  5] ;  cf.  Lang,  Myth 


c.xlii  INTRODUCTION 

The  most  curious  instance  of  tliis  is  in  the  hfe  of  Molua'  who  is  said 
to  have  founded  an  annual  feast  for  the  benefit  of  the  wolves. 
Miracles  are  wrought  on  behalf  of  wolves-,  and  wolves  obey  the 
saints'  bidding',  or  execute  their  vengeance'.  Ailbe,  like  Romulus 
and  Remus,  was  suckled  by  a  she-wolf,  and  to  the  end  of  his  life 
acknowledged  this  '  kinship  by  the  milk ' ;  Bairre  was  fostered  in 
the  same  way°.  Colman  mac  Luachain  had  a  standing  covenant 
with  wolves".  In  the  secular  tale  of  Bruiden  da  Derga,  the  monarch 
Conaire  has  seven  wolves  as  hostages  for  the  agreement  that  wolves 
shall  not  touch  more  than  one  calf  a  year  from  each  byre  in  Ireland  '. 
With  these  tales  may  be  compared  the  curious  statement  of  Camden 
that  the  Irish  took  wolves  as  gossips,  and  prayed  for  them  as  if  they 
were    human   beings*.     AII  this  tcnds  to  show  that   the  wolf  in 


and  Ritual,  ii.  i8o  [158I.  This  is  always  quoted  as  an  instance  of  the  sainfs 
great  kindness  to  animals.  The  feehngs  of  the  eaten  animals  do  not  seem  to  be 
considered. 

'  Lug.  §  33;  cf.  Moling,  §  27,  though  there  the  guests  are  foxes,  not 
wolves. 

'  Bo.  §  13. 

'  Bo.  5  14  ;  Coem.  5  9  ;  Br.  Cnemgen,  c.  14  ;  Fech.  §  7  ;  Fin.  C.  5  24  ;  Lug. 
§  33  ;  C.  S.  c.  390  {i  59,  not  in  M) ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  541''  (§  isg^  [Ab.  §  31*  ;  Ber. 
5  8  ;  Ger.  5  6  ;  Mun.  §  3  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  12  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  10-11,  263  ;  N.  and  K.  pp. 
193-4  ;  Capg.  ii.  199  [.  ;  St.  Malo,  p.  153;  Brev,  Aberdon.  Pars  Hiem.  Propr. 
Sanct.  f,  26  v".  In  many  of  these  cases  it  will  be  seen  that  the  wolf  takes  on 
itself  the  function  of  some  domestic  animal  which  it  has  killed,  It  is  possible 
that  some  of  the  stories  of  wolves  tending  cattle  may  be  intended  to  account 
for  the  origin  of  the  domesticated  dog,  cf.  especially  Capg.  ii.  200  ;  but  other 
animals  act  in  the  same  way ;  lions,  Br.  i,  §  85  ;  a  hawk  tends  poultry,  Tig. 
§  16I. 

*  Ci.  C.  §  30  ;  here  it  is  probably  significant  that  the  crime  which  the  vvolves 
punish  is  that  of  extinguishing  a  sacred  fire.  Other  mentions  of  wolves,  Aed, 
§  22  ;  C.  S.  c.  82B  !,§  2). 

^  Ail.  §§  I,  44  ;  Ba,  §  i  ;  other  instances,  F<51. '  p.  Ixxxv ;  Fel.*  p.  120  ;  cf. 
Coir  Anm.  No.  213  ;  Macculloch,  Childhood,  p.  277.  We  find  childrcn  of  Apollo 
by  raortal  womcn  exposed  and  nurtured  by  wolves,  Lang.  Myth  aiid  Ritual,  ii. 
221  [200].     Cii  allaid  (wolf),  as  a  man'sname,  p.  clix,  note  3. 

^  '  lotar  tra  chugci  faolchoin  an  dairc,  7  ligsitt  a  chuaranna  .  .  .  on  mud  na 
con  tairisi  .i.  na  con  tigi  ;  .  .  .  7  isbert  friu  :  "  bid  sund  dogrcs  ;  7  in  Ila  dobertar 
mo  ainmsi  a  n-cterguidhi  cugcaib.  is  cett  dib  can  dcrgad  for  nech  in  laithi  sin,'' ' 
i.  e.  the  wolves  of  Ihe  forest  came  to  liim  and  licked  liis  shoes  likc  domestic  dogs. 
And  he  said  to  them  :  '  Be  here  continually  ;  and  the  day  that  my  name  is  men- 
lioned  to  you  in  intercession,  you  must  not  commit  raven  [lit.  rcddening]  on 
any  one,'  Kennes  MS.  f.  86". 

'  R.  C.  xxii.  166.  Hostages  exacted  from  birds  and  rivcrs,  Misc.  Celt.  Soc. 
p.  4.  Blood  covcnants  with  animals,  Macculloch,  u.  s.  p.  250  ;  Lang,  Myth  and 
Ritual,  i.  138  [139]. 

"  '  Lupos  sibi  adsciscunt  in  patrimos,  quos  c/iari  C/irist  appcllant,  pro  eis 
orantes  et  bene  precantes,  et  sic  se  ab  illis  lacdi  non  uercntur,'  Britannia,  ed. 
1607,  p.  791  ;  Gibson'sTransI.  ed.  1722,  ii.  1420,  Camden  gives  as  his  authority 
J.  Goode,  an  English  pricst  who  was  schoolmaster  at  Limerick  c  1566;  cf  R.  C. 
viii.  197.  which  first  guided  me  to  the  passage,  To  this  day  caiiiieas  Chriosd 
(lit.  Christ-friendship)  is  ihe  rcgular  Irish  name  for  gossipred. 


HEATIIEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     cxliii 

pagan  Ircland  was  a  sacred  aniinal,  and  associated  with  the  cult  of 
the  sun '. 

But  vvolves  are  not  the  only  animals  for  whose  benefit  miracles 
are  vvrought';  nor  are  they  the  only  animals  vvho  render  service 
to  the  saints.  Various  dead  animals  are  raised  to  life ",  the  most 
common  case  being  whcre  animals  which  have  been  killed  and 
eaten,  generaliy  for  the  entertainment  of  the  saint,  are  restored 
whole  and  entire*.  This  is  a  regularly  recurring  foll<  tale.  One 
of  the  best  examplcs  of  it  is  in  the  Icelandic  story  of  Thor  and  the 
Peasant  ^  Where  the  cooked  or  eaten  animal  has  been  stolen,  it 
is  often  made  to  notify  its  presence  in  the  cauldron,  or  in  the  interior 
of  the  thief '.  In  one  case  the  ear  of  the  stolen  animal  protrudes 
from  the  thiefs  mouth ' ;  in  other  cases  the  stolen  flesh  cannot  be 
cooked  at  all*,  or  turns  putrid  at  once'. 

The  idea  of  animals  helpful  and  friendly  to  men  is  one  vvhich  is 
very  widely  diffused  in  folklore'";  and  it  is  abundantly  represented 
in  the  lives  of  Celtic  saints.  Stags  plough  "'  or  dravv  a  cart  or 
chariot";  they  carry  the  saint's   books",  and  other  burdens",  or 

'  This  would  agree  with  one  possible  interpretation  of  the  epithet  AvKeios 
applied  to  Apollo. 

'  For  animals  saved  from  the  hunter  see  above,  p.  cxli,  note  8.  Tr.  Th.  p. 528" 
(5  13^  ;  cf.  Capg.  ii.  4'4-i5- 

'  Ail.  §  ai  note  ;  Bo.  §  20  ;  Ci.  C.  §§  2,  5  ;  Fech.  §  6  ;  Moling,  §  22;  Lug.  §  34  ; 
V.  Tr.  p.  ra  ;    cf.  Macculloch,  Childhood,   p.  84. 

*  Ab.  §  7  ;  Aed,  §  15  and  note  ;  Bo.  §  24  ;  Ci.  C.  §  5  and  note  ;  Enda,  §  30  ; 
Fin.  C.  §  II  ;  Mochua,  §  lo;  C.  S.  cc.  173  (§  is),  205  (§  27),  230-1  '§  13"!,  390 
(5  58,  not  in  M\  910  ,§  i3~:  ;  Tr.  Th.  pp.  26"  (§  63),  540''  (§  113)  ;  L.  S.  p.  31  ; 
R.  C.  xxvii.  286  8  ;  Rennes  MS.  f  83"  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  80  ;  Capg.  ii.  201,  209,  299  ; 
C.  B.  S.  pp   II,  78,  260  ;  Aur.  Leg.  p.  450  ;  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  4. 

*  Icelandic  Reader,  pp.  204-5:  where  note  the  command,  found  also  in  some 
of  the  Celtic  instances,  not  to  break  any  of  the  animars  bones;  cf.  Grimm,  i. 
184-5.  A  dismembered  man  is  restored  in  the  same  way,  V.  Tr.  p.  198  ;  British 
Saints,  i.  iii  ;  Oikneyinga  Saga,  i.  279  (R.  S.}.  Cf.  Macculloch,  Childhood, 
pp.  93,  102,  109;   Myth  and  Ritual,  ii.  37  [13]. 

*  Bo.  §  24;  Coem.  §10;  C.  S.  c.  919  (§  9,  this  ram  had  a  proper  name, 
Bethanus),  L.  S.  p.  12;  V.  Tr.  p.  180  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  203  ;  so  the  flesh  of  the  stolen 
oxen  of  the  Sun  bellowed  on  the  spits :  ^ouiv  6'  ihs  ylyvfTo  <pojvrjj  Odyss. 
xii.  396. 

'  Maed.  §  50. 

'  Bo.  §  12;  C.  S.  c.  666  (§  24~)  ;  cf.  Fel.''  p.  228  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  pp.  216-18;  Gir. 
Camb.  Opp.  v.  117  ;   C.  B.  S.  pp.  11,  15,  78,  260. 

»  C.  S.  C.667  (4  25 V 

'"  Matculloch.  Childhood.  chap.  VIII.  For  wild  animals  acting  as  shepherds, 
&c.,  see  above,  p.  cxlii,  note  3. 

"  Ail.  §  32  note;  Car.  §  25;  Fel.*  p.  72  ;  horses  come  of  iheir  own  accord  to 
harrow.  Cron.  §  13. 

'-  Dec.  §  29 ;  Mochua,  §  7  ;  Rua.  §  19  ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  59 ;  Br.  Berach,  c.  i8  ; 
C.  B.  S.  pp.  10,  38-9,  164  ;  L.  Land.  p.  134  >  142  . 

"  Ber.  §  II  ;  Ci.  C.  §  25  ;  C.  S.  c.  231  J  14") ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  79" ;  cf.  Tr.  Th. 
p.  407''  (§  III) ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  39  (a  ram;  ;  L.  S.  p.  120  ^a  fo.\). 

"  Mochua,  §  10  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  39;  L.  Land.  p.  96  (loi)  ;  a  stag  holds  the 
painter  of  a  buat,  C.  B.  S.  p.  257. 


cxliv  INTRODUCTION 

allow  their  horns  to  be  used  as  a  book-rest '.  Does  fumish  milk, 
like  covvs^;  though  this  is  rather  lookcd  down  on  as  a  woman's 
miracle'. 

The  otter  also  is  a  friendly  animal,  and  brings  fish  for  its  patron's 
needs*,  or  dives  for  the  book  which  he  has  dropped  in  the  water\ 

Often  the  saint's  place  of  settlement  is  fixed  by  the  appearance 
of  animals,  whether  foretold  beforehand,  or  accepted  on  the  spot 
as  an  omen".    His  burial  place  is  determined  in  the  same  way'. 

'  Cain.  5  36  ;  Maed.  §  7  ;  L.  S.  p   123. 

^  Ba.  §  4  ;  Br.  i.  §  4  ;  Cain.  §  30  ;  Coem.  5  31  ;  cf.  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  14,  Br.  Mac 
Creiche,  c.  2,  where  the  doe  deposits  her  milk  in  the  hollow  of  a  stone  (with 
this  cf.  Campbell,  Superstitions,  pp.  22.  122,  156,  162,  179.  185-6,  193  ;  Martin, 
pp.  67,  110,  391  ;  Christian  Inscriptions,  ii.  531  ;  Rua.  §  24  ;  Aur.  Leer.  p.  583. 
Secular  parallels,  Keating,  ii.  178;  C6ir  Anm.  No.  26;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  182  and  note. 

'  Ail.  §  31  ;  cf.  V.  Tr.  p.  72  A  fawn  taltes  the  place  of  a  calf,  C.  S.  c.  834 
(§  18) ;  so  in  some  of  the  wolf  storics  citcd  above.  The  most  curious  case  of  this 
kind  is  in  R.  C.  vi.  187,  where  a  cauldron  has  the  samc  elfect  ;  cf  Macculloch, 
u.  s.  p.  244.  This,  as  we  shall  see,  probablj'  rests  on  the  idea  of  '  sight  shifting ' 
on  the  part  of  the  deluded  animal. 

*  Br.  i.  §62,  ii.  §  50  ;  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  16.  This  otter  was  repaid  with  base 
ingratitude,  as  the  monk  tried  to  catch  him  and  make  a  purse  of  liis  skin.  i^Thc 
otter's  skin  is  supposed  to  have  magical  povver,  Campbell,  u.  s.  pp.  216-17; 
Martin,  pp.  159,  391.)  In  this  conncxion  the  proper  namcs  Faeldobhair  otter\ 
Maeldobharchon  tslave  of  the  otter")  may  be  noted,  F.  M.  i.  302,  308.  Tliere  is 
a  legend  of  Brendan  and  a  man  named  Dobarchu  (otter)  who  was  turned  into 
an  ottcr  (dobran)  by  Brendan  as  a  punishment.  His  doscendants,  the  tJi 
Dobarchon  of  Thomond,  do  not  touch  salmon  (printed  by  0*Crady  from  Book  of 
Lismore,  in  Melusine  iv.  298  ;  it  also  occurs  in  thc  Br.  Brendan,  c.  53.  This  is 
rather  different  from  the  abstinence  from  tiie  flesh  of  the  totem  animai,  which 
I  have  not  found  in  the  saints'  lives,  though  it  occurs  in  the  secular  litcrature, 
e.  g.  LL.  120'*  14  ;  R.  C.  xxii.  20,  24,  26  ;  lar-Connaught,  p.  27  note).  Otters 
did  special  service  to  St.  Cuthbert,  Bede's  Prose  Lite,  c.  10. 

^  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  9  ;  a  seal  does  the  like  for  St.  Cuthbert,  Capg.  i.  217. 
A  seal  fishes  for  Mochua  of  Balla,  L.  S.  p.  144.  A  wild  boar  cuts  wattlcs  for 
Ciaran  of  Saigir,  Ci.  S.  §  5.  One  of  the  prettiest  of  these  stories  tells  how 
Colman  mac  Duach  had  a  cock,  a  mouse,  and  a  fly.  Thc  cock  nsed  to  crow 
when  it  was  time  for  mattins,  the  mouse  would  rub  his  ear  to  wake  him  when 
he  had  slept  the  .allottcd  time,  and  the  fly  would  settle  on  the  line  of  his  Psalter 
at  which  he  left  ofl'  reading,  to  keep  his  place  lor  him,  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  544"  ; 
Keating,  iii.  72. 

"  Boar,  Fin.  C.  §  8  ;  Mochoem,  §  14  ;  Rua.  §  3  ;  C.  S.  c.  199  (§  18'),  c.  909 
(§  9)  ■>  V.  Tr.  p.  190 ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  33  4,  67  ;  N.  and  K.  p.  202  ;  Capg.  i.  249  ; 
sow,  C.  B.  S.  pp.  8-9;  R.  C.  V.  443  ;  L.  Land.  p.  77  (80)  ;  stag,  Ber.  §  11  ; 
Ci.  C.  §  25  ;  C.  S.  c.  231  (§  14")  ;  wolf  ib.  c.  912  (§  17)  ;  ox,  C.  B.  S.  pp.  147-8  ; 
cows,  Lug.  §  28  ;  horse,  C.  B.  S.  p.  258  ;  dove,  ib.  p.  loi  ;  cf.  also  Maed.  §  37  ; 
Silva  Gad.  i.  25.  Thisalso  is  widely  dirt'used  in  folk-lore  ;  cf.  Grimm,  Mythology, 
iii.  II 39-41,  iv.  1646  ;  Myth  and  Ritual,  i.  268  1278  ,  ii.  94-5  (70  11.  In  C.  B.  S. 
p.  99  is  a  curious  account  of  a  place  of  scttlenicnt  belng  dcterniined  by  throwing 
an  altar  overboard,  and  following  where  it  camc  to  land.  This  seemsa  Christian 
version  of  the  way  in  which  the  pagan  Norsemen  chose  their  settlenicnts  in  Icc- 
land  by  throwing  overboard  the  piliars  of  the  high-seat  and  noting  where  thcy 
driflcd  to  land,  Landnama,  i.  6,  ii.  la,  iv.  9,  v.  9  (  =  Orig.  Island  i.  21,  67,  188, 
220)  ;  Kormakssaga,  c.  2.  The  like  is  done  with  tlie  coltin  of  a  man  who  dicd  at 
sea,  Landn.  i.  18  (Orig.  i.  37-8)  ;  cf.  Dcclan's  stone,  Decl.  §  15. 

'  Lug.  §  53 ;  C.  S.  c.  107  (§  9) ;  N.  and  K.  p.  1 79  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  252  ;  Capg.  i,  503  ; 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxlv 

It  is  clcar  that  the  idcas  underlying  many  of  these  stories  go 
back  to  a  time  whcn  no  hard  and  fast  line  was  drawn  between 
mcn  and  aninials,  whcn  it  secmed  qiiite  natural  that  the  language 
of  animals  should  be  understood  by  men  and  vice  versa',  that  an 
animal  should  have  human  understanding  and  enter  into  a  nian's 
thoughts^;  that  covenants  should  be  made  with  them,  which  might 
be  treacherously  violatcd^. 

An  idea  which  recurs  frequcntly,  both  in  the  lives  of  saints  and 
also  in  the  secular  literature,  is  that  a  spccial  virtue  attaches 
to  animals  with  particular  '  points '  of  colour  or  markings ; 
red    animals  with   white    heads*,   white   animals  with    red   ears', 

cf.  Saintyves,  p.  385.  Several  of  these  stories  have  evidently  been  influenced 
by  I  Sam.  vi.  7  ff.,  which  is  expressly  referred  to  in  N.  and  K.  So  the 
boundaries  of  the  saints'  territory  are  marked  out  by  animals,  Br.  Ciaran  S. 
c.  3  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  187  ;  St.  Malo,  p.  62.  '  In  the  North  of  India  a  goat  is  turned 
loose  along  a  disputed  bordcr-line,  and  where  he  shivers,  there  is  the  mark  set 
up,'  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  p.  14.  Animals  track  out  saints  in  their  retirement, 
Cain.  §  43  ;  Coem.  §  7.  Children  also  determine  the  place  of  a  saint's  burial, 
C.  S.  c.  108  (5  10). 

'  Bo.  §  31  ;  Moehua,  53;  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  294,  v.  32  ;  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  64.  Contrast 
Herodotus'  naive  scepticism  as  to  the  talking  doves  of  Dodona,  ii.  57. 

-  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  16  ;  T.  B.  C.  p.  899. 

'  For  the  covenants  see  above,  p.  cxlii.  There  is  a  curious  story  how  Cormac, 
son  of  Tadg,  violated  the  covenant  which  his  father  made  with  the  badgers,  Cbir 
Anm.  No.  239  and  note  ;  Three  Glossaries,  pp.  xlii  ff.  Of  the  kindred  primitive 
idea  that  there  is  no  hard  division  between  animals  and  deities  I  see  no  trace  in 
the  Latin  lives  ;  but  there  is  a  possible  trace  of  it  in  the  Irish  life  of  Molaisse  of 
Devenish  ;  '  dochuaid  co  hiflern,  7  cocholl  do  chroicnib  broc  ime  ;  7  is  uadh 
ainranightcr  in  brocainech  .i.  mionn  maith  do  mhinnaibh  Molaise  ;  7  minleadban 
ina  laim  do  toghairm  in  druith  .i.  Manann  clamh  ;  co  tuc  Dia  do  a  hifernn  e  cona 
tri  caoca  comanmann  maille  fris,'  i.  e.  he  went  to  hell  with  a  cowl  of  badger- 
skins  about  him  ;  and  it  is  from  that  that  he  is  called  the  badger-faced  (i.  e.  [the 
cowl  is]  a  noble  relic  of  the  relics  of  Molaisse^  ;  and  a  little  strip  [of  the  skin] 
in  his  hand,  to  summon  the  jester,  Manann  the  leper ;  and  God  granted  him  to 
him  out  of  hell,  and  thrice  fifty  of  his  naraesakes  together  with  hira,  Silva  Gad, 
i.  21.  In  the  curious  piece,  Baih  Briaui,  in  which  the  saints  of  Ireland  are 
enumcrated  by  their  nicknames  or  kennings,  Molaisse  is  alluded  to  as  *  in  brocc- 
ainech  bindcorach  o  Loch  Erne ',  i.  e.  the  sweet-choired  badger-faced  one  of 
Lough  Eme,  Harl.  5280  f.  46  v°  (also  in  Egerton,  1782%  We  have  seen  that 
Molaisse  has  solar  characteristics  ;  here  he  seems  to  show  traces  of  an  animal 
god.  The  two  are  not  inconsistcnt  ;  cf.  the  Egyptian  ram-headed  Sun-god, 
Ammon  Ra,  and  the  Greek  Wolf-Apollo,  if  that  be  the  etymology  of  Ai5«ios, 
Myth  and  Ritual,  ii.  126-7  (i°3''  215  1194),  220  fl".  1 199  fj.).  Another  possiblc 
instance  is  the  Welsh  saint  Arddun  BenasgeIl,or  thewing-headed,  BritishSaints, 
i.  167,  who  reminds  us  of  Hermes  and  his  '  enchennach '  or  bird-gear,  as  the  Irish 
called  it,  Togail  Tr6i,  258  ;  R.  C.  xxii.  18.  Names  like  Cendreithi,  Cennmairc,  i.e. 
ram-head,  horse-head,  Misc.  Celt.  Soc.  p.  46,  Echbel,  horse-mouthed,  v.  s. 
p.  cxli,  note  5,  Cendcait,  Cat-head,  L.  S.  p.  x.xxvii,  Coincenn.  Dog-head,  Ab.  §  22 
note,  maypoint  in  the  same  direction.     A  cat-hcaded  god,  Cbir  Anm.  No.  241. 

*  Ci.  S.  §  30 ;  Enda,  §  22 ;  Fin.  C.  5  12  and  note  ;  Ita,  §  26 ;  red  with  white 
foot,  Br.  Ciaran  S.  c.  31 ;  red  in  front  and  white  behind,  C.  B.  S.  p.  49;  red 
hornless,  LU.  54''  29  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  198. 

'  Ail.  §  34 ;  Fin.  C.  §  24 ;  Lug.  §  28  ;  Three  Homilies,  p.  58 ;  R.  C.  viii. 
54  note  ;  xiii.  40  (=  LL.  2^5^  25),  xxiv.  143,  147  ;  Bran,  i.  58.  62.     Such  kine 

PLUMMER  k 


cxlvi  INTRODUCTION 

&c.  The  niilk  of  cows  of  a  single  colour  had  magical  proper- 
ties  \ 

But  apart  from  all  mythological  and  magical  associations  there 
seems  evidence  that  the  early  and  mediacval  Irish  were  realiy  lovers 
of  animals,  and  that  the  saints  shared  this  quaHty  to  the  full  ^  The 
benevolence  of  Ciaran  of  Clonmacnois  embraced  the  whole  irrational 
creation  ',  the  little  bird  lamcnted  Molua  who  '  never  had  worked  the 
woe  of  living  thing '  *.  The  same  Molua  had  a  tame  partridge, 
Cronan  a  tame  stag,  Moling  a  tame  fox ".  Cainnech  inflicted  a 
terrible  penance  on  a  vvoman  for  cruelty  to  a  dog".  The  swans  on 
Killarney  come  at  the  call  of  Cainnech ',  and  those  on  Lough  Foylc 
at  the  call  of  Comgall ".  Swans  carry  Columba  of  Terryglass  from 
island  to  island ',  or  sing  to  Colman  Ela  and  his  monks  to  console 
them  at  their  work  '" ;  and  seabirds  wing  their  flight  to  save  a  drown- 
ing  child  ".  Wild  animals  would  gather  round  the  hermit  saints'^  as 
they  have  done  round  many  an  Indian  ascetic  in  earlier  and  later 
times.  Even  the  blackbird  that  built  on  St.  Coemgen's  outstretched 
hand",  or  thewren  that  nested  in  St.  MaIo's  cowl"  could  probably  bc 

seem  to  have  been  regarded  as  belonging  specially  to  luchna  Echbel,  whom  we 
have  noted  as  a  patron  of  cattle,  p.  cxli,  note  5.  0'Reilly  gives  the  foUowing 
gloss :  earca  luchna  .i.  ba  finda  odearga,  i.  e.  Iuchna"s  kine,  that  is,  white  cxen 
with  red  ears  ;  cf.  R.  C.  vi.  187,  xv.  4^9,  xx.  250  ;  Corm.  Gloss.  p.  20 ;  Transl. 
p.  72  ;  horses  with  the  like  peculiarity,  Ir.  T.  II.  ii.  191. 

'  R.  C.  XV.  427,  439  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  124  and  note  xviii :  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  89; 
Kenncdy,  Fictions  of  the  Irish  Celts,  pp.  293  ff.  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  pp.  147-8  ;  Griram, 
Mythology,  i.  54-5,  iv.  1302-3.  With  the  uncanny  animals  in  Ab.  §  24  ;  Br.  i. 
§5  72,  75,  compare  Ir.  T.  i.  282  ;  Oss.  Soc.  v.  80  (T.  A  phantom  animal  is  brought 
on  thc  stage  to  bring  about  a  man's  deserved  death,  Ber.  §  22.     See  Addenda. 

^  Oftheir  fondness  forchildren  see  a  beautiful  instance,  Lug.  §  43;  cf.  Bencn 
and  Patrick,  V.  Tr.  p.  36. 

"  Ci.  C.  §  I  note.  *  Fel.'  pp.  56,  182. 

^  Lug.  §  34  ;  Cron.  §  8  ;  Mol.  5§  23,  24  ;  cf.  Brigit,  c.  127  ;  we  hear  of  tame 
cranes,  C.  S.  c.  648  ;  L.  S.  pp.  124-5  ;  cf.  Adamn.  i.  48  ;  doves,  C.  B.  S.  p.  262  ; 
robin,  N.  and  K.  p.  170 ;  crow,  Fcl.  p.  112  ;  a  cat,  wren,  and  fly,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  33. 

«  C.  S.  c.  378  (§  34,  not  in  M).  '  Cain.  §  38. 

'  Com.  §  40  (a  pathetic  story) ;  cf  Tr.  Th.  p.  54''  (§  127). 

•  C.  .S.  c.  456  (§  25).  ^"  Br.  Colmaii  E.  c.  3  ;  cf.  Ab.  §  35  note. 

"  Cain.  §  ai. 

'*  Ab.  §  35  ;  Coem.  §§  16,  24  ;  Capg.  i.  209  f.  (Columban,  cf.  ib.  ii.  5-6. 

"  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  10;    Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  116;  cf.  C.  S.  cc.  200  ',§  20), 

453  (§  ^7^- 

"  St.  Malo,  p.  76;  thc  same  story  is  told  ol  St.  Avitus  in  almost  idcntical 
words,  A.  S.  Junii,  iii.  356".  For  thc  wren  as  '  magus  auium  ',  Mol.  §  22,  and 
note  ad  loc,  cf  Silva  Gad.  i.  56-7.  The  wren  was  cursed  by  Moling  for  killing 
his  fly,  and  that  is  the  reason  why  the  vvren  is  perseculed,  Irish  Moling.  §§  73-4  ; 
cf.  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  147  iX.  For  birds  rescued  by  saints,  see  Ci.  S.  §  2  ;  Mol. 
§  23  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  262  ;  and  a  quaint  story  in  Capg.  ii.  396.  With  Brendan's 
birds  that  chant  thc  hours,  Br.  i.  §  27,  cf.  Aur.  Leg.  p.  670  ;  Bran,  i.  7  ;  Acc. 
Sen.  p.  202.  On  the  other  hand  birds  have  to  be  silenced,  Cain.  §  25  ;  kcpt  ofT 
crops.  &c.,  Ail.  §  43  ;  C.  S.  c.  193  (§  7);  C.  B.  S.  p.  170;  L.  Land.  p.  11  (9)  ; 
0'Hanl.  ix.  283.  St.  Coemgen  cursed  the  ravens  of  Glcndalough,  Gir.  Camb. 
Opp.  V.  113. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxlvii 

paralleled  froni  the  annals  of  Indian  asccticisin.  Wc  niay  well 
believc  inany  of  these  things  to  be  true,  without  supposing  them  to 
be  miraculous  ;  though  we  may  agree  with  the  spiritof  Bede's  reinark, 
that  the  inore  faithfully  man  obcys  the  Creator,  the  more  he  will 
regain  his  lost  cmpire  over  the  creature  '. 

An  idea  common  both  to  thc  ecclesiastical  and  secular  literature  is 
that  souls  and  other  spiritual  beings  appear  in  the  form  of  birds  ; 
angcis  and  blesscd  souls  as  doves  or  swans,  lost  souls  and  demons  as 
ravens  and  other  birds  of  evil  wing";  while  in  Paradise  birds  are 
found  among,  but  seem  to  be  distinguished  from,  the  angels '. 

After  this  long  digression,  occasioned  by  the  apparent  connexion 
of  certain  animals  with  solar  myths,  we  have  next  to  consider  the 
influence  on  Celtic  hagiology  of  the  cult  of  the  Celtic  water  deity.  As 
has  been  already  noticed  in  Part  II,  the  saints  which  seem  to  show 
traces  of  this  influence  are  Abban,  Ailbe,  Bairre,  and  Declan ;  and 
they  all  belong  to  the  south  of  Ireland*.  Among  miracles  which 
seem  to  be  of  this  character  are  the  following"  ;  walking",  riding',  or 
driving^  over  water;  crossing  water  on  a  garment',  dividing"  or 

'  Vita  Cudb.  c.  21  :  '  nos  idcirco  .  .  .  creaturae  dominium  perdimus,  quia  .  .  . 
Crtatori  .  .  .  seruire  negligimus.' 

-  Br.  i.  §  26  ;  C.  S.  cc.  182,  446  (§  3)  ;  L.  S.  p.  xiii  (=  Mart.  Don.  May  16) ; 
V.  Tr.  pp.  21,  114,  414  ;  MS.  Materials,  p.  530  ;  R.  C.  ii.  200  ;  i.x.  494  ;  xiv.  32, 
44,  48  ;  XV.  468  ;  Rawl.  B.  512,  f.  143"^ ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  192  ;  Keating,  iii.  220  ;  A.  S. 
p.  31;  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  140;  Elder  Faitlis,  i.  147;  Macculloch,  Childhood, 
p.  112  ;  Grimm,  ii.  828,  iv.  1571.  A  bird  as  symbol  of  the  birth  of  a  saint,  C.  S. 
c.  189. 

'  Seethe  Fis  Adamnain,§§  6,  7,  in  Windisch  Ir.  T.  i.  174-5  ;  Rhys,  F.  L.  i.  217. 

*  There  seem  some  traces  of  the  same  influence  in  a  northem  saint  not 
includcd  in  these  volumes,  Mochta  of  Louth,  C.  S.  cc.  903-5,  909  (§§  i,  3,  5,  10). 
Brendan  of  Clonfert  comes  to  some  extent  under  the  same  category. 

^  As  before,  I  bracket  references  in  which  water  miracles  are  ascribed  lo 
otlier  than  water  saints,  and  within  the  brackets  I  mark  with  an  asterisk  those 
cases  in  which  they  are  ascribed  to  saints  of  the  other,  or  solar,  cycle. 

«  On  the  sea,  Ab.  §  12  ;  C.  S.  c.  246  (§  22,  Ailbe,  but  not  in  M),  Ail.  §  46 
[Com.  §§  15,  35*  ;  Maed.  §  20*  ;  Moling,  §  5*  ;  C.  S.  c.  389  (§  57.  not  in  M) ; 
L.  S.  pp.  72  3  ;  Fel.-  p.  40]  ;  on  a  lough  [Aed,  §  23*  ;  Cain.  §  42*  ;  Coem.  §§  20, 
23,  24*;  Maed.  §  10  V*;  C.  S.  c.  286  (§  57*,  not  in  M),  cc.  749,  832  (§  13), 
900  (§  25*)] ;  on  a  river  [Col.  E.  §§  11,  12'].  Of  course  this  is  a  case  where 
biblical  influence  is  possible  ;  cf.  Tr.  Th.  p.  ^^g''  (§§  97-8).  For  instances  in 
the  secular  literature  cf.  T.  B.  C.  p.  159  ;  R.  C.  xxi.  156;  Magh  Rath,  p.  84. 

'  Ba.  §  9  note  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  132-3  (also  Bairre)  [Maed.  §  32*]  ;  cf.  Acc.  Sen. 
p.  107  ;  Iliad,  xx.  228.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  these  stories  may  have  arisen 
from  the  habit,  common  to  manj'  languages,  of  applying  the  term  sea-horses  to 
ships  ;  dKos  tiTTroi,  Odyss.  iv.  708  ;  Anglo-Saxon,  y»5-hengst ;  Icel.  unnar  hestr. 

'  [Fin.  C.  §  16  note*  ;  Maed.  §§  12  (marsh),  21  (sea),  37  (lough)*.] 

'  Ail.  §  4  [Cain.  §  45*  note  ;  Enda,  §§  8,  11 ;  Mochua,  §  9*] ;  cf.  Saintyves, 
pp.  254-5  ;  Rhjs,  A.  L.  p.  308  ;  and  Ino"s  Kp-qSffivm',  which  supported  Odysseus 
in  the  waves,  Odyss.  v.  346  fl".  The  cases  of  saints  crossing  the  watcr  on  stones 
will  be  dealt  with  in  a  different  connexion. 

'»  Ab.  §  30  [Bo.  §  16*  ;  Cain.  §  4*  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  6a  ;  Car.  §  64*].  Here  again 
biblical  influcnces  may  be  at  work. 

k2 


cxlviii  INTRODUCTION 

driving  back'  thc  sea  or  rivers,  diverting  streams^,  or  causing  theni 
to  flood  miraculously ';  preservation  not  only  in',  but  undcr  thc 
water  for  considerable  periods  of  time  ''■  Colman  mac  Luachain,  as 
a  child,  was  a  night  and  a  day  under  the  river  Brusna,  and  the  water 
animals  came  and  ran  races  before  him  to  weicome  him,  as  if  they 
would  say  :  '  Welcome  to  thee,  Colman,  Lord  of  this  vvater  and  of  the 
land  ;  thee  will  we  serve  for  evcr ' ". 

This  passage  may  serve  as  a  transition  to  the  numerous  cases  in 
which  animals  for  domestic  use  are  produced  from  the  water',  to 
which  they  generally  return  when  their  appointed  work  is  done''. 
For  good  or  for  evii,  very  special  powers  are  ascribed  to  water ', 
among  others  that  of  giving  revelations  to  thosc  who  can  understand 

•  Ab.  §  17 ;  Ail.  §  45  :  Decl.  §  16  [Com.  §5  24,  48* ;  Lug.  §  19* ;  L.  S.  p.  65 : 
Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  8 ;  St.  Malo,  p.  39 ;  R.  C.  v.  435-6]  ;  an  interesting  secular 
instance,  R.  C.  xvi.  76-7  and  note. 

^  [C.  S.  c.  831,  §  8  ;  c.  928,  §  II  ;  in  the  lattcr  case  the  miracle  was  wrought 
in  order  that  the  noise  of  the  water  might  not  disturb  the  sick  in  the  monastic 
infirmary.] 

'  [Ci.  S.  §  18* ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  532"  (5  47) ;  V.  Tr.  p.  256.  In  Ci.  C.  §  31  notc 
water  miraculously  envelopes  a  naked  saint  to  spare  his  modesty. ]  The  druids 
likewise  caused  floods,  Ir.  T.  II.  ii.  143;  M.  and  C.  ii.  288,  Poets  and  ollavs 
(who,  as  we  shall  see,  are  closely  akin  to  druids)  dry  up  waters  by  charms  and 
satires,  and  cause  thcm  to  flow  by  praise,  T.  B.  C.  p.  789  ;  Oitte,  p.  22.  Rivers 
rise  of  themselves  against  eneraies,  like  the  Scamanderagainst  Achilles,  T.  B.  C. 
pp.  194-5  ;  Iliad,  xxi.  305  fT.  The  druids  of  rival  hosts  contend  with  onc  another 
to  cut  off  or  restore  the  supply  of  water,  Keating,  ii.  320.  The  cases  of  water 
drying  up  if  touched  or  used  by  impure  persons  will  be  dealt  with  in  another 
conne.xion. 

'  Ab.  5  17  [Cain.  §§  6,  21  and  note  *  ;  L.  S.  p.  65]  ;  a  good  secular  parallel,  LL. 
126''  14  ff.  For  prostration  on  thc  water  see  above,  Part  IV,  p.  cxvi.  A  saint 
thrown  into  the  watcr  without  being  wetted,  Maed.  §  47*. 

^  Ab.  §  30;  C.S.  c.  909,  §  10  [Com.  §  23*;  Cron.  §  3;  Rua.  §  13;  Brev.  Aberdon., 
Pars  Hicm.  Propr.  Sanct.  fl'.  24  v",  26  v°  ;   Fel.-  p.  244]  ;  cf.  Iliad,  xxi.  238. 

^  Rcnnes  MS.  f.  77"  ;  a  picture  which  recalls  Iliad,  xiii.  27-8. 

'  Sea  [Maed.  §  31*;  Rua.  §18;  C.  S.  c.  673];  Lough  [Cain.  §  i  notc*; 
Cron.  §24;  R.  C.  xii.  346,  348  (Fechin)*];  River  [Ci.  S.  §31*];  Fountain, 
L.  S.  p.  loi.  Cuchulainn's  famous  horses  had  come  i^rom  loughs  and  returncd 
thither  after  his  death,  LL.  121"  32(5".,  121'' ^ff.;  cf.  Pagan  Ireland,  pp.  166, 
304;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  127-130,  aai ;  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  136;  Martin, 
p.  157.  The  water-horse  and  water-bull  arc  rather  to  be  classed  with  the 
'  peists '  discussed  above  ;  cf.  0'Flaherty's  lar-Connaught.  p.  19;  Campbell,  u.  s., 
pp.  203  ff. ;  Outer  Isles,  pp.  205,  404  ;  MaccuIIoch's  Wcstcrn  Isles,  ii.  185, 
though  somctimes  even  these  monsters  arc  made  available  for  agriculturc, 
Grimm,  Mythology,  ii.  490.     See  Addenda. 

'  Ab.  §  52  [Enda,  §  22]. 

"  The  plague  cannot  cross  nine  waves,  L.  H.-  i.  25  (for  the  special  virtue  of 
the  ninth  wave  cf.  Ir.  T.  iii.  189 ;  LL.  13"  39  ;  Grimm,  Mythology,  ii.  600  ; 
iv.  1461);  watcr  protects  against  ghosts,  &c.,  Campbcll,  Supcrstitions,  p.  50; 
Outer  Isles,  p.  231  ;  Rhys,  A.  L.,  p.  358  ;  F.Idcr  Faiths,  i.  280  ff.,  ii.  24  ;  I.yall, 
ii.  297.  Maelduin  and  his  companions  found  a  lough  which  rcnewed  youth, 
R.  C.  X.  78.  On  the  other  hand,  water  is  the  hauntof  cvil  spirits,  Grimm,  u.  s., 
ii.  497  ('malignus  spiritus  .  .  .  qucm  Neptunum  uocant ') ;  Macculloch,  Western 
Islcs,  i.  283. 


IIEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cxlix 

its  meaning'.  Of  thc  legends,  so  Crcquent  in  many  quarters  *,  of 
subaqucous  cities,  thc  only  instance  vvhich  I  have  fjund  in  Irish 
hagiologj'  is  the  story  of  the  submarine  city  of  Plea,  in  which  the 
anchor  of  Brigifs  messengers  was  cntangled,  and  whence  she 
obtained  her  '  ordo ' '. 

Closely  connected  with  this  subject  is  the  cult  of  fountains,  and  the 
number  of  sacred  wells  cxisting  in  Ireland  to  this  day  *  shows  how 
widcly  diflused  that  cult  was.  It  is  not,  of  course,  exclusively  Celtic, 
nor  cven  exclusivelj'  Aryan ''.  It  is  also  one  of  the  departments  in 
which  the  christianization  of  localities  and  customs  originally  heathen 
can  be  most  clearly  traced  °.  In  Adamnan,  and  in  the  lives  of  Patrick, 
we  have  express  mention  of  fountains  which  were  worshipped  by  the 
heathcn '.  We  have  what  looks  like  a  libation  to  a  fountain*;  in 
another  case  the  manacles  of  a  criminal  are  loosed  by  the  hands  of 
the  saint  beneath  the  fountain  ',  where,  clearly,  the  saint  has  taken 
the  place  of  a  water-nymph.    Sometimes  the  christianization  of  the 

'  L.  S.  p.  29 ;  for  a  most  interesting  secular  parallel  see  R.  C.  xxvi.  8 ;  here 
a  spell  has  to  be  chanted  over  the  wave  before  the  precise  import  of  the  message 
can  be  grasped  ;  cf.  Magh  Lena,  p.  40.  Divination  by  smiting  the  sea  with  an 
axe,  Orig.  Island,  ii.  425. 

-  Rh^s,  F.  L.  ch.  vii ;  these  stories  are  possibly  based  on  facts  in  some  cases, 
0'HanIon,  v.  407. 

'  Sce  above,  p.  cxxvii.  Foragood  secular  parallel  to  this  detention  of  a  boat 
by  subaqueous  folk,  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  243-4  ;  R.  C.  xv.  294  (and  for  miraculous 
detention  of  ships  cf.  Ab.  §§  12,  19;  Ail.  §  3);  cf.  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  92; 
Elder  Faiths,  i.  221  ff.  There  was  a  sublacustrine  smith  under  Killarney,  R.  C. 
XV.  451 ;  cf.  Grimm,  u.  s.,  ii.  495.  In  the  Welsh  life  of  Beuno  a  king  is  turned 
into  a  pool  as  a  punishment,  C.  B.  S.  p.  16  ;  the  Morrigu  does  the  like  with 
spells,  R.  C.  xvi.  65.  Of  offerings  to  water  deities  something  will  be  said 
presently.  The  demand  of  a  druid  for  a  human  victim  to  still  the  raging  of  the 
sea  (Mochta,  §  i,  C.  S.  c.  903)  may  be  modelled  on  the  Jonah  story. 

*  '  Probably  there  cannot  be  less  than  three  thousand  throughout  Ireland,' 
Pagan  Ireland,  p.  143;  cf.  Bertrand,  Religion,  pp.  330-1. 

^  '  Sacred  wells  are  among  the  oldest  and  most  ineradicable  objects  of 
reverence  among  all  the  Semites,  and  are  credited  with  oracular  powers,' 
Robertson-Smith,  Religion  of  Semites,  p.  135  ;  cf.  ib.  pp.  166  ff.  The  literature 
on  the  subject  is  very  extensive  ;  for  Ireland  a  tract  by  P.  D.  Hardy,  '  Holy 
Wells  of  Ireland,'  Dublin,  1836,  may  be  consulted.  It  is  written  from  a  strongly 
Protestant  point  of  view,  but  contains  curious  records  of  local  customs  ;  cf.  Ir. 
Nenn.  pp.  196-7,  210,  220;  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  84-90  ;  Pagan  Ireland,  pp.  93-4, 
142-5, 157  ff.,  361 ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii,  chap,  3,  For  Scotland, cf.  Martin,  pp.  140-1, 
C29  f,,  242,  253,  276-7  ;  Outer  Isles,  pp,  394-5.  For  Man,  Rhj^s,  F.  L.  i,  332  ff, 
For  Wales,  cf,  ib,  i,  354  ff. ;  British  Saints,  i,  112-13,  147,  183,  188,  193,  196, 
216,  298,     For  Gaul,  Bertrand,  Religion,  Lcfon  xv, 

'  Delehaye,  Legendes,  p,  200  ;  Saintj-ves,  pp,  227,  281, 

'  Adamn.  ii.  11  :  '  fons  .  .  .  quem  quasi  deum  stolidi  homines  uenerabantur ' ; 
V.  Tr.  pp.  122,  323 :  '  honorabant  magi  fontem,  et  immolauerunt  dona  ad  illum 
in  modum  dei.' 

'  C.  S.  c.  280  (§  46,  not  in  M)  ;  cf.  Hardy,  Holy  Wells,  pp.  31,  55  ;  Delehaye, 
p.  192  (lakes)  ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  189  (stream)  ;  Martin,  p.  28 ;  Campbell,  Super- 
stitions,  p.  244  (sea). 

»  C.  B.  S.  p.  206. 


cl  INTRODUCTION 

spot  was  effected  by  building  a  church  or  chapcl  ovcr  or  near  it '. 
But  the  commonest  way  of  cfTecting  this  was  by  ascribing  the 
origin  of  the  fountain  itself  to  the  miraculous  intervention  of  thc 
saint.  The  most  frequent  modc  of  production  was  by  the  saint 
smiting  the  ground  with  his  bachall  or  pastoral  staflF^,  generally 
with  the  butt  end  of  it.  But  in  one  case  the  fountain  is  produced  by  a 
distant  cast  of  thc  sainfs  crozier',  which  reminds  us  of  thc  fountains 
produced  by  the  arrows  shot  from  the  bow  of  Buddha  or  Mithra '. 
But  there  are  many  other  modes  of  production  ;  from  a  saint's  blood', 
or  tears  °,  by  a  word  ',  by  the  sign  of  thc  cross  - ,  by  the  saint"s  prayer 
or  blessing',  by  the  blow  of  a  horse's  hoof'",  by  water  poured  from 
the  sainfs  bell ",  as  also  by  the  more  prosaic  process  of  digging '-. 
Sometimes  the  fountain  is  produced  by  or  on  account  of  an  infant 
saint,  to  supply  water  for  his  baptism  '^.  These  sacred  fountains  havc 
various  vvonder-working  quahties.  Most  of  them  havc  healing  pro- 
perties,    either   general    or    special  '* ;    thej'  miraculously    support 

'  V.  Tr.  p.  8;  C.  B.  S.  p.  65  ;  British  Saints,  i.  147  ;  cf.  Capg.  i.  gg,  364  : 
Bertrand,  Religion,  pp.  ig8,  208,  212,  332;  Macculloch,  Childhood,  pp.  76-7. 
It  may  well  bc  that  in  some  cases  these  chapels  are  themselves  adaptations  of 
earlier  heathen  shrincs,  ib.  p.  206  ;  Saintyves,  p.  153. 

^  Ail.  §  16  (hcrc  the  biblical  parallel  of  Moses  smiting  the  rock  has  clearly 
been  at  worl?  ;  so  Z.  C.  P.  v.  28  ;  Aur.  Leg.  p.  860)  ;  Ail.  §  34  note  ;  Col.  E.  §  7  ; 
Fin.  C.  §  15  ;  Rua.  §  22  ;  C.  S.  cc.  105  (§  6),  793  (§  4) ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  525'' ; 
Irish  Moling,  §  6g  ;  Rawl.  B.  512,  f.  32''  22  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  82'' ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  61 , 
65,  130,  150,  169,  186  ;  R.  C.  V.  441  ;  Capg.  i.  112,  ii.  184,  317,  566  (non-Celtic 
instances,  ib.  i.  97,  gg,  284) ;  cf.  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  cc.  11,  12. 

'  Mart.  Don.  p.  28,  Naile  of  Inbher  Naile  ;  cf.  Capg.  ii.  184  (cast  of  a  stone). 
In  Keating,  ii.  320,  a  druid  produces  a  fountain  by  thc  cast  of  a  spcar  ;  cf. 
Grimm,  Mythology,  iv.  1454  (cast  of  an  axc). 

'  The  Buddha  story  will  be  famihar  to  readers  of  Kipling's  Kim ;  for  Mithra 
cf.  Dill,  Roman  Society  from  Nero  to  Marcus  Aurclius,  pp.  605-7. 

^  Decl.  §  16 ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  17,  ig,  126,  201  ;  Capg.  ii.  g^,  gg,  235. 

^  C.  B.  S.  p.  171  ;  cf.  Grimm,  u.  s.  iv.  1455. 

'  Br.  i.  §  7  ;  Com.  §  31.  «  C.  S.  c.  191,  §  3  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  8. 

'  Ail.  5§  20,  32  (in  S  the  well  is  discovered  by  tho  cast  of  a  stonc) ;  C.  S. 
cc.  169  (§  g),  ig3  (§  7)  ;  Adamn.  ii.  10  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  26,  67,  130,  262  ;  Capg. 
i.  208,  46g,  ii.  103,  353.  Conversely  a  noxious  fountain  is  produccd  by  a  sainfs 
curse,  C.  B.  S.  p.  30  ;  while  noxious  fountains  are  made  wholesome  by  the  saint's 
blessing,  Adamn.  ii.  11  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  123.  Hot  springsand  volcanoes  arc  believed 
to  be  connected  with  hell,  Br.  i.  §§  58-g  ;  Gregory,  Dialogues,  iv.  30,  35,  55. 

'"  C.  B.  .S.  p.  260  :  cf.  Grimm,  ii.  584,  iii.  ^38. 

"  Rennes  MS.  f.  84». 

n  Col.  E.  §  33  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  530«  (§  32%  p.  336"  (§71);  d"-  Fech.  §  5 ;  Macd. 
§  27.  In  anothcr  case  the  site  of  a  fountain  is  revealcd  by  .m  angel  in  a  dream, 
C.  B.  S.  p.  73.  The  curious  story  in  Enda,  §  11,  in  which  fountains  are  pro- 
duced  from  the  urine  of  animals,  has  an  exact  parallel  in  the  secular  literature, 
Silva  Gad.  i.  234. 

"  Bo.  §  2  ;  Car.  §  6  ;  Com.  §  6  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  8 ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  121-2. 

'*  Rua.  §  22  ;  C.  S.  c.  105  ;  L.  S.  p.  81  ;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  1 1  ;  C.  B.  S. 
pp.  8,  17,  65,  126,  160:  Capg.  ii.  421;  R.C.  v.  443.  So  with  cortain  loughs  and 
pools,  Mun.  §  8  ;  Br.  Farannan,  c.  9 ;  Br.  Coemgen,  cc.  a,  8  ;  thcse  healing  virtucs 
arc  increased  by  the  addition  of  vvater  from  the  Jordan,  C.  B.  S.  p.  67,  a  chris- 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY      cli 

life'  ;  they  give  oracics  or  auguries^,  thiey  cause  a  magic  sleep  ^. 
Some  fountains  on  being  drained  ensure  a  favourable  wind  :  '  On  tiie 
northiern  coast  of  this  island  [Inismurray]  is  a  well  calied  Tobar  na 
cobhrach,  i.  c.  the  wcli  of  assistance.  When  the  islanders  or  inhabit- 
ants  of  the  opposite  coasts  are  too  long  detained  on  the  island  by 
tempestuous  weather,  thcy  drain  this  well  into  the  sea,  and  repeat 
certain  prayers,  by  which  the  storm  will  immediately  subside  through 
the  miracles  of  God  and  St.  Molaise  who  blessed  this  well  '•.  'When 
any  foreign  boats  arc  windbound  here  [Isle  of  Gigha],  the  master  of 
the  boat .  .  .  gives  the  nativc  that  lets  the  water  run  a  piece  of  monej', 
and  they  say  that  inimediately  aftcrwards  the  wind  changes".  To 
these  instances  thcre  is  a  most  exact  and  interesting  parallel  in  the 
Bookof  Llandaff  with  reference  to  a  fountain  sacred  to  St.  Sampson". 
Other  fountains  contain  wonderful  stones ',  or  sacred  fish '.     Thej- 

tianizing  touch ;  cf.  Hardy,  Holy  Wells,  pp.  31,  49 ;  Bertrand,  u.  s.  pp.  197-9  ; 
Macculloch,  Childhood,  p.  77  ;  a  fountain  cures  barrenness,  Luzcl,  Legendes 
Chroticnnes,  ii.  84.  In  the  secular  literature  we  have  fountains  which  not  only 
heal  wounded  and  blind  men,  but  even  raise  the  slain,  R.  C.  xii.  94,  xv.  462  ; 
Cath  Finntragha,  p.  7. 

"  Br.  i.  §  25,  ii.  §51. 

'  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  196 ;  Martin,  p.  7.  A  fountain  turns  to  blood  whenever  any 
of  the  clan  is  about  to  be  slain,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  32. 

'  Br.  i.  55  28,  36  ;  ii.  j  29. 

*  John  0'Donovan  in\Vakeman's  Antiquarian  Remains  on  Inismurray,  p.  xii. 
Mr.  Wakeman  himself  says :  *  it  is  probably  some  years  since  a  rite  so  very 
pagan  in  character  was  practised,'  ib.  p.  126. 

*  Martin,  p.  230. 

'  '  Nautae  illius  gentis  Armorieae,  propter  uentum  consuetum  ad  naues  illorum, 
ut  in  directum  nauigare  possint  ad  rectum  iter  ubi  uelint,  consuetum  habent 
illum  saluificum  fontcm  purgare,  et  sacpius  ac  saepius  per  interventum  sanctl 
pontificis  [sc.  Sampson]  Dominus  largitur  precarium  illorum,  id  est  uentum  ad 
uelum  nauigii,  ut  cum  gaudio  gradiantur  per  aequoreum  iter,'  L.  Land.  p.  103 
(109%  Mr.  Wakeman.  u.  s.,  explains  this  as  a  libation  to  the  Celtic  Sea-god. 
It  may  perhaps  be  imitative  magic ;  the  weakening  the  fountain  weakens  the 
opposing  elements  :  just  as,  converscly,  the  stirring  up  of  the  sacred  well  on  the 
Lycaean  Mount  by  the  priest  of  Zeus  stirred  up  the  rain  clouds,  Lang,  Myth  and 
Ritual,  ii.  190  (169) ;  cf.  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  105.  For  other  means  of  obtaining 
fair  winds,  ib.  i.  305  ;  Martin,  pp.  109,  166 ;  Grimm,  i.  425,  ii.  637-40,  iv.  1472-3. 
In  lona  a  favourable  wind  was  obtamed  by  placing  Columba's  books  and  vest- 
nients  upon  the  altar,  Adamn.  ii.  45. 

'^  '  lapilli  tres  limpidissimi  cum  fontis  scaturigine  ascendentes  et  descendentes 
more  artauorum  a  iaculatore  proiectorum  . . .  sibi  ad  inuicem  obuiabant,'  C.  B.  S. 
pp.  202-3  ;  ef.  St.  Malo,  p.  50  ;  0'Hanlon,  ii.  582.  •  At  Cranfield  (Antrimi, 
there  is  a  spring  .  .  .  consecrated  by  St.  Colman.  .  .  .  Pilgrims  go  to  it  on  May 
eve.  They  empty  and  clear  the  well  in  the  twilight  [this  is  the  'purgare 
fontem '  of  the  last  note],  stay  all  night  about  it  saying  a  certain  number  of 
Paters.  &c.  In  the  moming  tficy  find  small  .  .  .  stones  of  an  amber  colour  in 
the  bottom  of  the  well,  which  .  .  .  will  preserve  those  that  carry  one  of  them 
.  .  .  from  any  loss  by  fire  or  water,'  Richardson,  Great  FoIIy  of  Pilgrimages 
(1727),  p.  65,  cited  in  Reeves,  Eccl.  Antiquities,  p.  88. 

*  y.  Tr.  p.  H2  ;  L.  Land.  p.  253  (264) ;  Capg.  ii.  214  (three  fish  which  always 
remained  three  though  the  saint  had  one  every  day  for  his  dinner) ;  cf.  Enda, 
§  22 ;    Rua.  §  14.     Such  sacred  fish,  if  caught,  cannot  be  dressed  or  cooked, 


clii  INTRODUCTION 

show  their  resentment  at  any  indignity  or  pollution  by  drj'ing  up  or 
removing'.  Many  of  them  object  to  be  mcddled  with  bywomen". 
But  a  fountain  will  sometimes  remove,  not  out  of  anger,  but  in  order 
to  follow  or  guide  a  favoured  saint '. 

Very  frequently  a  sacred  tree  ovcrhangs  or  grows  by  thc  sacrcd 
fount ' ;  and  on  these  are  hung  the  shreds  of  rags,  etc,  left  by  the 
pilgrims^. 

The  cuh  of  sacred  trees  is  of  course  a  widely  extcnded  form  of 
nature-worship*.  We  have  already  noticed  the  trees,  probably  sacred 

C.  S.  c.  232  (§  16) ;  Z.  C.  P.  iH.  562  ;  cf.  Religion  of  Semites,  pp.  172-8  :  Hardy, 
Sacred  Wells,  p.  31.  In  the  secular  literalure  cf.  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  66,  217  ;  Ir. T. 
iii.  195;  Elder  Faitlis,  ii.  88,  92,  96,  108  ff.  ;  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  159;  Martin, 
p.  141.  In  the  year  1061  Aedh  0'Connor  sacked  Kincora,  '  and  stopped  up  the 
fountain,  and  ate  its  two  salmon,'  no  doubt  as  a  deliberate  outrage  to  the 
inhabitants,  F.  M.  ii.  880. 

'  A  fountain  dries  up  because  'quidam  laici  post  cfTusionem  sanguinis  ex  ipso 
.  .  .  biberunt ',  C.S.  c.  280  (§  46,  not  in  M) ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  28;  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  103, 
209;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  65,  88,  96  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  196  note.  A  well  dries  up  if  a 
dog  drinlis  of  it,  Martin,  p.  34.  In  heathen  estimation  thc  approach  of  a  Christian 
was  pollution  to  a  sacred  Ibuntain,  Grimm,  u.  s.  i.  77.  Water  from  a  sacred 
well  will  not  boil  if  used  for  ordinary  cooking,  Capg.  ii.  89;  Martin,  pp.  7,  277. 
Wells  also  show  their  anger  by  flooding,  C.  B.  S.  p.  76;  Ace.  Sen.  pp.  102-3. 

^*  St.  Cranatan's  well  at  Killuragh  dries  up  in  summer  because  a  woman  once 
washed  dirty  hnen  in  il  (private  information)  ;  an  exact  parallel  is  cited  from 
Pausanias,  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  88;  cf.  ib.  27-30;  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  142;  Christian 
Inscriptions,  i.  10  ;  Martin,  p.  242  ;  Religion  of  Semites,  p.  168  ;  Macculloch, 
Childhood,  p.  317  and  reff.  ;  Capg.  i.  99;  R.  C.  xv.  315  ;  Grimm,  u.  s.  iv.  1789. 
1812.  A  woman  is  struck  with  barrenness  for  bathing  in  a  fountain,  C.  B.  S. 
p.  205.  On  thc  othcr  hand,  a  man  is  punished  for  using  a  wcll  specially 
appropriated  to  the  othcr  sex,  British  Saints,  i.  335. 

'  C.  S.  cc.  905-6  (§  5) ;  Mochua  of  Balla,  on  lcaving  Bangor,  took  with  him 
a  fountain  to  guide  him  to  his  ultimate  dcstination  ;  he  wished  to  settle  at 
Tehelly,  *  7  nir  IiAadh,  ar  ni  ro  thoirinn  in  topur,'  i.  e.  and  he  could  not, 
because  the  fountain  did  not  descend  ;  ultimately  he  settled  at  Balla,  L.  S. 
pp.  139-41  ;  cf.  Capg.  i.  129  ;  Cormac,  Glossary,  p.  31  ;  Transl.  p.  121  ;  cf. 
Grimm,  ii.  599  (a  very  charming  story).  There  are  somc  marvellous  fountains 
mentioned  in  the  curious  Irish  tract,  Tenga  bithnua,  or  Ever-new  Tongue, 
§§36-9,  Eriu,  ii.  112-14.  The  source  of  this  tract  is  not  known,  possibly 
some  lost  apocryphal  apocalypse. 

*  Br.  i.  §  26;  St.  Malo,  pp.  50-1  ;  N.  and  K.  p.  153  ;  L.  S.  p.  71  ;  CHanlon, 
ii.  578  ;  cf.  the  fountain  and  grove  and  altar,  Odyssey,  xvii.  205  fl". ;  Driver's 
Genesis,  p.  154. 

^'  This  is  a  phenomenon  found  all  over  the  world  nearly ;  cf.,  for  Irish  examples, 
Elder  Faiths,  ii.  chap.  3.  It  is  doubtful  whethcr  the  underlying  idca  is  that  of 
an  offering  to  the  deity  or  saint,  orof  leaving  bchind  on  the  rag  thc  diseasc,  &c., 
of  which  the  pilgrim  came  to  be  healed.  Of  course  small  ofTerings  of  many 
kinds  may  be  found  at  any  sacrcd  well ;  sec  an  article  by  the  present  writcr  in 
the  Guardian  of  Dcc.  23,  1903.  For  other  traces  of  Well  Worship,  &c.,  cf. 
0'Flaherty's  lar-Connaught,  pp.  53-4;  Bran,  ii.  214-15,  217;  Rhys,  H.  L. 
pp.  105-6,  186-7,  i9'i  216-17;  snd  Miss  Stokcs,  Three  Months  in  the  Forests 
of  Francc,  pp.  xxxiii,  25,  39,  46-51,  122,  140,  176-8,  223-4,  229. 

"  For  its  prcvalencc  among  the  Semites  scc  Rcligion  of  Scmitcs,  pp.  185  fT., 
195-6,  335-6.  Herc,  too,  thc  rag-hung  tree  is  frequent.  For  some  raarvellous 
trccs  cf.  ■fenga  bithnua,  u.  s.,  §§  49-54.     For  Ireland,  see  Oss.  Soc.  v.  152-5; 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     cliii 

tribal  trces,  at  which  Irish  chicrtains  wcrc  inaugurated  ;  and  wc  find 
a  hazel  asaplace  of  judgemcnt '.  Giraldus  speaks  of  trees,  especially 
ancient  yevv-trees  in  cemeteries,  plantcd  by  Irish  saints*^;  but  I  have 
not  come  across  any  instances  in  the  livcs.  Ruadan  of  Lothra  had  a 
marvciious  lime-tree  vvhicli  distilled  sustenance  for  him  and  his 
nionks-' ;  and  therc  vvas  a  similar  tree  on  Inis  Celtra^.  Trees  furnish 
auguries  to  saints  ^  ;  but  tlic  oracular  trce  of  Rahen  was  thc  abode  of 
a  dcmon '.  Druids  prctend  to  pass  through  trees,  though  this  is 
nierely  a  case  of  glamour ' ;  but  a  tree  really  opens  and  conceals 
fugitives '.  A  hazel  tree  heals  all  discases  ^,  and  a  plane  tree  tests 
perjury'".  To  cut  any  of  these  sacred  trees  or  groves  is  sacrilege". 
In  many  vvays  the  trees  do  homage  to  the  saints  ;  their  leaves  make 
mclody  for  Coemgen  '-,  they  lie  down  to  give  him  passage,  and  lift 
themselves  again  when  he  has  passed".    Fallen  trees  are  raised  "  at 

Magh  Lena,  pp.  94-6 ;  Magh  Rath,  p.  234  ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  chap.  5.  For 
Tcutonic  instances,  Grimm,  i.  7^  fl'. ;  ii.  474,  648  fi".  For  classicai  instances, 
Ramsay,  in  H.  D.  B.  v.  1 13-14.     For  India,  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  pp.  12-16. 

'  C.  B.  S.  p.  72;  cf.  above,  p.  civ,  note6.  -  Opp.  v.  135,  152. 

'  Rua.  §  14 ;  C.  S.  cc.  202-3.  *  C.  S.  c.  453  (§  16). 

''  Maed.  §  8.  '  Ber.  §  20. 

'  C.  S.  c.  353  (§  39,  Aed  mac  Bricc,  not  in  M);  Cain.  §  11. 

*  Sam.  §  i8 ;  cf.  V.  Tr.  p.  556  ;  Capg.  i.  iii  ;  Aur.  Leg.  p.  900;  Delehaye, 
p.  39  ;  Saintyvcs,  p.  267.  At  Killuragh  is  a  white-thorn  sacred  to  St.  Cranatan. 
In  old  days  people  from  far  and  near,  when  going  to  America,  took  a  little  bit 
of  it  vvith  them,  as  it  was  supposed  to  ensure  a  safe  journey  (private  information). 
For  the  virtues  of  hawthorn,  cf.  Grimm,  u.  s.,  iv.  1618. 

»  C.  S.  c.  451  (§  12);  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  69. 

'"  Mart.  Don.  p.  xli,  the  reading  is  doubtful.  In  C.  B.  S.  p.  14  is  a  tree 
which  killed  Englishmen  but  spared  Welshmen,  an  extreme  instance  of  Welsh 
nationalism. 

"  '  Do  gheall  Caoimligin  iffern  7  saoghal  gerr  da  gach  nech  do  loisccfedh 
lirach  no  crionach  na  cailledh  sin  go  brath,'  i.  e.  Coemgen  promised  hell  and 
a  short  life  to  any  one  who  should  burn  cither  fresh  or  dry  wood  from  this 
forest  for  ever,  Br.  Coem.  c.  9;  Forannan  ordained  '  gan  uiret  deilcc  bruit  do 
bhuain  da  fhiodhbadh  ',  i.  e.  that  not  so  much  as  a  cloak-pin  should  be  cut  from 
his  wood,  Br.  Farannan,  c.  9;  Anecdota,  iii.  6.  A  raan  who  tanned  his  shoes 
with  bark  from  Columba's  oak  was  smitten  with  leprosy  when  he  put  them  on, 
L.  S.  p.  28  ;  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  310.  Of  a  tree  at  Tombrickane  0'Donovan  says  : 
'  the  peasantry  would  not  cut  any  part  of  it  for  fuel,  because  they  believe  that 
the  house  in  which  any  part  of  it  should  be  burnt  would  soon  meet  the  same 
fate,'  Supplement  to  0'ReiIIy,  s.  v.  bile ;  cf  British  Saints,  i.  220 ;  Martin, 
pp.  69,  141  ;  Grimm,  Hythology,  ii.  648,  iii.  1085  ;  Lucan,  Pharsalia,  iii.  430-1  : 
'  si  robora  sacra  ferirent,  In  sua  credebant  redituras  membra  secures.'  We 
hear  of  a  tree  of  vvhich  the  chips,  when  cut,  would  fly  back  into  their  place, 
Fel.'  p.  204  (  =  V.  Tr.  p.  556).  "The  grove  of  Zeus  Lycaeus  might  not  even  be 
entered,  Pausanias,  viii.  2,  cited  by  Lang,  Myth  and  Ritual,  i.  259  (268).  The 
hanging  of  the  heads  of  animals  taken  in  the  chase  on  trees  is  probably  a  reiic 
of  tree-vvorship.  Aur.  Leg.  p.  448  (life  of  Germanusl.  The  name  Melcruinn 
(probably  =  Mael-crainn,  i.  e.slaveof  thetree),  Coem.  §  38,  points  the  same  way. 

'^  Coem.  §  19. 

"  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  9  ;  cf.  Ci.S.  §  18 ;  a  tree  bows  down  to  form  a  bridge  across  a 
riverfora  messenger  of  Cadoc.C.  B.  S.  p.  79.    A  tree  removed  bodily,  Ber.  §  20. 

"  Car.  §  60  ;  Cron.  §  22 ;  Fin.  C.  §  12  note  ;  Mochoem.  §  22  ;  Rua.  §  20 ;  cf. 
Sam.  §  19. 


cliv  INTRODUCTION 

the  bidding  of  thc  saints ;  fruitlcss  trees  bear  fruit',  sour  fruits  are 
made  sweet'-,  and  fruits  are  produced  or  preserved  out  of  due 
season^;  a  dry  stick  becomcs  a  green  tree,  and  blossoms,  and  bears'. 
Certain  trees  have  magical  propcrties.  Of  the  rowan  vve  do  not 
hear  so  much  as  we  might  expect  from  its  prominence  in  the  secular 
mythology.  In  the  Irish  hfe  of  Berach  is  a  very  curious  account  ol 
druidical  divination  by  means  of  hurdles  made  of  rowan '.  Hazel 
also  is  more  prominent  in  the  secular  than  in  thc  hagiological  Htera- 
ture  \ 

'  Ber.  §  9  ;  Coem.  5  34  ;  Maecl.  §  54. 

-  Mochoem.  §  23  ;  Adamn.  ii.  2. 

'  Ber.  §  9;  Car.  §  21;  Cl.  S.  §16;  Coem.  §34;  N.  and  K.  p.  227.  An 
interestlng  parallel  from  the  secular  llterature  in  Oss.  Soc.  v.  50-4. 

«  Car.  §  66 ;  Col.  E.  §  i  ;  C.  S.  c.  737  ;  L.  S.  pp.  57,  71 ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  529"  (§  18) ; 
Br.  Macdoc,  c.  4.  Most  of  thcse  instances  rcfer  to  thc  wood  held  by  thc  mother 
of  the  salnt  at  thc  time  of  her  delivery.  (So  Leto  grasped  a  palm  or  ohve  when 
she  brought  forth  Apollo  and  Artemis,  Lang,  Myth  and  Ritual,  il.  319,  237  [198, 
218].)  In  L.  S.  p.  57  the  wood  isrowan,  and  Mr.  Stokes  suggests  that  the  object 
was  to  ward  off  wltchcraft.  A  very  common  form  of  thls  mlracle  is  where  thc 
saint  sets  his bachall  in  thc  ground  and  it  becomes  a  tree,  Mochoem.  §  18  ;  N.  and 
K.  p.  153  ;  Capg.  I.  1 12,  250,  362-3,  425  ;  11.  57,  184  ;  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  432-3,  576  ; 
cf.  ib.  866.     A  javelin  hurled  by  Cohimba  bccomes  a  holly  tree,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  52. 

'  c.  33  :  '  doraldh  iEdhan  frla  dniidhibh  :  "  fionnta  libh,  cia  doroine  na  ferta 
sa"  .  .  .  ;  7  dochuatar  na  draolthc  ara  ccllathaibh  caerthainn  7  tuccadh  dano 
nua  corma  doibh,'  i.  e.  Aedan  [mac  Gabrain,  cf.  Bcde,  H.  E.  i.  34]  said  to  his 
drulds,  '  find  out  who  has  done  these  wonders ' ;  and  the  druids  went  on  to 
their  rowan  hurdles,  and  new  beer  was  brought  to  them.'  This  is  illustrated 
by  a  passage  in  Keating,  11.  348-50,  who  says  that  this  was  the  most  potent 
form  of  druidic  dlvination,  and  was  only  resorted  to  when  everything  else  had 
falled  :  '  is  eadh  donidis,  crulnnchliatha  caorthainn  do  dheanamh,  7  seachadha 
na  d-tarbh  n-lodhbart  do  ieathadh  orra,  7  an  taobh  do  bhiodh  ris  an  bh-feoil  do 
chur  i  n-uachtar  diobh,  7  dul  mar  sin  ,  .  .  do  thogairm  na  n-deamhan  do  bhualn 
sccal  diobh,'  i.  e.  this  is  what  they  would  do,  namely,  make  round  hurdles  of 
rowan,  and  spread  ovcr  them  the  hides  of  sacrificcd  bulls  with  the  fleshy 
(or  inner)  slde  uppermost,  and  so  proceed  to  summon  the  demons  to  extract 
Information  from  them.  And  hence,  adds  Keating,  it  bccame  a  proverb  to  say 
of  any  one  who  has  donc  his  utmost  to  obtain  informatlon  '  go  d-teld  ar  a 
chliathaibh  fis',  i.  c.  that  he  has  gone  on  to  hls  hurdlcs  of  knowledge.  Wc 
find  saints  called  Mac  Carthainn  and  Der  Carthainn,  i.  e.  son  and  daughter  of 
Rowan,  Mart.  Don.  pp.  70,  218,  268  ;  LL.  351''  ad  calcem,  353''  7  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  158  ; 
two  brothers  called  Carthenn  Mor  and  Carthenn  Bec,  i.  e.  Rowan  the  Great  and 
Rowan  the  Llttle,  ib.  p.  168,  cf  ib.  206;  and  another  pair  called  Calrthenn 
Finn  and  C.  donu,  i.  e.  thc  Falr  and  the  Dark,  L.  S.  p.  93.  In  the  secular 
Ilterature  rowan  protects  against  magic  (sec  last  note,  Keating,  i.  202  ;  Elder 
Faiths,  li.  155-6;  Scott,  Blaek  Dwarf,  Introduction,  and  Ihe  Scottish  Rhyme  : 
Rowan,  ash,  and  rcd  Ihrced 
Keep  the  dcvils  from  their  speed. 

Lang,  Custom  and  Myth,  p.  149  . 
But  it  is  also  very  powcrful  magic  or  mcdiclne,  LL.  120";  a  '  peist '  haunts 
the  roots  of  a  rowan,  Ib.  250" ;  for  rowan  bcrries  cf.  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  1 10-12  ;  the 
smoke  of  a  fire  of  rowan  Is  potcnt,  Rawl.  B.  502  f.  72'' ;  so  a  fire  of  blackthorn 
is  used  in  ordcals,  Ir.  T.  lii.  190. 

'  For  the  healing  propcrty  of  hazcl  see  above,  p.  cliii,  note  9;  cf.  N.  and  K. 
p.   172  (a  branch  of  hazel  ignited  by  fire  from  heavcn) ;  L.  S.  p.  71.     For  the 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     clv 

That  Ireland  was  in  old  days  an  aniply  wooded  country  is  shown 
by  many  passagcs  in  thc  iives  ',  Connaught  being  particularly  famous 
for  its  timber';  and  this  evidence  is  confirmcd  by  the  number  of 
buried  forcsts  vvhich  are  continualiy  being  exposed  to  view',  and  also 
by  the  topographical  nomenclature  of  the  country  *. 

The  cult  of  stones  is  probably  not  to  bc  regarded  as  part  of  Celtic 
nature-worship,  but  rather  as  due  to  that  pre-Aryan  population  to 
whom  we  owe  the  megalithic  monuments  of  the  world''.  \Ve  find 
numerous  traces  of  this  cult  in  our  lives  and  other  documents. 
Various  stones  are  regarded  as  sacred  because  of  their  association 
with  certain  saints*',  though  in  many  cases  the  cult  is  probably  much 
older.  Sometimes  the  stone  marks  the  site  of  a  martyrdom ' ;  oftcn 
it  has  served  as  a  vessel  to  transport  the  saint  across  the  ocean  when 
othermeans  of  navigation  failed*;  even  more  frequently  it  shows  the 

ramous  '  Hazels  of  Knowledge '  see  R.  C.  xv.  456-7,  xxvi.  18,  note  2  ;  Ir.  T.  iii. 
195.  Three  gods  of  thcTuatha  De  Danann  were  Coll,  Cecht  (ploughshare),  and 
Grian  (sun),  Keating,  i.  222.  Rhys,  H.  L.  p.  569,  takes  the  first  to  be  the  Irish 
word  coll  =  destruction ;  I  think  it  is  probably  coll  =  hazel.  Of  the  idea  of 
a  life-tree,  i.  e.  a  trec  with  which  the  life  of  a  human  being  is  bound  up,  I  have 
not  found  any  trace.  There  was  a  magic  tree  at  Ess  Maighe  of  which  the 
rellexion  could  be  seen  in  the  water,  but  the  tree  itself  was  invisible,  Ir.  N. 
p.  220;  cf.  Grimm,  Mythology,  ii.  509. 

'  Car.  §  60 ;   Fint.  §  20  ;  Mochoem.  §§  13,  22  ;  Mun.  §  17  ;  Sam.  §  i8. 

-  Br.  i.  §  71 ;  Sam.  §  16.  ^  Bog-pine  is  alhided  to,  Sam.  §  16. 

'  In  the  Index  to  the  Census  of  1851  there  are  nearly  a  thousand  townlands 
bearing  the  name  of  Derry  (Ir.  doire,  an  oak  wood),either  alone  or  with  various 
additions.  Several  place-names  begin  with  Fee-  or  Feigh-  (Ir.  fid,  a  wood). 
The  majority  of  names  beginning  with  Kill-  are  no  doubt  from  Ir.  cell,  a  church  ; 
but  quite  an  appreciable  proportion  of  them  are  derived  from  Ir.  coill,  caill, 
a  wood.  Gir.  Camb.  speaks  of  '  siluae  immensae',  Opp.  v.  141.  Of  the  site 
ofArmagh  a  story-teller  says  :  'ba  caill  in  tan  sin,'  i.e.  it  was  all  wood  in 
those  days,  Ir.  T.  II.  i.  178.  The  denudation  began  in  Elizabeth's  time,  Elder 
Faiths,  i.  37-8. 

'  Bertrand,  Religion,  Lefons,  i,  iii :  cf.  Rhj^s,  H.  L.  pp.  205  ff.  ;  Religion  of 
Semites,  pp.  204-9;  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  pp.  7,  lo-ii,  17;  Lang,  Myth  and 
Ritual,  i.  195  (203),  256  (266),  265  (275);  ii.  284  (265):  Custom  and  Myth, 
p.  223.  The  custom  of  dressing  rude  fetish  stones  mentioned  in  several  of 
these  passages  may  be  compared  with  the  dressing  of  rude  images  of  saints  ; 
cf.  Outer  Isles,  p.  121.  Fetish  stones  to  which  homage  of  this  kind  was  paid 
tiU  within  recent  times  existed  on  Inishglora  and  Inishkea,  Elder  Faiths, 
ii.  67-8,  106-7.  For  various  marvellous  stones  see  Tenga  Bithnua,  u.s.  §§  43-7, 
R.  C.  xxiv.  374-5.  For  Teutonic  instances.  cf.  Grimm,  u.s.  ii.  645,  iv.  1476-8. 
For  pilgrimages,  offerings,  &-c.,  to  megalithic  stones,  slightly,  if  at  all,  chris- 
tianized,  see  Bertrand,  u.  s.  pp.  45-6,  53,  64,  66,  398-9.  In  Fel.^  p.  186  is 
mcntioned  a  stone  adorned  with  gold  and  silverand  worshipped  by  the  heathen. 
It  was  built  into  the  church  of  Clogher  (above,  p.  cxxix,  note  6) ;  cf.  Kristni- 
saga,  c.  I. 

'  Ci.  C.  §  4  ;  Dec.  §  32  ;  L.  H.-  i.  62  ;  cf.  Reeves,  Adamn.  p.  330. 

'  Col.  E.  §  32. 

«  Ci.  S.  §23;  Enda,  §  15;  Las.  §23;  C.  S.  c.652  (§9),c.  654  (§  "l.c.^ss^^  4) ; 
Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  135''  (§21,  Fechin) ;  V.Tr.  pp.  446-9  (cf.  Todd,  Obits,  pp.  x.\ff.): 
C.  B.  S.  pp.  6-7,  191,  cf.  ib.  p.  171  ;  Capg.  ii.  94,  cf.  ib.  p.  206,  where  an  angel 


clvi  INTRODUCTION 

print  of  his  feet  or  knees ',  or  traces  of  the  punishment  of  thc  enemies 
who  have  opposed  him  ^.  We  have  already  noticed  in  another 
connexion  the  instances  of  stones  hollowed  by  the  head  of  a  new- 
born  saint^  with  their  secular  parallcls ;  and  there  are  other  stones 
held  sacred  because  of  their  connexion  with  a  saint's  birth',  or 
baptism  ^  The  holed  stones  which  occur  so  frequently  are  accounted 
for  by  legends  that  they  were  pierced  by  thc  sainfs  finger'.     These 


detaches  from  Ireland  the  portion  of  land  on  which  Modwenna  and  her  com- 
panions  stood,  and  sent  them  on  it  across  to  Britain.  The  infant  Haedoc  was 
conveyed  to  baptism  from  the  island  in  which  hc  was  born  on  a  flag-stone, 
which  continued  to  act  as  a  fcrry,  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  3  (=  Mart.  Don,  p.  32  ;  for 
a  local  variant  of  this  legend  see  Proceedings  R.  I.  A.  viii.  441  ff.).  A  stone 
conveys  Declan's  bell  across  the  sea,  Decl.  §  15  (on  this  stone  see  Pagan 
Ireland,  p.  310 ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  233).  A  stone  which  he  had  miraculously 
consoHdated  out  of  sand  follows  St.  Patricl^,  Tr.  Th.  p.  39"  (§  30) ;  cf.  V.  Tr. 
p.  72.  Maclduin  found  on  an  island  a  pilgrim  who  had  come  from  Ircland  on 
a  sod,  R.  C.  ix.  494.  In  LL.  354''  53  ff.  four  saints  cross  the  occan  on  a  flag- 
stone  and  cast  lots  for  it  afterwards. 

'  V.  Tr.  pp.  xlvii,  90,  414  ;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  26  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  121  (marks  of  the  hands 
of  the  sainfs  mothcr  at  the  time  of  his  birth) ;  Capg.  i.  217,  425,  443,  ii.  194  ; 
Elder  Faiths,  i.  80,  ii.  256  ;  0'HanIon,  iv.  31 ;  Hy  Fiachrach,  pp.  9,  10  ;  British 
Saints,  i.  1 1  r,  183  ;  a  stone  which  St.  Magnus  had  used  as  a  ferry  shows  marks 
of  his  feet,  Martin.p.  367  ;  cf,  Rua.  §  14.  This  is  awidely  diffused  pieceof  folk- 
lore,  cf  Deleheye,  pp.  48  9  ;  giants  and  heroes  have  preceded  the  saints  in  thus 
leaving  traces  of  their  exploits.  Elder  Faiths,  i.  163  ;  0'Curry,  M.  and  C.  ii.  263  ; 
MaccuIIoch,  Western  Isles,  ii.  271.  The  footprints  of  Cuchulainn's  son  Conla 
when  he  wrestled_  with  his  father  gave  its  name  to  Traig  lisi  (the  strand  of  the 
track)  in  LHster,  Eriu,  i.  1 18.  Cuchulainn  himself  left  the  print  of  his  feet  on  the 
doorstep  of  the  palace  of  Ctirbi  mac  Daire,  Ir.  T.  i.  299.  For  Teutonic  instances 
see  Grimm,  u.  s.,  i.  241 ;  ii.  645,  656 ;  iii.  1022  ;  iv.  1381,  1483,  1612,  1703.  In 
the  hagiological  sphere  the  climax  is  reached  in  the  legend  that  thc  footprints 
of  our  Lord  remained  on  thc  dust  of  the  mount  of  the  Ascension,  and  that  if  it 
was  attempted  to  pave  the  spot,  the  stones  flew  up  into  the  faces  of  the  work- 
men,  Aur.  Leg.  p.  319. 

2  Ger.  §  9;  Irish  Moling,  §70;  C.  B.  S.  p.  260;  Capg.  ii.  420-1 ;  N.  and  K. 
p.  149. 

'  See  above,  pp.  cxxxii,  cxxxix  f. ;  Aed,  §  i ;  Decl.  §  3.  \Vc  find  a  child's 
head  struck  on  a  stone  for  luck,  Keating,  iii.  52, 

'  Dec.  §  3 ;  Mun.  §  i  (snow  would  not  lie  on  this  stone)  ;  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  556-8  ; 
Br.  Berach,  c.  5  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  8.  A  saint  is  born  holding  a  stone  in  his  hand, 
which  has  various  marvellous  properties,  Ger.  §§  i,  7  ;  L.  S.  p.  2 ;  cf.  Z,  C,  P. 
iii.  558.  Here  too  thcre  arc  secular  parallcls,  e.  g.  the  stone  on  which  Conchobar 
was  born,  R.  C.  vi.  177  ;  Eriu,  iv.  22. 

^  Z,  C.  P.  iii.  560;  Fel.*  p.  76. 

«  Fech.  §§  7,  8  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  ^^i"  (§  119) ;  Grimm,  i.  155  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  69 ; 
Bertrand,  La  Gaule  avant  Ics  Gaulois,  pp.  151-4.  Stones  are  split  by  a  saint's 
bachall,  Enda,  §  24  ;  or  by  his  cursc,  Macd.  §  35.  Conversely  a  split  stone  is 
miraculously  mended,  Mol.  §  13.  Stones  and  trces  become  uscless  on  being 
cursed,  V.  Tr.  pp.  80,  194.  A  not  unfrequcnt  miracle  is  the  removal  of  im- 
movablestones,Acd.§  18;  Col.E.  §  30;  Mol.  §  12  ;  cf.  Aed,  §  33;  Coem.  §  24;  C.S. 
c.  829.  A  standing  or  pillar  stone  (Ir.  coirthci  is  mentioned  Ab.  §  23;  such 
cccur  as  grave-stones,  Oittc,  p.  6.  The  fact  tliat  sevcral  cf  these  sacred  stoncs 
arc  supposed  cither  to  cure,  Hardy,  Holy  Wells,  p.  33 ;  Bcrtrand,  Religion, 
p.  66;  or  to  cause  barrenncss,  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  562  ;  cf.  Acc.  Sen.  p.  224 ;  seems  to 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clvii 

sacred  stoncs  havc  various  marvcllous  propertics ;  thcy  hcal  discases, 
cithcr  dircctly,  or  by  the  watcr  which  collects  in  thcir  hollows ',  or  in 
vvhich  they  have  bccn  washed '.  Stones  set  up  by  saints  cannot  be 
moved '',  and  thcrc  are  stones  which  if  removed  always  return  to 
thcir  place''.  Going  'deisel'  or  righthandwisc  round  certain  stones 
ensures  victory^  to  turn  them  thrice  ensures  a  safe  return".  We 
have  noted  elsewhere  stones  that  detectcd  perjurers'' ;  but  they  test 
other  crimes  also ",  and  give  oracles  and  grant  petitions ' ;  they 
produce  rain,  and  cause  a  favourable  wind". 

Of  the  cursing  stoncs  "  which  occur  so  often  in  local  tradition  I 
have  only  found  one  instance,  viz.  in  the  later  Irish  life  of  Maedoc. 
This  stone  was  left  by  Maedoc  to  protect  his  church  from  oppression. 
If  the  stone  was  turned  three  times  '  tuaithbel '  or  widdershins  against 
the  oppressor,  hc  would  die  within  a  year '-. 

Scvcral  of  the  birth  stories  of  the  saints  seem  to  bc  connected  with 
nature-worship,  and  may  find  a  place  here  before  vve  pass  on  to 
examine  traccs  of  the  second  or  magical  element  in  Celtic  heathenism. 
Somc  of  them  have  been  noticed  already  ",  and  parallels  from  secular 

shovv  that  they  had  originally  a  sexual  significance.  That  barrenness,  as  among 
the  Jevvs,  vvas  considered  a  reproach,  appears  from  Sam.  §  21  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  40-1. 
It  is  frequently  cured  by  the  saints. 

'  Aed,  §§  r,  18  ;  Dec.  §  3  ;  C.  S.  c.  933  (§  4") ;  Adamn.  i.  ,1,  ii.  33 ;  C.  B.  S. 
p.  48;  N.  and  K.  p.  234  ;  Br.  Mochuda,  c.  8  sub  finem ;  cf.  Eriu,  iv.  54  ;  Elder 
Faiths,  ii.  69  fT. ;  Pagan  Ireland,  pp.  153  flf.,  308  flf.,  412;  Murray's  Handbook 
for  Ireland,  ed.  7,  p.  218 ;  Martin,  pp.  225-6.  GeoflTrey  of  Monmouth  says  of 
the  stones  of  vvhich  .Stonehenge  vvas  built :  '  mystici  sunt  lapides,  et  ad  diversa 
medicamenta  salubres,'  viii.  11. 

"  Ger.  §  I  ;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  26  ;  this  especially  assists  women  in  labour  ;  cf.  Martin, 
p.  22.     A  stone  vvhich  drives  away  melancholy,  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  328. 

'  Mochoem.  §  29. 

*  Capg.  il.  194-5;  Nennius,  ed.  Stevenson,  p.  60 ;  Ir.  Nennius,  pp.  120,  220; 
Elder  Faiths,  ii.  60,  65,  88,  211 ;  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  307. 

°  Decl.  §  25  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  122  ;  cf.  Martin,  p.  241. 

''  Fel.^  p.  76,  where  this  stone  is  said  to  have  been  the  baptism  stone  of 
Fintan  of  Clonenagh,  Feb.  17.  I  suspect  that  it  really  belonged  to  Fintan 
Corach,  Feb.  21 ;  for  one  e.xplanation  given  of  the  epithet  '  corach "  is  that  it 
was  derivcd  from  the  '  cor '  or  pledge  vvhich  he  gave,  that  he  would  return 
from  his  pilgrimage,  vvhethcr  alive  or  dead. 

'  Above,  p.  cv,  note  9;  lar-Connaught,  p.  121. 

'  V.  Tr.  p.  72  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  212  ;  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  306 ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  224. 

°  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  148,  224  ;  R.  C.  xv.  281  ;  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  306. 

"■  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  ig8  ;  Martin,  pp.  59,  166.  We  hear  of  musical  stones,  R.  C. 
xxvi.  146;  Bran,  i.  11. 

"  That  is  stones  which  being  turned  '  widdershins' brought  a  curse  on  the 
pcrson  in  respect  of  whom  they  were  turned,  Pagan  Ireland,  pp.  150-3  ;  Elder 
Faiths,  ii.  58  ff.  ;  lar-Connaught,  p.  120 ;  Macculloeh,  Western  Isles,  i.  14, 
ii.  158  ;  Hardy,  Holy  Wells,  p.  31. 

'*  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  69  ad  finem.  Evil  spirits  are  imprisoned  in  stones  and 
rocks,  Coem.  §  21  ;  Mochoem.  §  21  ;  Tig.  §  8  ;  C.  S.  c.  230  ;  Fel.''  p.  94.  A  soul 
believed  to  dwell  in  a  stone,  Kristnisaga,  c.  i. 

"  See  above,  pp.  c.xxxii,  cxxxix  f. 


clviii  INTRODUCTION 

sources  adduced.  In  most  of  thesc  cases  the  story  of  the  sainfs  con- 
ception  is  toned  down  into  the  form  of  a  vision.  But  the  original 
tradition  was  doubtless  meant  to  be  taken  literally.  Thus  in  the  case 
of  Boetius  (Buite),  Maedoc,  and  Ciaran  of  Saigir  a  vision  was  seen  at 
the  time  of  their  conception  ofa  star  falling  into  thc  mother's  mouth  '. 
But  in  the  case  of  Ciaran  a  poem  preserved  in  thc  notes  to  the  Felire 
niakes  the  falling  of  the  star  an  actual  fact'.  The  mother  of  Finan  of 
Kinnity  saw  a  vision  of  a  fish  of  the  colour  of  red  gold  cntering  her 
mouth''.  But  in  a  poem  in  the  notes  to  the  Felire  Finan  is  repre- 
sented  as  born  of  the  actual  intercourse  of  a  '  red-gold  salmon  '  with 
his  mother  when  bathing  in  Loch  Lein  (Killarney),  and  the  attempt 
madc  to  give  a  Christian  complexion  to  this,  no  doubt  original,  form  of 
the  legend  is  of  inconceivablc  cruditj'  \ 

In  all  the  legends  which  have  to  do  with  the  beginnings  of  Chris- 
tianity  in  Ireland  the  druids  meet  us  at  every  turn  as  the  chief,  if  not 
the  only,  opponents  of  the  new  faith  ^  Druidism  was  of  course  not 
confined  to   Ireland",  or  even  to  the  British    Isles'.     It  was   very 

1  Bo.  §  I  ;  Ci.  S.  §  I ;  Maed.  §  i.  In  the  last  case  the  father  sees  the  vision 
of  a  star,  thc  mother  thc  vision  of  the  moon  cntering  her  mouth.  The  mothers 
orThomas  a  Beckctt  and  Willibrord  had  visions  of  the  latter  kind,  Capg.  i.  470, 
ii.  447  ;  cf.  R.  C.  iii.  452;  and  Hdt.  iii.  28:  AtyvuTtQi  Xtyovat  ae\as  (irt  t^i'  ySoDv 
(K  Tov  ovpavov  i:aT'taxitVy  Kal  fitv  (K  Tovrov  TiKTftv  rov^Aniv^  Samthann  appeared 
as  a  moon  at  the  timc  of  her  death,  .Sam.  §  26. 

2  'intan  soes  a  gnuis  fri  nem,  docher  rctla  i  n-a  gin  .  .  .  is  de  .  .  .  atbert 
Luaignc  ni  m-ba  mac,"  i.  e.  as  she  turned  her  face  towards  heaven  a  star  fell  into 
her  raouth.  . . .  Hencc  it  vvas  that  Luaigne(  =  Lugneus.Ci.  S.  §  i)  said  that  he  was 
not  his  son,  Fel.''  pp.  86-8.  An  instance  of  conception  by  firc  has  been  already 
given,  p.  cxxxvii,  note  9.  Somcthing  of  the  same  kind  may  undcrlic  Br.  i.  |  i, 
wherc  the  mothcr  dreams  that  her  bosom  is  fuU  of  gold  and  that  her  paps  shine 
with  rcsplendcnt  light ;  cf  Capg.  ii.  103.  The  following  may  pcrhaps  contain 
a  trace  of  naturc-worship.  Several  mythologics  havc  many-brcasted  deities, 
who  symbolizc,  pcrhaps,  thc  productivc  powers  of  naturc.  The  bcst  known  is 
'  Great  Artcmis  of  the  Ephesians  ',  Myth  and  Ritual,  i.  254  (263).  Now  in  the 
Welsh  Achau  y  Saint,  wc  find  tlic  inothcr  of  St.  Cadvan  given  as  Gucn  tcirbronn, 
Gwen  of  the  threc  paps,  C.  B.  S.  p.  266,  who  appcars  iii  a  Latin  dress  in  Cap- 
grave  as  Alba  Trimanimis,  ii.  558.  In  LL.  349"  16  and  372"  59  the  mothcr  of 
certain  saints  is  callcd  Derinncll  cctharchichcch,  or  of  the  four  paps.  In  thc 
sccular  literature  we  have  a  woman,  Admacr  trecliichcch,  of  the  three  paps, 
Rawl.  B.  502  f.  73''  13,  and  a  man  :  '  DiJil  cichcch  forsambatar  iii  cichc,'  i.  c. 
Didil  of  the  paps,  on  whom  wcrc  three  paps,  ib.  f.  73"  ;  cf.  Lugaid  cichccli,  L.  S. 
p.  63  ;  Mochua  cichech,  Mart.  Don.  June  4.  ^  Fin.  C.  §  i. 

'  F(5l."  p.  112;  cf  Capg.  ii.  452;  Saintyvcs,  pp.  221-2.  This  may  be  totc- 
niistic,  though,  as  I  havc  alrcady  stated,  I  have  found  little  tracc  of  totomism  in  thc 
ccclesiastical  literature.  In  Fel."  p.  246  is  a  curious  story  of  a  saint  bcing  con- 
ccived  owing  to  his  mothcr  drinking  thc  ink  of  Comgall  of  Bangor !  Coemgen 
is  said  to  have  bccn  born  witliout  his  mother  suflrering  any  pain,  Br.  Cocmgen, 
c.  4.    This  is  probably  Jcwish-Christian,see  Edcrsheim,  Lifc  and  Times,  i.  188. 

'  Scc  abovc,  p.  cxxxiv,  and  bclow,  p.  clxv. 

'  According  to  C.  S.  c.  172  (§  14^,  thc  district  of  Murthemnc  (in  Co.  Louth) 
vvas  a  spccial  stronghold  of  magical  practices  :  'gens  .  .  .  arcium  magicarum 
pericia  pre  aliis  .  .  .  gcntibus  imbuta.'  It  appcars  from  LL.  263''  17,  18;  TBC. 
p.  673,  that  druids  had  a  prccmincnt  position  at  thc  court  of  Ulstcr,  taking 
prcccdcncc  in  somc  rcspccts  evcn  of  thc  king. 

'  For  druids  in  Britain  scc  abovc,  p.  c,  note  2;  and  C.  B.  S.  p.  121. 


HEATHEN  EOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clix 

strong  in  Gaul,  thougli  Caesar  says  that  the  hcadquarters  of  the 
system  vvere  in  Britain  \  Whcthcr  thc  druids  thcmselves  vvere  of 
Celtic  descent  or  not,  it  is  novv  gcncrally  acccptcd  that  druidism  is 
pre-Aryan,  part  of  that  grcat  magical  systcm  of  thouglit  which  spread 
vvestward  from  some  Eastcrn  ccntrc,  possibly  Babylonia ".  There  is 
evidence  that  the  craft  vvas  often  hereditary ' ;  it  was  freely  practised 
by  womcn  *.  Considering  the  opposition  of  thc  druids  to  Christianity, 
it  is,  not  unnaturally,  on  their  malignant  powcrs  that  stress  is  chiefly 
laid.  They  overlook  a  place  and  curse  it,  making  it  unfruitful '" ;  thcy 
raise  storms^;  thcy  bercave  men  of  their  senses'';  thcy  cause 
glamour  or  sight-shifting ' ;  their  spells  kill  a  Christian  king',  and 

I  Bell.  Gall.  vi.  13. 

"  See  Bertrand,  Religion,  Lefons  iii-vii,   xi.\,  xx  ;   MaccuUoch,   Childhood, 

P-  473- 

'  On  hearing  of  the  death  of  his  father  Diarmait,  the  poet-druid,  his  son 
Ciiallaid  at  once  goes  to  the  place  wherc  he  had  been  killed  :  '  da  fegadh  7  da 
mallachad,'  i.  e.  to  overlook  it  and  curse  it,  Br.  Berach,  c.  23  sub  finem;  'boi 
drui  amra  .  .  .  i.  Nuadu  .  .  .  boi  mac  .  .  .  oc  Nuadait  .i.  Tagd  .  .  .  driii  amra  dano 
Tadg,'  i.  e.  there  was  a  notable  druid,  viz.  Nuadu,  and  he  had  a  son  namcd 
Tadg.  Tadg  also  was  a  notable  druid,  LU.  41''  (  =  R.  C.  ii.  86-8) ;  cf.  R.  C.  xxiii. 
422  ;  Coir  Anm.  No.  287  ;  Grimm,  u.  s.  iii.  1107. 

*  Ber.  §  10;  Coem.  §§  31,  33;  R.  C.  xxvi.  156.  We  frequently  hear  of  the 
'bandrui',  or  female  druid  ;  R.  C.  v.  198,  xxix.  H2  ;  'bandrai  do  Thiiaith  de 
Danann,'  i.  e.  a  female  druid  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  Acc.  Sen.  p.  208  ;  '  tri 
ferdruid  7  tri  bandruid,'  T.  B.  C.  p.  331,  i.  e.  three  malc  and  three  female 
druids.  From  the  LU.  te.xt,  ib.  note  i,  it  vvould  appear  that  the  latter  were  the 
wives  of  the  former.  We  hear  of  a  '  bantuathaid',  or  witch,  vvho  vvas  of  fairy 
lineage,  a  banshee,  R.  C.  xxiv.  178.  From  the  close  connexion  of  the  poet, 
'file,'  aud  the  druid  (see  below,  pp.  cl.xif.),  we  may  mention  here  Fedelm  ban- 
filc,  i.  e.  the  poetess,  LU.  55''  11,  and  Brigit  banfile,  who  was  the  daughter  of  the 
Dagda,  Corm.  Glossary.  p.  8  ;  Transl.  p.  23 ;  R.  C.  xxvi.  31,  note  2 ;  cf.  Elder 
Faiths,  i.  353  ;  Grimm,  iii.  1038-41,  iv.  1617-18. 

5  Br.  Berach,  c.  23  sub  finem  (quoted  above).  That  their  maledictory  func- 
tions  vvere  inherited  by  the  Christian  saints  see  below,  pp.  clxxiii  f.  ;  cf.  Tac.  Aiin. 
xiv.  30 :  '  Druidae  .  .  .  preces  diras  .  .  .  fundentes,'  cited  by  Bertrand,  Religion, 
p.  260. 

'  Capg.  i.  202. 

'  Br.  2324  f.  53:  '  draoi  a  athar  fein  ro  imir  siabradh  7  ealadnacha  draoi- 
dheachta  air,  .  .  .  go  n-demadh  oinmid  7  amadan  de,'  i.  e.  the  druid  of  his 
[Comdan's]  own  father  plied  witchery  and  druidical  arts  upon  him,  so  that  he 
became  an  idiot  and  simpleton,  Life  of  Cuiminc  Foda.  A  sainfs  curse  has  the 
like  effect,  Keating,  iii.  90. 

'  Cain.  §  II  ;  C.  S.  c.  353  (§  39,  not  in  M).  On  glamour  or  sight-shifting  see 
below,  pp.  clxix  f. 

"  LU.  50'' 34  fl".  ;  F.  M.  i.  116.  According  to  Las.  §  15;  and  V.  Tr.  p.  54; 
they  vvere  not  above  resorting  to  poison.  Other  attempts  at  poisoning,  Ail. 
§  12  ;  Moling,  §  7 ;  L.  S.  p.  2 ;  V.  Tr.  p.  182  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  131  ;  L.  Land.  pp.  13, 
23  (II,  22);  cf.  L.  H.2  i.  107  (=  L.  S.  p.  333).  We  hear  of  poisoned  arms  in 
the  secular  literature,  but  not,  as  far  as  I  knovv,  in  the  ecclesiastical,  T.  B.  C. 
p.  423;  R.  C.  vii.  292;  Cath  Finntr.igha,  p.  32;  Keating,  ii.  iio;  0'Curry, 
M.  and  C.  ii.  347,  iii._  131.  We  do  hear  of  one  horrible  heathen  custom, 
'hastam  quinque  acuminum  [Ir.  sleg  coicrinn]  in  sanguine  innocentium  ritu 
gentili  consecrare,'  C.  S.  c.  918  (§  8).  This,  like  the  tossing  of  children  on 
spears,  maj'  have  been  a  '  gall  cherd '  or  invention  of  the  Scandinavian  wikings. 


clx  INTRODUCTION 

their  incantations  are  constantly  mentioncd',  as  arc  their  various 
forms  of  divination'.  They  declare  auspicious  and  inauspicious 
times  ',  they  are  expected,  liice  savagc  mcdicinc-men,  to  discover  the 
authors  of  crimes ' ;  they  interpret  dreams  and  omens  ^.    There  is  a 

'  It  is  worth  noting  that  in  Ir.  T.  iii.  191-3  '  dichetal  filedh'  and  '  dichetal 
druadh  *,  i.  e.  incantation  of  poets  and  ot'  druids,  scem  used  as  identical  terms  : 
'  dicetla  druad,'  T.  B.  C.  p.  793.  A  poet's  incantation  drives  fish  away,  Bran, 
i.  46 ;  we  have  seen  that  saints  do  the  same,  above,  p.  ci  ;  druids  and  poets, 
by  their  'brechta'  or  spells,  bind  Cuchulainn  hand  and  foot,  Ir.  T.  i.  226;  a  saint 
does  the  likc,  Rennes  MS.  f.  87''.  Druids  cause  a  magic  thirst,  R.  C.  xxii.  315 
(Bruiden  Da  Derga),  and  it  is  curious  that  a  saint  subdues  an  opponent  in 
exactly  the  same  vvay,  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  12  sub  finem.  Incantations  by 
a  witch  to  destroy  life.  (*oem.  §§  31,  33  ;  cf  Cain  Adamnain,  §46;  R.  C.  xv. 
300,  311.  326  ;  Outer  Isles,  p.  243.  A  druid  sings  spells  against  Senan  to  drive 
him  out  of  his  island,  L.  S.  p.  68.  But  druids  and  poets  are  not  thc  only  persons 
who  make  incantations;  cf  T.  B.  C.  p.  309,  note  5,  where  Cuchulainn  himself 
uses  one.  In  Vatnzdsela  Saga,  c.  47,  of  a  wizard  laying  a  storm,  it  is  said  : 
'  hann  gekk  andsaelis  [Tysvar,  ok  mEelti  irsku,'  i.  e.  he  went  widdershins  (Ir. 
tuaithbel)  thrice,  and  spoke  IHsh  ;  which  shows  that  Irish  was  regarded  as 
the  language  par  exccUence  of  magical  formulae.  A  spel!  to  heal  a  wound  is 
sung  by  a  Christian  student,  Ir.  Moling,  §  35 ;  cf  iiraOiS^  5'  ai/ia  KiXaiirui'  'EaxfSoy, 
Odyss.  xix.  457-8.  On  spells,  &c.,  cf.  Grimm,  iii.  1035,  1223  ff.  ;  Anthropology 
and  the  Classics,  pp,  93  f1', 

"  One  of  these,  divination  by  rowan  hurdles,  has  been  already  mentioned, 
p,  cliv. 

'  Aed,  §  I  (propheta  M,  astrorum  peritus  R)  ;  Ci.  C.  §  28  ;  L.S,  p.  24  (the 
diviner  is  here  called  '  faith '  =  uates,  but  it  is  clear  that  heathen  divination  is 
meant ;  on  druid  and  prophet  see  below,  p.  clxii) ;  T.  B.  C,  p.  131  ;  R.  C.  vi.  178 
note,  ix.  458;  Magh  Lena,  p.  160  ;  cf  ib.  pp.  72-4  ;  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  290.  That  the 
druids  were  sometimes  bribed  to  give  the  answer  desired  on  these  point.s,  sec 
Magh  Lena.  p.  158. 

*  '  A  cind  dona  druidib  7  dona  filedaib,  mani  fintar  cia  dorbne,'  i.  e.  their  heads 
off  the  druids  and  poets,  unless  it  be  discovered  who  h.is  done  this,  Z.  C.  P.  iii. 
5  ;  cf.  T.  B.  C.  p.  73  ;  M.  and  C.  iii.  243  ;  Hdt.  iv.  68.  Of  a  poet  it  is  said  :  '  is  e 
ro  toimsedh  cach  n-dicclta,'  i.  e.  it  is  he  that  would  conjecture  every  sccret 
thing.     To  this  function  also  the  saints  succeed  ;  see  below,  p.  cl.xvii. 

^  Ci.  S.  §1;  R.C.  xxiv.  174;  MaghLena,  p.6  (modelled  on  Joscph"sintcrpreta- 
tion  of  Pharaoh's  dreams).  In  Acc.  Sen.  p.  89  a  dream  is  interpretcd  by  a  poet. 
For  saints  .ind  clergy  as  interpreters  of  dreams  see  Las.  §  32  ;  Magh  Rath,  p.  10. 
According  to  Magh  Rath,  p,  12,  '  the  venom  goes  out  of  a  dream  after  a  year,' 
i.  e.  its  fulfilmcnt  need  not  be  dreaded  after  the  lapse  of  that  time.  There  was 
a  form  of  divination  by  magically  induccd  dreams,  called  'imbas  forosnai '.  or 
thc  knowledge  which  enlightens,  Cormac,  Glossary,  p.  25  :  Translation,  p.  94 ; 
LU.  55''  13  (practised  by  a  'banfile',  or  poetess) ;  ib.  125''  10  (=  Z.  C.  P.  iii. 
255).  Of  the  samc  kind  was  the  '  tarb-fcis ',  or  bull  sleep,  Ir.  T.  i.  200,  213; 
R.  C.  xxii.  22  ;  Grimm,  iii.  1 1 15,  iv.  1744.  ^  very  similar  process  is  describcd 
by  GeotVrey  of  Monmoulh,  i,  n;  cf  Martin,  p.  iii.  Another  form  of  divina- 
tion,  called  'teinm  laegda',  is  probably  rabdomancy,  Cormac,  u.  s.,  and  pp.  30, 
34,  Transl.  pp.  112,  130;  on  both  thcsc  cf  Zimmcr,  Kelt.  Beitr.  iii.  148  If.  Thc 
lattcr  sccms  to  bc  thc  same  as  tlie  '  flesc  filed  ',  or  poet's  rod,  of  Cormac,  p,  14  ; 
Transl.  p.  42  ;  and  the  keys  of  poetry  (cochra  eccsi)  of  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  458.  note  18  ; 
'con  dernai  (in  dnii)  iiii  flcsca  ibir,  7  scripuid  oghumm  inntib,  7  foillsighthir  do 
triana  eochraib  ccsi  7  triana  oghumm,  F.tain  do  bilh  i  sith  Breg  Leith,"  i.  e.  so 
the  druid  made  four  rods  of  yew,  and  wrote  an  ogham  on  thcm,  and  it  was 
revealed  to  him  through  his  kej'S  of  poetry  and  through  his  ogham  that  Etaiu 
was  in  tlie  fairy-hill  of  Bri  l  cilli,  Ir.  T,  i.  129.    We  hear  of  divination  by  clouds, 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxi 

druidic  hedgc  ',  some  magic  obstruction  to  keep  off  an  enemy  ;  and 
tlie  saints  erect  the  same  sort  of  barrier  by  the  sign  of  the  cross^. 

But  the  druids  were  very  much  more  than  mere  medicine  men.  It 
is  probable  that  they  really  had  superior  knowledge,  and  all  superior 
knowledge  tends  to  be  regarded  as  magical  in  primitive  times^. 

That  they  had  literary  attainments  is  shown  by  their  close  associa- 
tion  and  frequent  identity  with  the  class  of  poets.  Several  passages 
have  already  been  cited  which  illustrate  this.  The  two  words  are 
often  used  interchangeably  in  different  recensions  of  the  same  text  *, 


T.  B.  C.  p.  791  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  211  ;  Ir.  T.  II.  ii.  133;  III.  476;  and  a  curious 
forni  of  divinalion  by  a  chessboard  {fithcheli  and  water,  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  180.  We 
have  already  seen  that  water,  if  incantations  were  sung  over  it,  would  give 
answers,  above,  pp.  cxlviii  f.  ;  there  is  also  divination  from  the  sound  of  the  wind, 
I.L.  i^^**  41  ;  253^  49  ff.  ;  Ir.  T.  iii.  468-71.  Keating  further  enumerates  the 
notes  of  birds,  reflexions  in  the  water,  and,  most  powerlul  of  all,  the  rowan 
hurdle,  as  instruments  of  divination,  iii.  348-50. 

'  'airbe  druad';  see  the  passages  coUected  by  Stokes,  Togail  Troi,  p.  129; 
and  add  to  them  Ann.  Ult.  560  ;  R.  C.  xvii.  144  ;  L.  S.  pp.  xxviii  f. ;  Silva 
Gad.  i.  79.  From  these  last  tvvo  passages,  which  refer  to  the  same  matter, 
it  would  seem  to  be  a  magic  mist,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  this  is  the  meanlng 
in  all  cases.  There  is  also  a  druid's  knot,  '  snaidm  druad,'  apparently  some 
magical  defencc  of  fortresses,  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  27,  281.  Curoi  mac  Daire  had 
a  magic  vvheel  which  defended  his  fortress,  Keating.  ii.  223  ;  but  according  to 
the  earlier  texts  the  fort  itself  revolved  with  incredible  swiftness  af^er  sunset, 
Ir.  T.  i.  295. 

*  Maed.  §  24  ;  cf.  Aed.  %  21.  The  curious  process  mentioned  in  the  note  to 
Maed.  §  15.  of  doing  a  thing  with  one  foot,  one  hand,  and  one  eye,  has  clearly 
some  magical  significance,  but  I  do  not  know  what  it  is.  It  occurs  frequently 
in  the  secular  literature,  T.  B.  C.  pp.  73,  75  ;  R.  C.  xii.  98,  307,  xv.  431,  xxi.  156, 
xxii.  41,  59.  The  Fomori  were  a  one-footed  and  one-handed  race,  LL.  5"  aa  ; 
cf.  Macculloch,  Childhood,  pp.  290,  301. 

'  In  many  languages  words  which  primarily  mean  knovvledge  or  power  tend 
to  suggest  an  idea  of  magical  knowledge.  In  Irish  cumachta,  povver.  has  often 
thissecondary  meaning;  e.  g.  'ba  fer  cumachtach  .  .  . ,  co  teighedh  a  n-ilrechtuib", 
i.  e.  he  was  a  powerful  man,  for  he  could  go  into  many  shapes,  i.  e.  was  a  shape- 
shifter,  Coir  Anmann.  No.  205  ;  edlas,  which  in  Irish  means  knowledge,  especially 
knowledge  of  the  way.  guidance,  is  in  Scotch  Gaelic  a  spell ;  and  it  is  beginning 
to  acquire  this  meaning  in  Irish,  see  next  note  but  one.  So  Irishyfii,  science, 
cf.  'ag  foglaim  fessa  7  druidechta  ',  i.  e.  leaming  science,  and  druidism,  R.  C. 
xii.  56;  cf.  Ber.  §  tonote  ;  Grimm,  iii.  1034. 

'  Thus  the  '  artis  magice  peritus  '  of  Berach,  §  13,  is  in  Br.  Berach,  c.  23 : 
'  primeicces  7  ardmaigistir  druidechta,'  i.  e.  chief  poet  and  high  master  of 
druidism.  In  the  '  Death  of  Conchobar'  the  '  driii '  of  the  LL.  text  becomes 
tlie  '  file'  of  the  Edinb.  MS.  ;  while  in  the  Liber  Flauus  text  he  is  '  fili  7  drai  ', 
Oitte,  pp.  9,  10,  14  So  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  458,  and  notes  9,  14,  18.  In  Magh  Lena, 
pp.  8,  20-2,  not  only  are  poetical  effusions  attributed  to  a  druid,  but  after  the 
second  of  these  it  is  added  :  '  the  poet  (eiges)  asked  for  a  truce  .  .  .  and  Conn 
granted  it,  and  the  rfrM;V/ returned  to  Eogan.'  The  persons  of  druids  and  poets 
were  sacrosanct.  hence  their  use  as  ambassadors,  Magh  Rath,  p.  loo  :  Oss.  Soc.  v. 
p.  xxi ;  cf.  Diodorus,  v.  31,  given  in  Holder,  AltceltischerSprachschatz.  i  1322-3. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  Diodorus  couples  together  here  the  druids,  whom  he  calls 
^ptKinfOifioty  and  ol  fi(\qjSovyTt^  TToiTjTai. 

rtUUMER  i 


clxii  INTRODUCTION 

or  even  in  the  same  recension ',  or  they  are  coupled  closely  together '. 
The  druids  are  also  largely  identical  with  the  prophets'.  We  find 
Becc  mac  De  called  both  '  propheta '  and  'magus'*;  the  earliest 
biography  of  Patrick  makes  the  foretelling  of  future  events  the  chief 
function  of  the  'magi'^;  druids  are  constantly  represented  as  pro- 
phesying"';  they  prophesy  of  Christ  ^'  and  of  Christian  saints,  fore- 
telling  their  birth',  their  coming»,  thcir  cmincnce '",  their  place  of 

'  '  cetri  druid  isna  cetri  ccthrachaibsin.  .  .  .  It  iad  na  cetri  filid  ocar  foglaindsit 
Tuatiia  De  fios  7  eolas,'  i.  e.  tiiere  were  four  dntiiis  in  the  four  cities.  .  .  .  They 
are  the  four  poels  with  whom  the  Tuatha  De  (Danann'>  learned  science  and 
knowledge,  R.  C.  xii.  58  ;  '  ba  drai  7  ba  banfile  isi  Dub,'  i.  e.  this  woman  Dub 
was  a  druid  and  a  poetess,  R.  C.  xv.  126.  So  :  '  bandrui  7  banliccerd,'  druidess 
and  female  rhymer,  xvi.  34.  In  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  48  a  druid  is  not  only  called 
'  eolach',  knowing,  but  also  nicknamed  'duanach',  i.e.  a  man  of  poems  ;  cf. 
ib.  V.  pp.  xvi  f.  ;  Kcating,  iii.  58  :  '  file  Albanach  d'arb'  ainm  Labhan  Draoi,' 
i.  e.  a  poet  of  Aiba,  called  L.  the  Drtiid ;  cf.  T.  B.  C.  pp.  xl  ff.  When,  however, 
Windisch  'ib.  p.  793)  says  'es  ist  der  Verdienst  der  jiingeren  Handschriften,  diese 
Stande  {dnii,  file,  &c. )  >ieben  einander  hervortreten  zu  lassen ',  he  seems  to  me 
to  show  a  lack  of  historical  sense.  In  early  times  various  functions  are  com- 
bined  in  the  same  person  ;  specialization  comes  later.  To  apply  to  earlier  times 
the  ideas  of  a  later  day  is  no  '  merit ',  but  the  contrary.  The  classical  passages 
are  collected  by  Holder,  Sprachschatz,  s.  v.  driiida.    See  Addenda. 

*  '  d'acallaim  a  druad  7  a  filed,'  i.  e.  to  consult  his  druids  and  poets,  Acc.  Sen. 
p.  iio;  cf.  R.  C.  XV.  311. 

'  Irish /diM  =  uales,  which  latter  means  both  prophet  and  poet.  Ferchertne 
is  called  '  rofhili  faith',  i.  e.  a  great  poet  and  a  prophet,  R.  C.  xxvi.  50;  of 
Marban  it  is  said  :  '  ba  naemh,  7  ba  1,-iidh,  7  ba  fili,'  i.  e.  he  was  a  saint,  a 
prophet,  and  a  poet,  Oss.  Soc.  v.  88  ;  of  Moling.  ba  fili,  ba  faith,  ba  fissidh  (man 
of  science),  Ir.  Moling,  §  76  ;  while  of  Lugaid  Mor  it  was  foretold  :  '  bidh  drai 
bidh  faidh,  bidh  fili,'  i.  e.  he  will  be  a  druid,  a  prophet,  a  poet,  Misc.  Celt.  Soc. 
p.  74  ad  calcem. 

'  Las.  I  28  ;  so  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  320,  v.  50  (of  the  same). 

^  V.  Tr.  p.  273  :  '  omnia  scire  ct  prouidere  .  .  .  antequam  essent.' 

*  Medb  goes  to  consult  her  druid  :  '  d'iarfaigid  fessa  7  fastini  de,'  i.  e.  to  seek 
knowledge  and  prophecy  from  him,  T.  B.  C.  p.  27  ;  '  mbrfiss,'  '  morfastine,'  and 
'  druidecht '  (great  knowledge,  great  prophecy,  and  druidism)  are  coupled 
together,  ib.  181;  cf.  Magh  Rath.  pp.  166,  172;  Magh  Lena,  pp.  38,  154,  158; 
R.  C.  xxi.  154.  Very  often  a  druid  like  a  saint)  foretells  the  future  of  a  child 
before  or  at  its  birth,  Ir.  T.  i.  69  (the  ill-fatcd  Deirdre) ;  LL.  126"  41  ff.  (Ai  mac 
OUoman);  Rawl.  B.  502,  f.  72''  (Eithne  Uathach). 

'  Oitte,  p.  14.  "  See  next  note  but  one. 

°  Aed,  §  34  note  ;  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  544,  548  (Columba);  the  most  famous  instance 
is  the  alleged  druidical  prophccy  of  the  coming  of  Patrick.  V.  Tr.  pp.  33-4. 

'•*  Ci.  C.  §  I  ;  Ci.  S.  §  I  ;  Las.  §  4;  C.  S.  c.  800.  In  many  cascs  these  pro- 
phecics  take  the  form  of  an  exclamation  '  currus  sonat  sub  rege  ',  wlien  a  chariot 
is  heard  approaching,  in  which  sits  the  prcgnant  mothcr  of  the  future  saint ;  so 
Ci.  C.  5  I  note  ;  Macd.  §  2  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  527"  52)  ( =  L.  S.  p.  35" ;  cf.  Yi\.^  p.  256. 
In  other  cascs  this  prophecy  is  attributed  to  an  ecclesi.istical  person,  clearly 
a  later  attempt  to  christianize  the  legend,  Com.  §  5  and  note  ;  Mochoem.  §  5  ; 
C.  S.  c.  929  '^§  12);  cf.  Maed.  §  2  note  ;  so  also  in  the  secular  litcrature  :  '  fuaim 
n-echraide  fo  rig  rocluiniur,"  i.  e.  I  hcar  thc  sound  of  horses  under  a  king,  R.  C. 
xxii.  49.  One  explanation  given  of  the  name  Mog  Ruith  is  *  magus  rotarum,  ar 
is  a  rothaib  donith  a  taiscelad  dniidhechta  ',  i.  c.  the  whcel  druid,  for  it  is  from 
wheels  that  he  used  to  make  his  druidical  prognostication,  Coir  Anraann, 
No.  287. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxiii 

burial '.  AIl  this  shows  once  more  how  far  the  Christian  Irish  were 
from  regarding  the  power  of  the  druids  as  an  unrcal  thing^.  Again 
the  druid  was  sometimes  a  brchon^.  The  title  '  faith-brithem  '  or 
prophet-brehon,  is  givcn  to  Lugaid  Corc*,  and  exactly  the  same  title 
is  given  to  Columba'.  More  frequent  is  the  identification  of  poet  and 
brehon  '.  The  druids  and  the  physicians  are  also  closely  connected, 
and  here  too  we  find  the  compound  '  faith-iiaig ',  or  prophet-leech '. 
Of  druids  as  rath-builders  something  has  already  been  said".  We 
have  also  seen  that  something  uncanny  attached  to  the  smith's  art  in 
popular  fancy '.  This  is  to  some  extent  explained  when  vve  find  the 
smith  closely  associated  with  the  druid.  Patrick  in  his  famous  hymn 
prays  against  'the  spells  of  vvomen '",  of  smiths,  and  of  druids'". 
Manannan  is  calied  '- '  druid,  artisan  (cerd),  and  chapman '.  Sithchenn, 
the  smith  of  Tara,  vvas  'a  man  of  (magical)  science,  and  a  notable 
prophet' ". 
There  is  a  famous  character  in  Irish  mythology,  Gobban  Saer,  or 


1  C.  S.  c.  199  (5  18). 

'  'L'liglise  tout  en  les  anathematisant  a  toujours  cru  a  1'efEcacite  de  ces 
pratiques,'  Bertrand.  Religion,  p.  404;  cf.  Ger.  §  9. 

'  Sce  Caesar,  B.  G.  vi.  13  :  'eorum  .  .  .  iudiciis  parent.' 

*  Rawl.  B.  502,  f.  72''.  5  R.  c.  XX.  140. 

"  Amargen  Gliinmar  was  '  rig-file  7  rig  brithem  ',  i.  e.  royal  poet  and  royal 
brehon,  Mtsca  Ulad,  p.  2:  cf.  '  breth  bertait  brithemain  7  filid  in  chuicid ', 
i.  e.  the  judgement  which  the  brehons  and  poets  of  the  province  shall  deliver, 
R.  C.  xiv.  430.  The  Irish  tradition  was  that  from  the  time  of  the  above 
Amargen  the  judgements  of  Erin  were  in  the  hands  of  the  poets  until  tlie 
incident  of  the  •  Colloquy  of  the  two  Sages  ',  i.  e.  Ferchertne  and  Nede,  when 
the  terms  used  by  the  two  rivals  were  so  obscure,  that  it  was  resolved  that 
judgement  should  no  longer  be  in  the  hands  of  the  poets,  Ir.  Texte,  iii.  186  ; 
Laws,  i.  18.  The  Colloquy  has  been  printed  by  Stokes,  R.  C.  xxvi.  4  ff.,  and 
is  certainly  obscure  enough. 

'  Conchobar's  court-physician  was  Fingin  faithliaig,  T.  B.  C.  pp.  610,  729 ; 
he  could  tell  from  the  smoke  issuing  from  a  house  the  diseases  of  the  persons 
within,  Oitte,  p.  8  ;  there  was  a  faith-liaig  in  Munster,  who  with  his  pupils 
could  tell  from  the  groans  of  a  wounded  man  the  exact  nature  of  his  hurt, 
LL.  329**  (  =  Silva  Gad.  ii.  493).  The  faithliaig  occurs  frequently  in  the  satirical 
tale  Aislinge  Meic  Conglinne,  where  the  editor,  Prof.  Kuno  Mcyer,  aptly  quotes 
Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  xxx.  4.  13  :  '  Tiberii  Caesaris  principatus  sustulit  dritidas  eorum, 
et  hoc  genus  ttattttn  ntediroriimqtte^ ;  cf.  the  iajpo^xavTis  of  Aeschj'lus.  Meyer 
also  cites  LL.  200"  2,  where  we  have  a  man  who  is  both  brehon  and  faith-liaig. 
For  the  close  connexion  of  medicine  and  magic,  cf.  Grimra,  u.  s.,  iii.  1150-a. 
According  to  Keating,  i.  92,  the  druids  were  genealogists  also. 

"  Above,  p.  xcviii,  note  4.  *  Above,  p.  xcviii. 

'**  So  in  a  poem  attributed  to  Columba  the  poet  includes  women  among  the 
magic  influences  of  which  he  niakes  no  account.  Misc.  I.  A.  S.  i  6. 

"  V.  Tr.  p.  50 ;  L.  H.^  i.  135.  «  R.  C.  xvi.  276. 

"  '  Sithchenn  gaba  bai  i  Temraig  ;  ba  fisid  side  7  faidh  amra,'  R.  C.  xxiv.  194, 
196  ;  '  every  great  smith  was  chiefly  famous  for  his  spells  and  divination,'  Rhys, 
H.  L.  p.  317  ;  Elder  Faiths,  i.  266-7,  ''•  '°7  '•  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  246  ; 
and  the  very  interesting  remarks  of  Bertrand,  La  Gaule  avant  les  Gaulois, 
pp.  336  fT.,  313  ;  for  a  combination  of  smith  and  leech  see  Martin,  p.  183. 

I2 


it 


clxiv  INTRODUCTION 

Gobban  the  wright,  to  vvhom  popular  traditions  assign  many  raths 
and  buildings  in  Ireland'.  He  appears  in  our  lives.  In  the  Hfe  of 
Maedoc  he  is  christianized  into  a  man  whose  hands  were  blessed  by 
the  saint,  so  that  he  became  a  skilful  wright,  and  completed  the 
church  of  Mochua,  which  the  angels  had  begun -.  In  the  life  of 
Abban  he  is  smitten  with  bhndness  by  the  saints  because  of  his 
excessive  charges '.  The  namelcss  'famosus  artifex '  of  our  hfe  of 
Moling  becomes  '  Gobban  Saer'  in  the  Irish  hfe^  There  are  several 
saints  named  Gobban  in  the  Irish  Calendars,  one  of  whom,  Gobban 
Finn,  or  the  Fair,  seems  to  have  attracted  some  of  the  characteristics 
of  the  Celtic  Vulcan.  Angels  are  said  to  have  dug  the  rampart  of  his 
church  ° ;  one  of  his  churches  was  called  Tech-da-gobha,  i.  e.  house  of 
the  two  smiths  *.  He  is  called  hypocoristically  Mogoppoc  in  a  Ust  of 
homonymous  saints,  where  there  is  another  saint  called  '  Mogopp6c 
artifex ',  unless  the  epithet  has  got  misplaced,  and  belongs  in  reality 
to  Mogoppoc  Finn  '. 

Cathbad  the  Druid  was  also  a  famous  warrior ',  and  Diodorus '  lays 
great  stress  on  the  influence  of  the  druids  in  war. 

In  the  hfe  of  Gerald  we  seem  to  get  a  ghmpse  of  a  druidic  school 
or  coUege  ",  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  some  at  least  of  the  later 

'   Petrie,  Round  Towers,  pp.  348,  385,  404  ;  Reeves,  Eccl.  Ant.  p.  285. 

2  Maed.  5§  46,  48.  '  Ab.  §  42. 

'  Ir.  Moling,  §  34;  cf.  ib  §§  41,  46-50;  and  0'Donovan,  Supplement,  s.  v. 
raitnsech. 

'-  Fel.2  p.  256.  «  Mart.  Don.,  Dec.  6. 

'  LL.  368^20,  23;  cf.  Christian  Inscrlptions,  ii.  23-4.  For  a  reference  to 
fiobban  Saer  in  the  secular  literature,  see  R.  C.  xvi.  76-7.  A  kindred  character 
is  Goibniu,  the  magic  smith  of  the  Tuatha  De  Danann,  on  whom  see  Cormac, 
Glossary,  p.  32  ;  Transiation,  p.  133  ;  R.  C.  xii.  88  ;  *  fiss  Goibncnn,'  the  t^magic) 
science  of  Goibniu,  occurs  in  the  obscure  St.  Gallen  Incantation  printed  in 
Gramm.  Celt.'^  p.  949.  There  were  traditions  of  a  magic  feast  of  liis  ;  no  one 
who  partook  of  it  ever  suflfered  pain  or  sickness  afterwards,  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  177, 
189,  327  ;  Oide  Clainne  Lir,  §  13  and  note  ;  Rhys,  H.  L.  pp.  90,  319.  388.  The 
name  of  Goibniu  is  probably  connected  with  Ir.  goha,  a  sinith.  Gobban  may 
have  been  connectcd  with  it  by  folk-etymology ;  but  the  double  b  or  f>  is  ag.iinst 
a  real  connexion.  One  of  the  daugliters  of  the  Dagda  was  '  I^rigit  bc  goibnechta, 
i.  bande  ',  i.  e.  Brigit  the  woman  of  smithcraft,  that  is  a  goddcss.  Cormac.  p.  8  ; 
Transl.  p.  23.  On  the  contiiient  St.  Eligius  or  Kloi  is  thc  hagioloi^ical  Vulcan, 
Luzcl,  Legendes  Chretiennes,  i.  94,  99  fi.     See  Addenda. 

"  LL.  106"  9;  R.  C.  vi.  174.  Scathach,  the  military  instructrcss  of  Cuchu- 
lainn.  was  also  a  '  faith  '  or  prophetcss,  R.  C.  xi.  448.  Compare  the  inllucnce 
of  the  German  priests  in  war,  Grimm,  i.  90. 

^  u.  s.  p.  clxi,  note  4. 

'"  '  famosus  magus,  qui  multos  sue  artis  habebat  discipulos,'  §  9 ;  cf.  Hy 
Fiachrach,  p.  98  :  '  Cnoc  na  n-druadh  ainm  ele  don  tulaigh  sin,  tre  bheith  do 
draoithibh  Dathi  righ  Ercann  innte  ag  faghail  feasa  7  eoluis,'  i.  e.  Druids'  KnoU 
was  another  name  of  this  hill,  owing  to  the  druids  of  King  Dathi  bcing  there, 
acquiring  scicnce  and  knowlcdgc  {thcse  two  passages  refer  lo  the  samc  locality) ; 
and  we  hear,  not  luifrequently,  of  the  pupils  of  famous  druids  ;  e.  g.  Cathbadi 
and  Dil,  Ir.  T.  i.  325 ;  Kawl.  B.  502,  f.  72'' ;  and  thc  forraer  is  represented  as 
head  ofa  regular  school,  T.  B.  C.  p.  131. 


HEATHEN  FOLKLORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    dxv 

schools  and  monasteries  of  Ireland  were  direct  successors  of  these 
ancient  diuidic  institutions'. 

We  have  already  seen  how  great  was  the  influence  of  the  druids 
at  the  court  of  Ulster  •.  We  hear  of  an  Irish  druid  in  Wales  who  was 
also  a  '  satrapa ',  and  had  an  '  arx  '  or  rath  of  his  own '.  To  this  position 
the  saints  and  the  ecclcsiastics  of  the  new  faith  largely  succeeded. 
But  thcy  did  not  supplant  their  rivals  all  at  once.  For  a  time,  at  any 
rate,  the  two  systems  existed  side  by  side  ;  there  seems  clear  evidencc 
of  the  presence  ot  druids  at  the  courts  of  Christian  princes';  and 
it  is  evidently  regarded  as  a  mark  of  special  virtue  that  a  Christian 
chief  refuses  to  consult  druids^  But  it  was  not  only  to  the  position 
of  the  druids  at  court  that  the  clergy  succeeded  ;  they  succeeded  also 
to  their  property.  We  have  seen '  how  the  ciergy  imitated  the 
circuits  and  collections  of  dues  made  by  their  predecessors  ;  they 
seeni  also  to  have  taken  their  land  ;  the  process  probably  being  that 
when  a  chief  was  converted  to  Christianity  he  transferred  the 
mensal  lands  of  the  ministers  of  the  old  religion  to  the  ministers  of 
the  new  religion.  It  is  surely  not  vvithout  significance  that  so 
many  of  the  contests  between  saints  and  druids  are  stated  to 
have  had  reference  to  the  possession  of  land '.    In  the  regulation 

'  See  Bertrand,  Religion,  Lefons  xix,  xx,  ib.  pp.  388-9.  We  find  women 
cducated  by  druids,  V.  Tr.  p.  92, 

'  Above,  p.  clviii,  note  6. 

'  C.  B.  S.  p.  124  ;  on  the  political  influence  of  the  medicine  man,  cf.  Lang, 
Myth  and  Ritual,  i.  iog-17  i^io8-i6');  Custom  and  Myth,  pp.  236-8. 

*  Ber.  §  15  i^Aedan  mac  Gabrain,  king  of  the  Scottish  Dalriada  :  *  rex  suum 
uocat  ariolum  ' ;  in  the  Irish  life  the  king  has  four  druids,  cf.  Tr.  Th.  p.  416", 
§  38^  ;  Mochoem.  |  13  1  the  chief  of  Eile,  who  is  clearly  regarded  as  a  Christian, 
has  '  suus  magus  "t ;  Moling,  §  19  (Finnachta,  King  of  Tara  :  •  sui  magi  ad  regem 
uenerunt ") ;  cf.  Magh  Rath,  p.  46,  where  the  druid  is  called  '  the  king's  bard 
and  poet,  a  man  of  ^magical)  science  and  a  notable  druid  ' ;  ib.  p.  166,  where  it 
is  said  that  the  king  of  Ulster  was  imper\'ious  to  the  advice  alike  of  his  druids 
and  of  his  clergy,  showing  clearly  that  the  author  saw  no  impossibility  in  their 
co-exislence  at  the  same  court ;  see  also  Petrie,  Tara,  p.  123  ;  Oss.  Soc.  v.  58  note. 
On  the  replacement  of  the  druidsby  the  clergy,  cf.  Bertrand,  Religion,  pp.  278  ff. : 
'les  eveques  ont  remplace  les  druides,'  &c.  Perhaps  it  is  due  to  this  that  the 
writer  of  Accallam  na  Senorach  is  doubtful  whether  a  certain  Gedech  was  a 
bishop  or  a  druid  :  •  Fert  in  druad,  risa  raiter  Fert  in  Gedig  issin  tan  so  .i.  Gedech 
espoc  do  muintir  Patraic,  .  .  .  no  dono  Gedech  drai  Medba  7  Aililla,'  i.  e.  the 
Druids  Grave,  now  called  Gedech's  Grave  :  Gedech  was  a  bishop  in  Patrick"s 
retinue,  or  it  may  be  Gedech  was  a  druid  of  Medb  and  Ailill,  p.  216.  Keating 
asserts  that  the  king's  confessor  took  the  place  of  the  court  druid,  ii.  342  ;  cf. 
■  Todd's  Patrick,  pp.  iiSfT. 

^'  Ci.  S.  §  14.  *  Above,  pp.  c,  note  a  ;  cxxviii,  note  ri. 

'  Ber.  §13:  '  magus  uendicabat  sibi  ius  hereditarium  in  terra,  quam  uir 
Dei  .  .  .  possederat';  in  the  Irish  life,  c.  23,  the  land  is  said  to  have  been 
conferred  on  the  druid-bard  in  reward  for  a  eulogy  composed  on  the  chief; 
Ger.  §  9  '  magus  .  .  .  uendicans  sibi  ius  hereditarium  in  eadem  terra '.  Mochta 
founds  his  monastery  of  Louth  on  '  magorum  possessio ',  C.  S.  cc.  905-6.  (The 
incident  in  Ci.  C.  §  25  may  originally  have  been  of  this  kind  ;  cf.  also  C.  B.  S. 


clxvi  INTRODUCTION 

of  ordeals  also  the  clergy  seem  to  have  inherited  the  functions  of  the 
druids'. 

A  stock  mode  of  bringing  about  the  conflict  between  the  druids  and 
the  saint  is  for  the  druids  to  object  to  the  fire  kindled  by  the  saint, 
on  the  ground  that  wherever  the  smoke  of  the  fire  goes,  the  power 
of  the  saint  will  extend.  The  classical  instance  is  that  of  Patrick 
and  the  druids  of  King  Locgaire  ;  but  parallel  instances  occur  in  our 
lives  and  other  authorities  ^  It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that 
the  issue  of  these  conflicts  is  in  any  way  represented  as  the  triumph 
of  spiritual  over  magical  and  material  religion.  Rather  it  is  regarded, 
both  by  the  populace  and  by  the  druids  themselves,  as  the  triumph 
of  a  more  powerful  kind  of  'medicine'  over  an  inferior  species'; 
and  it  must  be  admitted  that  thc  biblical  story  of  the  contests  of 
Moses  with  the  magicians  of  Egypt  gave  colour  to  this  point  of  view. 


pp.  124-5.)  In  Colgan's  Latin  version  of  Magnus  0'Donneirs  Life  of  Columba 
is  a  curious  legend  that  when  the  saint  first  settled  in  lona  the  druids  there 
tried  to  balk  him  by  pretending  to  be  Christian  bishops,  Tr.  Th.  p.  411"  (§  11). 
A  druid  voluntarily  gives  up  his  '  hereditas'  to  Brigit,  ib.  p.  541"  (§  123").  It  is 
possible  that  in  some  cases  the  transference  of  property  from  the  old  to  the  new 
faith  was  eftected,  not  through  a  change  of  persons,  but  by  the  conversion  of 
the  'sitting  tenant'  to  Christianity.  Instances  of  the  conversion  of  druids  are 
mentioned,  V.  Tr.  pp.  102-4  ;  Ger.  §  9. 

1  In  Ir.  T.  iii.  192  the  ordeals  by  red-hot  iron  and  by  the  water  of  incantation 
are  expressly  represented  as  druidical  ;  the  lot,  ib.  p.  191,  is  worked  by  incanta- 
tion  of  the  poets,  which  is  nearly  the  same  thing.  The  ordeal  by  fire  is  pro- 
posed,  Mun.  §  27  ;  fire  and  water,  V.  Tr.  p.  56  ;  by  boiling  water,  C.  B.  S. 
p.  192.  The  lot  is  the  simplest  kind  of  ordeal.  The  Cain  Adamnain,  §  46, 
prescribes  that  the  names  of  the  suspected  parties  are  to  be  placed  in  a  chalice 
on  the  altar,  and  the  one  on  whom  the  lot  falls  is  the  guilty  one.  When  the 
opponents  of  the  Celtic  tonsure  gave  it  a  druidical  origin  they  were  probably 
quite  coriect,  though  when  they  traced  it  further  up  to  Simon  Magus  thcy  were 
on  more  doubtful  ground,  V.  Tr.  p.  509  ;  Rhys,  Celtic  Britain-,  pp.  73-5. 

^  V.  Tr.  p.  42  ;  Ger.  §  9  ;  Las.  §  14  note  (=  Silva  Gad.  i.  25) ;  C.  S.  c.  go6, 
§  5  (cf.  ib.  c.  801)  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  124  (cl.  ib.  p.  9,  where  this  omen  is  interpreted 
by  a  Christian  chief  in  a  friendly  sense).  For  a  secular  parallel  see  R.  C. 
XV.  297.  Perhaps,  as  suggested  by  Messrs.  Baring-Gould  and  Fisher,  Brit. 
Saints,  i.  323,  the  rcal  objection  was  that  lighting  a  fire  symbolized  a  formal 
settlement  and  taking  possession.  The  mude  by  which  the  earliest  Norse 
settlers  in  Iceland  took  possession  was  '  fara  eldi  um  land  ',  to  fare  with  fire 
round  the  land,  Landnama,  iii.  6,  v.  i.  3.  One  curious  dcvice  which  the  druids 
and  hostilc  princes  are  reprcsented  as  adopting  against  the  newcomers,  in 
order  to  drive  them  avvay,  was  that  of  seiiding  abandoned  women  to  annoy 
them  with  thcir  impudent  gesturcs  and  behaviour,  C.  B.  S.  pp.  124-5  !  L.  Land. 
p.  95  (100)  ;  Book  of  Fenagh,  pp.  114  ff.,  128  (here  there  is  a  confusion  between 
drnitlw,  shamclcss  women,  and  druids)  :  to  this  there  are  analogies  in  the  secular 
literature,  T.  B.  C.  pp.  166-7  ( =  LL.  67''  35  ff.) ;  R.  C.  xiv.  4 18  i^  =  LL.  1 10"  30  ff.) ; 
LL.  119"  2  ff.;  Mesca  Ulad,  p.  53  (  =  LU.  20''  11  ff.) ;  cf.  Ruad.  §  8  note;  Rhys, 
A.  L.  pp.  179-82. 

^  A  striking  instance  from  New  Zealand  is  quoted  by  Lang,  Myth  and  Ritu.il, 
ii.  56  (32).  Thc  destruction  of  magical  properties,  Acts  xix.  19,  is,  as  Harnack 
says,  an  incident  with  fevv  parallcls,  Mission,  p.  211  note. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    cl.xvii 

Indeed  many  of  the  accounts  of  Patrick's  conflicts  with  the  druids ' 
have  evidcntly  been  influenced  by  the  narrative  of  Genesis.  Many 
instances  of  the  druids  being  beaten  by  the  saints  at  their  own 
thaumaturgic  weapons  occur  in  our  hves  and  elsewhere".  Hence 
the  saints  are  regarded  as  druids,  and  their  miracles  are  ascribed 
to  magic  ^.  When  Columba  contending  against  the  enchanted  mist 
is  represented  as  saying  '  my  druid  who  will  not  betray  me  is  the 
Son  of  God ' '  the  phrase  may  be  understood  metaphorically  '^,  but 
there  were  plenty  who  would  have  accepted  the  phrase  quite 
literally '. 

We  have  already  seen  instances  of  practices  which  the  saints 
exercised,  or  were  believed  to  exercise,  in  succession  to  the  druids. 
Some  others  may  be  mentioned  here.  Like  medicine  men  in  all  ages 
they  were  expected  to  detect '  and  punish  crime.  As  regards  punish- 
ment,  one  of  the  commonest  forms  is  that  the  criminals  remain 

'  V.  Tr.  pp.  44,  54-60,  92,  130,  138  ;  cf.  L.  H.'  i.  105  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  42. 

'  Aed,  §  20;  Car.  §§  21,  66  ;  Las.  5  17;  C.  S.  cc.  753-5  ;  L.  S.  pp.  68-9  ; 
Adamn.  ii.  11,  32,  34  ;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  12  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  98 ;  cf.  Lang,  Myth 
and  Ritual,  i.  gi,  112  (^89,  iii);  Grimm,  iv.  1281.  And  these  contests  of  the 
druids  with  the  saints  were  but  a  counterpart  of  the  contests  which  rival  druids, 
or  the  druids  of  rival  tribes,  had  with  one  another,  Cbir  Anm.  No.  76  ;  0'Curry, 
M.  and  C.  ii.  11,  189  f.,  213,  278,  280;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  108.  Columba  discomfits 
thc  magi  by  chanting  Ps.  xMv  i,xlv) ;  Patrick  hisenemics,  afler  the  defeat  of  the 
magi,  by  chanting  Ps.  Ixvii  (Ixviii),  Adamn.  ii.  37  ad  fin. ;  V.  Tr.  p.  44. 

^  Coem.  §  47  ;  Enda,  §15;  C.  S.  c.  801,  §  3;  Capg.  i.  443,  ii.  115,  202,  287. 
It  is  interesting  to  find  that  the  part  which  the  life  of  Moling,  §  19.  assigns  to 
Finnachta's  druids  of  explaining  to  the  king  the  deception  practised  on  him 
by  Moling  as  to  the  remission  of  the  Borr6ma  is  in  the  secular  tract  Borrdma 
ascribed  to  a  saint,  Adamnan,  R.  C.  xiii.  iio;  cf.  Pagan  Ireland,  p.  303.  The 
charge  of  magic  was  often  brought  against  the  early  Christians  :  '  cji  lacobus  : 
'■  Nazarenus  sum."     Et  ille  :  "  ergo  magjis  es  ",'  Aur.  Leg.  p.  800. 

*  '  Sluagh  doching  i  timchill  chairnn 

Is  mac  ainbthe  notus  mairn  ; 
Is  e  mo  drai  nim  mera 
Mac  De,  as  lium  congena.' 
i.e.  A  host  that  raarches  round  a  cairn,  it  is  a  son  of  storm  that  betrays  them ; 
this  is  my  druid  who  will  not  betray  me,  the  Son  of  God,  He  will  take  my  side, 
R.  C.  xvii.  143  (Stokes  divides  '  nimm  era  ',  from  '  eraim  ',  to  refuse  ;  but  '  mera  ' 
is  clearly  related  to  the  '  mairn  '  which  precedes  ;  cf.  *  nit  merad  .i.  nit  mairnfed  *, 
T.  B.  C.  p.  133  (=  LL.  64''  25"i.     The  same  expression  occurs  in  a  poem  attri- 
buted  to  Columba,  Misc.  I.  A.  S.  i.  6,  where  also  there  is  a  contrast  with  the 
false  druidism  of  the  heathen. 

'  As  Clement  of  Alexandria  calls  the  Logos  07105  i-naSo^,  Paedag.  i.  a.  6,  cited 
by  Harnack,  Mission,  p.  82. 

'  Cf.  Harnack,  Mission,  pp.  97,  104  ;  Grimm,  iv.  1614.  In  many  of  Luzers 
Legendes  Chretiennes  de  la  Basse  Bretagne,  our  Lord  is  introduced  simply  in 
the  character  of  a  travelMng  magician  ;  cf.  Outer  Isles,  pp.  214  (T.  In  Acc.  Sen. 
p.  72  Cailte  addresses  Finn  as  *  ar  m-breithem,  ar  n-druth,  ar  n-driii ',  i.  e.  our 
brehon,  our  jester,  our  druid.  These  last  two  words  are  often  confused  in  MSS., 
and  indeed  in  some  of  their  cases  they  come  very  near  each  other  ;  an  example 
has  already  been  given,  p.  clxvi,  note  a. 

'  Ita,  §j  27,  34. 


clxviii  INTRODUCTION 

immovable  in  the  act  of  committing  tlie  crime,  until  tlicy  confess 
and  receive  release  and  absolution  from  the  saint ' ;  or  the  instru- 
ments  with  which  they  are  perpetrating  their  crime  cleave  to  their 
bodies  ;  thiis  a  bar  adheres  to  the  shoulders,  an  axe  to  the  hands 
of  those  who  are  using  them''.  Clothes  adhere  to  the  feet  of  women 
who  are  washing  them  against  the  saint's  protest '.  A  treacherous 
host,  bribed  by  a  cauldron,  betrayed  Patrick  to  his  pursuers ;  the 
hands  of  the  traitor  and  of  all  his  family  clave  to  the  cauldron,  till 
Patrick  released  them  *.  Another  frequent  punishment  is  that  the 
criminals  wander  fruitlessly  round  and  round,  often  returning  uncon- 
sciously  to  the  scenes  of  their  misdeeds  ^  I  believe,  however,  that 
these  stories  owe  their  origin  not  to  popular  tradition,  but  to  a  fanciful 
interpretation  of  a  verse  of  scripture  ^  Often  the  misdoer  is 
swallowed  by  the  earth',  or  is  turned  into  stone*. 

1  Ab.  §§  37,  41 ;  Aed,  §§  12,  21  ;  Ber.  §  14  ;  Cain.  §  5  ;  Car.  §  27  ;  Ci.  C.  §  7  ; 
Col.  E.  §§  13,  14  ;  Com.  §  51  ;  Cron.  §  15  ;  Enda,  §  4  ;  Ger.  §  9  ;  Las.  §  14  ; 
Maed.  §  13;  Mochoem.  §  16;  Mun.  §§  22,  23;  Rua.  §  15  ad  finem  ;  C.  S. 
cc.  2o6-7  (§§  30,  31),  c.  279  (§  44,  not  in  M),  c.  389  (§  55,  not  in  M),  c.  669 
(§  27\  c.  801  (§  3",  ;  Silva  Gad.  i.  30;  V.  Tr.  p.  iio;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  84  ;  Tr.  Th. 
P.  538"  (§  88);  C.  B.  S.  pp.  31,  133;  Capg.  ii.  319,  570;  St.  Malo.  p.  86; 
L.  Land.  p.  128  1136").  Some  of  these  stories  have  probably  been  influenced  by 
I  Kings  xiii.  4-6  ;  Zech.  xi.  16.  In  Rennes  MS.  f.  87''  Colman  offers  to  his 
friends  either  to  bring  mist  over  the  eyes  of  their  enemies,  or  to  bind  their 
hands.  The  latter  is  chosen.  In  Lug.  §  4  the  arrest  of  the  threatening  hand 
is  ascribed  to  an  angel.  In  Capg.  ii.  317  one  saint  fixes  anotlier  saint  in  this 
way.  Soil  from  the  magical  Inis  Tuile  [?  Thule]  caused  tlie  hands  and  feet  of 
those  vvho  trod  on  it  to  adhere  to  the  ground,  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  188.  This  class  of 
miracle  also  occurs  in  non-Cellic  lives  of  saints.  e.  g.  Capg.  i.  14  ;  Aur.  Leg. 
pp.  18,42,  &c.  Animals  are  also  struck  motionless,  Lug.  §  4;  ci'.  the  stories 
of  calves  separated  tVom  their  mothers,  and  animals  saved  from  hunters,  above, 
pp.  xcvi,  note  9,  cxli. 

^  Ab.  §  33  ;  Col.  E.  §  12. 

^  Maed.  §  27  ;  cf.  Capg.  i.  190  ;  Grimm,  iv.  1349. 

*  L.  S.  p.  6 ;  V.  Tr.  p.  22  ;  there  is  an  intcresting  parallel  to  this  in  the 
Mabinogion,  ed.  Rhjs  and  Evans.  pp.  50-1  ;  ed.  Guest,  iii.  150-1,  171-3. 

'  Br.  i.  §  loi  ;  Coem.  §  26;  Com.  §  17;  C.  S.  c.  179  (§  24"!,  c.  911  (§  15); 
C.  B.  S.  pp.  177-8  ;  cf.  Magh  Ratli,  p.  234  ;  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  25. 

*  Ps.  xi.  (xii.)  9  :  '  in  circuitu  impii  ambulant ' ;  cf.  Bo.  §11;'  tmpii  .  .  .  recto 
itinere  ire  putantes,  tota  noctu  in  circitittt  monasterii  atnbulabatii ' ;  Cain.  §  37  : 
'  illi  .  .  .  noM  potuerunt  transire,  sed  per  circitiliim  .  .  .  anibiilabaiit ; '  Br.  i.  §  loi. 

'  Bo.  §  21  ;  Dec.  §  32  ;  C.  S.  c.  796  (§  11'),  c.  833  (§  15);  V.  Tr.  pp.  36,  130,  242  ; 
L.S.  pp.  9,  139  (cf.  ib.  p.  xxviii);  C.  B.  S.  pp.  43,  46,  160,  176-7,  193;  Rennes  MS. 
f.  84'';  Br.  Grellan,  c.  4.  The  biblical  parallel  of  Dathan  and  Abiram  is  often 
cited  in  these  stories,  and  niay  have  inHuenced  them  ;  but  the  same  povvcr  is 
attributed  to  the  druids,  0'Curry,  M.  and  C.  ii.  217.  Stories  of  criminals 
melting  like  wax,  C.  B.  S.  pp.  173,  201;  cf.  L.  Land.  p.  109  (116"),  havc 
probably  grovifn  out  of  Ps.  Ixvii.  (Ixviii.)  3  :  '  sicut  fluit  cera  a  facie  ignis,  sic 
pereant  peccatores  a  facie  Dei.'  Thieves  trying  to  cross  a  river  find  it  boiling 
hot,  Capg.  ii.  200. 

8  Decl.  §§  32,  36;  C.  S.  c.  673;  B.  Fenagh.  p.  116;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  138" 
(§  40);  C.  B.  S.  p.  178;  ef.  ib.  p.  64,  vvherc  the  criminals  are  vvolves.  This 
punishment  occurs  frequently  in  foik-tales,  cf.  Martin,  p.  9  ;  and  the  curious 
tradition  in  0'Donovan's  Supplemcnt,  s.v.  laimscch  ruad. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     clxix 

Another  magical  power  which  is  constantly  attributed  to  the  saints 
is  that  of  causing  ocular  illusion,  glamour,  or  sight-shifting'.  Thus 
laymen  appear  as  clerks  '  and  a  man  as  a  woman  carrying  an  infant ', 
and  so  are  passed  by  their  enemies.  A  man  or  a  horse  is  talten 
for  a  log  of  wood  *.  A  standing  stone  is  attaclved  under  the  idea  that 
it  is  a  man'";  soldiers  slay  one  another,  each  man  thinking  that  he  is 
aiming  at  St.  Moling".  Misdoers  flee  at  the  approach  of  fancied 
enemies',  or  because  their  own  homes  appear  on  fire",  or  because 
their  opponents  seem  to  be  three  times  as  numerous  as  they  really 
are '.  Invaders  think  that  thcy  are  burning  and  slaughtering  ;  in 
reality  they  are  doing  no  harm,  and  the  severed  heads  which  they 
seem  to  be  carrying  off  by  the  hair  turn  out  to  be  lumps  of  rotten 
wood,  or  sods  of  earth  with  grass  growing  from  them  '".  A  prisoner 
who  in  fact  has  escaped  is  thought  by  his  captors  to  be  still 
in  their  hands,  or  even  to  have  been  put  to  death  by  them ". 
Analogous  to  this  is  the  case  of  a  favourite  youth  who  seemed  to  be 
present  witheach  of  threebodies  of  monks  whodesired  his  company '^ 


'  This  form  of  magic  plays  a  considerable  part  in  the  Icelandic  sagas,  and  is 
called  *  sjonhverfing ',  lit.  sight-turning;  this  has  suggested  to  me  the  term 
'  sight-shilling '  as  a  convenient  correlalive  to  the  accepted  term  *  shape- 
shifting  ',  the  former  being  conceived  of  as  a  subjective  delusion,  the  latter  as 
an  objectivc  fact.  The  tvvo  are  sometimes  confused,  e.  g.  Ail.  §  31  and  note  ; 
C.  S.  c.  279  ^§  44").  That  it  was  regarded  as  a  malignant  power  is  shown  by 
the  fact  that  it  is  produced  in  some  cases  by  demoniac,  Br.  i.  §  70,  and  druidic, 
agency,  Cain.  §  11 :  C.  S.  c.  353  ^§  39,  not  in  M) ;  Adamn.  ii.  17  ;  and  that  it 
was  one  of  the  charges  against  Kentigern's  mother  that  she  '  visus  immutat,  et 
sensus  alienat ',  N.  and  K.  p.  167  ;  cl.  also  V.  Tr.  p.  300.  In  a  Latin  life  of 
Patrick  sight-shilting  is  learnedly  called  '  illud  genus  caecitatis  .  .  .  quam 
Acrisiam  nuncupant  Phisici ',  Tr.  Th.  p.  104''. 

*  Col.  E.  §  23  ;  cf.  R.  C.  xxiv.  56. 

*  '  andar  leo  ba  banscal  he,  7  naeidi  for  a  muin,'  i,  e.  it  seemed  to  them  that 
he  was  a  woman,  with  an  infant  on  her  back,  Rennes  MS.  f.  88". 

*  Coem.  §  13  ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  87°. 

'  Br.  i.  §  6;  Ci.  C.  §  31  note  ;  Three  Fragments,  p.  196  ;  Magh  Lena,  pp.  30-4. 
These  things  occur  even  in  grave  Chronicles;  cf.  Ann.  Ult.  1167,  where  the 
Cinel  Eogain  mistake  a  brake  of  sallows  for  their  enemies.  Ajax  slaughtering 
the  defenceless  herds  under  the  idea  that  he  is  slaying  his  enemies  is  a  classical 
instance  of  sight-shifting. 

'  Ir.  Moling,  §  70. 

'  Maed.  §  51  ;  C.  S.  cc.  792-3  (S§  3,  5) ;  cf.  R.  C.  xii.  92,  xv.  446. 

"  Fin.  C.  §  16  note. 

'  'dobersa  taidbsi  tri  cath  fort,'  i.  e.  I  will  put  the  appearance  of  three  bat- 
talions  upon  thee,  Rennes  MS.  {.  87''.  Of  Manannan  mac  Lir  it  is  said  :  '  if  he 
dreaded  an  enemy,  he  would  of  one  man  cause  to  seem  one  hundred,  and  that 
by  art  magic,'  lar-Connaught,  p.  263. 

>»  Ail.  §  31 ;  Cron.  §  i8  ;  Tig.  §  10  ;  C.  S.  c.  379  (§  44)  ;  Tr.  Th.  pp.  521»  (§  23), 
534    (§  67) ;  cf.  R.  C.  xxiii.  413-16. 

"  Sam.  §  12  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  535«  (§  68). 

*'  Lug.  §  18  and  notes  ;  so  Bran,  the  famous  hound  of  Finn  mac  Cumaill, '  was 
seen  as  three  dogs,  intercepting  the  deer  at  three  passes,'  Campbell,  Supersti- 
tions,  p.  31.     For  sight-shifting  on  the  part  of  animals  see  Maed.  §§  7,  33  ;  the 


clxx  INTRODUCTION 

So  when  rival  clans  were  in  danger  of  coming  to  blows  for  the 
possession  of  a  sainfs  body,  a  car  drawn  by  oxen  bearing  the 
precious  burden  appeared  to  be  accompanying  each  of  the  contend- 
ing  parties,  and  thus  bloodshed  was  prevented '.  Lastly  Bishop 
Bron  and  his  company  on  their  way  to  Kildare  are  lost  at  night- 
fall  in  a  wood.  But  it  seemed  to  them  they  had  reached  their  destina- 
tion  and  were  received  by  Brigit  and  her  maidens  with  all  goodly 
hospitality.  In  the  morning  they  awoke  to  find  themselves  in  the  wood, 
and  the  real  Brigit  came  with  herattendants  to  lead  themto  Kildare''. 

Again  serpents '  and  vermin  *  of  various  kinds  are  expelled  by 
saints,  as  magicians  charm  away  lice '',  or  Irish  poets  were  believed 
to  rhyme  rats  to  death  '. 

Many  of  the  prophecies  ascribed  to  saints  have  a  striking  analogy 
with  the  phenomena  of  second  sight ;  foreknowledge  of  the  coming 
of  guests',  the  knowledge  of  events  taking  place  at  a  distance,  such 
as  the  danger  or  death  of  friends,  the  movements  of  travellers,  the 

stories  alrcady  cited  in  which  wolves,  &c.,  act  as  calves  to  bereaved  cows 
probably  rest  on  the  same  idea. 

'  Ab.  §52  ;  Enda,  §  11  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  256;  Breuiarium  Aberdon.,  Pars  Hiem., 
Propr.  Sanct.,  f.  Ixiv.  r** ;  the  writer  modestly  calls  this  'res  non  frequenter 
audita  ';  R.  C.  v.  457.  In  one  case  no  less  than  three  corpses  wcre  thus  pro- 
vided.  But  subsequent  miracles  showed  that  Llandaff  had  secured  the  genuine 
article,  L.  Land.  p.  iio  (117). 

^  This  resemblcs  the  common  folk-tale  motive  of  a  party  lost  at  night-fall 
coming  on  a  house,  not  known  to  have  existed  there  before,  and  being  sumptu- 
ously  entertained  ;  in  the  morning  the  house  has  vanished,  and  they  find  that 
they  have  becn  sleeping  on  the  ground,  Ir.  T.  i.  137-8;  iii.  318-23;  R.  C.  vii. 
2960".,  ix.  486,  492  ;  cf.  Capg.  ii.  451.  An  amusing  case  of  sight-shifting  is  in 
Aur.  Leg.  p.  48,  which  has  been  borrowed  by  Hrotswith,  the  learned  nun  of 
Gandersheim,  in  one  of  hcr  Terentian  comedies,  Ker,  Dark  Ages,  p.  180. 

'  The  classical  instance  is,  of  course,  Patrick  expclling  scrpents  and  other 
reptiles  from  Ireland  ;  cf.  Tr.  Th.  p.  102.  But  Columba  did  the  like  for  lona, 
Adamn.  ii.  28,  iii.  23  ad  init. ;  cf.  Capg.  ii.  563 ;  Bede,  H.  E.  i.  i  and  notes ; 
Keating,  ii.  18  ;  Martin,  p.  161. 

■■  Br.  i.  §  79  ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  138»  (§  39,  fleas)  ;  C.  S.  c.  193  (5  7,  sparrows, 
serpents,  and  fleas)  ;  Gir.  Camlj.  Opp.  v.  120  ,,rats) ;  Cain.  §  24  i^mice).  Giraldus 
says  that  in  Ircland  therc  were  '  mures  infinitissimi ',  3'ct  thcy  would  not  livc  in 
Aran,  u.  s.  pp.  61,  84  ;  certain  of  the  Hebridcs  had  the  samc  peculiarity,  Martin, 
PP.  50,  380  ;  while  cats  will  not  live  in  others,  ib.  p.  381  ;  cf.  Lang,  Myth  and 
Ritual,  ii.  222  (,201)  ;  Grimm.  iii.  1129,  iv.  1784,  1826. 

'^  Grimm  citcs  the  trial  of  a  family  of  magicians  who  were  supposed  to  have 
an  hereditary  power  of  doing  this,  iii.  1068. 

"  See  Proc.  R.  I.  A.  v.  355  ff. ;  Oss.  Soc.  v.  76-7  ;  0'Curry,  M.  and  C.  ii.  87-8  ; 
Campbell,  Supcrstitions,  pp.  225-6. 

'  Ba.  §  14  ;  Cain.  §  23  ;  Coem.  §§  30,  36  ;  Decl.  §  34  (attributed  to  angelic 
revelation)  ;  Enda,  §  10  ;  Fin.  C.  §  27  ;  Fint.  §§  2,  12  ;  Ita,  §§  20,  24,  31,  35  ; 
Moling,  §  27  ^in  tliis  case  the  guests  werc  animals)  ;  Rua.  §  29  ad  finem  ;  Tig. 
§  2  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  98 ;  cf.  Ci.  C.  §  29.  According  to  the  Amra,  this  knowlcdge  never 
failed  Columba,  '  ni  doficed  sede  nach  n-dam  ccn  a  remfhis',  i.  e.  no  company 
evcr  rcachcd  him  without  hisforcknowing,  R.  C.  XX.  140;  cf.  xxix.  120.  Martin, 
on  landing  in  Rona,  was  assured  by  thc  nalivcs  that  they  had  *  had  frequent 
apparitions  of  your  person  ',  Western  Isles,  p.  20. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxxi 

outbreak  of  war,  or  the  perpetration  of  crime',  the  prevision  of 
a  man's  destiny ',  of  the  dcath  which  threatens  him',  his  place  of 
burial ',  ivnowledge  of  his  hiddcn  quality  ",  of  his  guilt  or  innocence  ^ 
Alcin  to  this'  are  cases  in  which  the  actual  faculty  of  vision  is 
magically  or  miraculously  extended  '.  This  power  also  is  transferred 
by  the  saint  to  others  by  physical  contact '.  Sometimes  the  vvhole 
world  is  seen  spread  out  before  the  seer '".    The  faculty  of  hearing, 

'  Br.  i.  §  104;  Cain.  §§  10,  44;  Coem.  §  14;  Col.  E.  §  27;  Com.  §  30; 
Fint.  §§  8,  12  ;  Ita,  §  34  ;  Maed.  §  42  (an  exaet  parallel  to  this  in  Gregory's 
Dialogues,  iii.  14) ;  Mun.  §  12  ;  Capg.  i.  215  (represented  as  a  dream)  ;  Tr. 
Th.  p.  535*  (§  71)  ;   Adamn.  i.  7,  12,  22,  28,  29;   Br.  Grellan,  c.  4. 

-  Col.  E.  §  19;  Fint.  §  10;  Maed.  §  34;  Mun.  §  12;  cf.  ib.  §  s.where  theprophetic 
sight  is  accompanied  by  a  genera!  ecstatic  state.  In  other  cases  the  person's 
future  destiny  or  past  actions  are  divined  Irom  the  sound  of  his  voice,  Cain.  §  41  ; 
Ci.  C.  §  26  ;  Col.  E.  §  8  ;  Enda,  §  2 ;  Fint.  §§  13,  14  ;  cf.  Br.  Coemgen,  c.  12  :  '  ro 
athain  for  a  ghuth  7  for  a  dheilb  go  n-derna  drochgniomh,'  i.  e.  he  knew  by  his 
voice  and  form  that  he  had  committed  a  crime.  I  cannot  give  anye-xact  parallel 
from  the  secular  literature  ;  cf.  Ir.  T.  i.  300  for  a  slight  analogy. 

'  Col.  E.  §  lo  ;  Com.  §  30  ;  Cron.  §  ii  ;  Fin.  C.  §  g ;  Fint.  §§  9,  17  ad  fin. ;  Ita, 
§§  la,  32  ;  Maed.  §§  13,  36  ;  Mochoem.  §§  17,  26 ;  Adamn.  i.  21  ;  Fel.*  p.  116. 

*  Car.  §  30  ;  Lug.  §  37. 

'  Ita,  §  24  ;  Adamn.  i.  44.  Akin  to  this  are  cases  in  which  the  names  of  per- 
sons  never  seen  before  are  intuitively  known,  Br.  i.  §§  13,  61  ;  ii.  §§  49,  55  ; 
a  secular  parallel,  R.  C.  i.x.  490. 

'  Ita,  §  27.  Parallels  to  almost  all  these  instances  may  be  found  in  the  cases 
of  second  sight  coUected  by  Martin,  pp.  300-35  ;  cf.  Outer  Isles,  ch.  15.  The 
faculty  is  shared  by  animals,  Martin,  pp.  306-7  ;  Outer  Isles,  p.  105  ;  it  can  be 
transferred  to  another  by  physical  contact,  ib.  p.  70;  Martin,  p.  305.  A  phan- 
tasm  of  the  dying,  C.  S.  c.  106  (§  8). 

'  Indeed,  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  draw  the  line  between  them  ;  e.  g.  Z.  C.  P. 
iii.  248. 

'  Maed.  §  30  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  1 19 ;  Br.  Berach,  c.  30  ;  in  Bcr.  §  25  this  is  a  vision 
seen  in  sleep  ;  in  Fech.  §  12  in  ecstasy. 

"  How  thoroughly  consonant  this  is  with  the  traditions  of  secular  folk-lore  may 
be  seen  from  the  foUowing  comparisons  ;  in  Rhys'  Celtic  Folk-Iore,  i.  230,  is  a 
story  of  how  a  man,  by  standing  on  a  fairy's  foot,  is  enabled  to  see  the  fairy 
mansion  beneath  theground  (cf.  Macculloch,  Childhood,  p. 315).  So  Aengus  mac 
Nadfraich,  by  laying  his  face  on  Enda's  feet,  is  enabled,  by  the  elevation  of  the 
ground  (a  semirationalizing  touch  which  is  not  in  the  parallel  version,  Ail.  §  25), 
to  see  the  isle  of  Aran,  though  many  miles  away,  Enda,  §  13.  (Even  closer 
parallels  in  Capg.  i.  loi  [—  Sim.  Dun.  i.  298],  ii.  413  ;  but  these  are  non-Celtic.) 
So  the  sight  of  the  future  world  is  given  by  contact  with  the  saint,  Z.  C.  P.  iv. 
308.  Other  knowledge  is  also  conveyed  by  contact,  as  in  the  pretty  story  of  the 
little  boy  who  resorted  to  Aengus,  the  author  of  the  Felire,  to  help  him  to  learn 
his  psalms  :  '  "  Come  here,"  said  Aengus,  '*  and  put  thy  head  on  my  knee,  and 
go  to  sleep."  He  did  so  ;  and  the  boy  arose  afterwards ;  and  Aengus  said  : 
'•repeat  thy  lesson,  my  son."  The  boy  repeats  more  than  the  i^appointed) 
lesson,'  Fel.^  p.  la.  In  a  story  given  in  Rhys,  u.  s.  i.  170-1,  the  magic  sight  is 
conditioned  by  standing  on  a  sod  from  St.  David's  churchyard.  For  the  miracu- 
lous  elevation  of  ground  to  suit  the  saint's  convenience  cf.  Cain.  §  39  ;  V.  Tr. 
p.  93  ;  L.  S.  p.  143  ;  L.  H.-  i.  5  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  112-13,  139  (here  the  elevation 
is  caused  by  the  saint  standing  on  the  '  sudarium  '  of  a  youth  whom  he  had 
raised  from  the  dead) ;  St.  Malo,  p.  39  ;  N.  and  K.  p.  217. 

'"  Maed.  §  52  ;  Adamn.  i.  1  ad  finem,  i.  43  sub  finem  ;  Capg.  ii.  311  ;  Gregory, 
Dial.  ii.  35.  Our  Lord's  temptation  on  the  Mount  has  probably  had  influence 
here,  Luke  iv.  5  ;  cf.  Grimm,  i.  136. 


clxxii  INTRODUCTION 

or    the    carrying    power   of   the    voice,   is    similarly    extended    by 
a  miracle  '. 

Yet  more  curious  are  the  cases  in  vvhich  the  saint  causes  the  souls 
of  men  to  go  forth  from  their  bodies  in  sleep,  and  visit  distant  scenes'. 
That  the  soul  in  sleep  goes  forth  from  the  body  is  a  verj'  primitive 
behef;  and  hence  comes  the  idea  that  it  is  dangerous  to  wake 
a  sleeping  man  suddenly ',  not  only  lest  the  souFs  travels  and  acquisi- 
tion  of  knowledge  should  be  interrupted  *,  but  also  lest  the  absent 
soul  should  be  unable  to  find  its  way  back  to  the  body  \  Sleep  of 
a  supernatural  character  is  causcd  in  various  ways,  sometimes  by  the 
saint's  prayer ',  or  by  his  breath ',  sometimes  by  liquor  that  has  been 
blessed  by  him ',  sometimes  by  drinking  of  a  charmed  fountain ', 
sometimes  by  music  '". 

'  Ab.  §  31 ;  Br.  i.  §  5  note ;  Cain.  §  13 ;  Car.  §  41  ;  Coera.  §  43 ;  Mun.  §§  21, 
26  ;  Sam.  §  23  ;  C.  S.  cc.  917,  920  (§§  4,  13)  ;  R.  C.  -xx.  176  ;  Adamn.  i.  37  ; 
L.  S.  pp.  25,  102.     For  a  secular  parallel  see  Ir.  T.  II.  ii.  125. 

^  Com.  §  42  ;  the  most  interesting  case  of  this  is  in  C.  S.  c.  310,  §  16  :  '  rogauit 
populus  Finanum  ut  e.\irent  uidere  agonem.  Quibus  ait  :  "  Maneant  corpora 
uestra  iuxta  me,  et  exeant  anime  uestre  ".  .  .  .  Dormientibus  .  .  .  illis  iuxta 
sanctum,  exierunt  anime  eorum  ad  stagnum  longe,  ubi  uidcrunt  agonem  ;  .  .  . 
et  reuerse  sunt  .  .  .  ante  uesperum  anime  ad  corpora  sua,  et  narrauerunt  omnia 
que  facta  fuerant  in  agone,  sicut  erant."  In  the  M  text,  Fin.  C.  §  13,  this  has 
been  toned  down  to  a  vision  seen  in  sleep  ;  cf.  Ber.  §  25  ;  Forbes,  Calendars, 
p.  347,  from  A.  S.  March,  ii.  439. 

^  This  idea  occurs  constantly  in  the  Icelandic  sagas.  Restlessness  in  sieep 
(lata  illa  i  svefni)  showed  that  the  soul  was  undergoing  special  experiences,  and 
made  any  premature  awakening  exceptionally  dangerous,  Njala,  c.  62  ;  Flatey- 
jarbbk,  ii.  216.  So  in  Irish  :  'arigsitar  Ulaid  anisin,  7  asbertatar  ara  n-duscide. 
*'  Acc,*'  ol  Fergus,  "  nachin  gluasid,  res  atchi,"  '  i.e.  the  Ultonians  noticed  this, 
and  .said  that  he  ought  to  be  awaltened.  '  No,'  said  Fergus,  '  do  not  disturb 
him,  he  is  seeing  a  vision,'  Ir.  T.  i.  208;  cf.  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  6. 

'  This  idea  appears  Bo.  §  3  ;  cf.  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  446,  749.  In  Tr.  Th.  pp.  538-9 
(§  91)  the  sainfs  soul  goes  forth  not  in  sleep,  but  in  an  ecstatic  state. 

^  'aithnit  dia  muinteraib  nar  foghiaister  na  cuirp.  air  dia  n-gluaister,  ni  thic- 
fadsum  chucu  semper,'  i.  e.  they  enjoin  their  attendants  not  to  move  their 
bodies,  for  it'  thcy  were  moved  they  would  never  come  back  to  them  again,  Ir. 
Nenn.  p.  204.  In  this  case  the  souls,  while  abscnt,  became  werewolves  ;  cf.  Gir. 
Camb.  Opp.  v.  101-6;  Grimm,  ii.  829,  iii.  1083  :  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  ii.  164. 
A  charge  of  being  a  werewolf  was  brought  against  a  Breton  saint,  Ronan  : 
'  Ronanum  .  .  .  aliquando  conuerti  in  lupum,  et  non  solum  caedem  exercere 
pecorum,  uerum  etiam  filiorum  liominum,'  R.  C.  xi.  243  ;  but  no  Celtic  saint  is 
actually  represented  as  a  shape-shitter,  so  far  as  I  am  aware  ;  this  was  too 
heathen  an  art  to  be  attcibuted  to  aChristian  ;  cf  Ir.  T.  iii.  235  :  '  suithi  gennt- 
lechta  la  cechtar  de,  ...  7  nus  delbdais  in  ccch  richt,'  i.  e.  they  both  had  the 
learning  of  gentilism,  and  could  shift  into  any  shape.  The  druids  practised  this 
art,  LU.  54''  36  (T.  Saints,  however,  change  criminals  into  animal  shapes  as 
a  punishment,  V.  Tr.  p.  248  ad  calcem  ;  L.  S.  p.  xiii. 

'  Capg.  ii.  202.  '  Ail.  §  38. 

'  Lug.  §  10 ;  cf.  R.  C.  ix.  486,  xi.  448,  for  secular  parallels  ;  this  was  the 
result  of  a  spell :  '  do  chuirsi  bricht  suain  forsin  fin,'  i.  e.  she  put  a  sleep-spell 
011  the  wine,  R.  C.  xxiii.  420. 

'  Br.  i.  §§  28,  36,  ii.  §  29;  Rua.  §  14  nole  ( =  C.  S.  c.  324). 

'"  Br.  i.  §  69;  Ci.  S.  §  14  ;  C.  S.  c.  446  (,§  3,  twoangels  in  theformof  swans} ; 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxxiii 

Another  druidic  function  which  the  Celtic  saints  inherited  only  too 
completely  was  that  of  malediction  '.  The  most  notable  instance  in 
our  lives  is  th,e  great  cursing  match  between  Ruadan  and  king 
Diarmait',  which  ended  in  the  desoiation  of  Tara'.  There  is 
a  similar  contcst  on  a  smaller  scale  in  the  Irish  life  of  Cranatan'; 
and  a  very  striking  secular  parallel  in  the  cursing  of  Emain  Macha', 
the  seat  of  Ulster  royalty,  by  the  druid  Cathbad,  on  account  of  the 
murder  of  the  sons  of  Uisnech  ".  But  there  are  many  other  instances 
of  saintly  curses'.  It  seems  to  be  regarded  as  extraordinary  self- 
restraint  if  a  saint  does  not  exercise  his  maledictory  powers  on 
the  slightest  provocation*.  The  practice  is  expressly  defended  in 
the  Irish  canons'  by  the  examples  of  St.  Peter'",  of  St.  Paul ",  and 
of  St.  Thomas  in  his  apocryphal  Acts  ".  The  left  hand  was  held 
up  in  cursing,  whereas  the  right  was  the  hand  of  blessing  ".  Finan 
gives  his  own  tribe  holy  water  to  drink  for  the  cursing  of  their 
enemies  '*.  In  the  ofl-cited  life  of  Colman  mac  Luachain  is  a  very 
curious  instance  of  a  curse  by  which  the  members  of  the  person 
cursed  are  distributed  among  the  various  saints  of  Ireland""'.  Comic 
curscs  somewhat  of  this  kind  have  descended  to  the  present  day 
in  children's  games  in  Ireland  '".    By  judicious  interposition  a  curse 


V.  Tr.  p.  254  (angelsV  In  the  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  14,  an  anfel's  song  sends  a 
'  peist '  to  sleep.  This  sleep-inducing  music  is  very  common  in  the  secular 
literature,  Acc.  Sen.  pp.  13,  98,  280  :  Ir.  T.  iii.  197  ;  R.  C.  ix.  488.  It  is  caused 
by  the  snng  of  birds,  R.  C.  xvi.  39 ;  M.  and  C.  ii.  276  ;  especially  of  shape-shifted 
birds,  Ir.  T.  i.  207  ;  R.  C.  xiii.  10  ;  Oide  Clainne  Lir,  §  20  ;  by  the  song  of  mer- 
maids,  R.  C.  xv.  433,  xvi.  31 ;  by  the  shaking  of  the  mieb  iida,  or  branch  of 
peace,  LL.  1 1 1"  45  (  =  R.  C.  xiv.  426),  177''  15  ;  Ir.  T.  iii.  193  ;  Bran,  i.  3  ;  Oss. 
Soc.  iii.  212  ;  M.  and  C.  iii.  313  ff.  Its  technical  name  is  '  suantraige  ',  or  sleep- 
strain,  LL.  269**  11  ;  the  other  two  kinds  of  magic  music  being  'gentraige', 
laughter-strain.  and  '  goltraige',  weeping-strain.  On  these  three  see  LL.  249" 
i7ff.  (=  Tain  Bd  Fraich,  pp.  140-2),  288''  14  ff.  '  =  Silva  Gad.  i.  311");  R.  C.  vi. 
183,  xii.  80,  108  ;  M.  and  C.  iii.  223  ;  cf.  Rhys,  H.  L.  p.  606  ;  Macculloch,  Child- 
hood,  p.  31.  On  the  fondness  of  Irish  saints  for  music  see  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v. 
155.     He  says  that  Coemgen's  harp  was  preserved  as  a  relic. 

'  Bertrand,  Religion,  p.  260  ;   British  Saints,  i.  13-17  :  cf.  Bede,  ii.  260. 

'  Rua.  5  17;  Cuimin  of  Connor  says,  quite  truly,  '  Ruadan  loved  cursing/ 
and  hc  tiieans  it  as  a  compiiment,  Z.  C.  P.  i.  66. 

■'   Magh  Rath,  p,  4.  *  Br.  Cranatan,  c.  2. 

■■^  Navan  Fort,  near  Armagh.  °  Trans.  Gaelic  Soc.  i,  iv.  130  ff. 

'  Ab.  f-  37:  Er.  i.  §  80;  Car.  §  58;  Fech.  §  6  note  ;  Br.  Colman  Ela,  c.  4  ; 
Renncs  MS.  f  88'' ;  C.  B,  S.  pp,  15,  16,  18,  29,  39,  63,  184-6  (we  have  a  collec- 
tive  curse  by  the  whole  monastic  community,  ib,  p.  132) ;  cf.  M^gh  Rath, 
pp.  18,  28,  232,  270, 

'  Ab,  5  1 1  ai1  finem  ;  Decl,  §  19 ;  cf.  Ba.  §  15 ;  Bo.  §  4,  a  very  curious  passage. 

'  Wasserschleben,  pp.  88-91,  '"  Acts  v,  3-10.  "   i  Cor.  v.  5. 

'"   =  Aur.  Leg.  p.  33.  ^'  Decl,  §  36  ;  Fel,-  p.  200  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  326. 

"  Fin.  C.  §  16  note,  from  the  S  text ;   toned  down  in  the  other  versions. 

'5  Rennes  MS,  f.  87  v°, 

"  Oss.  Soc.  v.  107  note ;  cf.  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  133. 


clxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

is  transferred  to  inanimate  objects,  a  stone,  or  a  tree'.  Sometimcs 
the  imprecation  is  that  the  hand  or  arm  with  which  the  evil  deed 
was  done  may  fall  off^  Sometimes  the  curse  takes  the  form  that 
the  persons  cursed,  or  their  descendants  or  successors,  shall  always 
do  or  suffer  what  they  are  doing  or  suffering  at  the  time  of  pronoun- 
cing  the  curse '.  Thus  the  descendants  of  nine  robbers  are  never  to 
exceed  nine  *.  Conversely,  as  a  blessing,  the  Ciarraighe  were  never 
to  have  less  than  the  numbers  in  which  they  went  to  meet  Mac 
Creiche^  Curses  and  blessings  which  thus  descend  from  generation 
to  generation  are  called  '  facbala ',  the  leavings  or  bequests  of  the 
saint.  They  occur  most  frequently  in  the  Irish  lives^  The  life  of 
Mac  Creiche  is  full  of  thcm,  and  they  formed  matters  of  hard  bargain- 
ing  between  the  saint  and  his  admirers.  The  annalists  record  the 
supposed  fulfilment  of  a  curse  through  many  generations '.  Curses 
and  blessings  are  given  from  a  height,  in  order  that  they  may  fall 
with  full  effect  on  the  objects  at  which  they  are  aimed*.  The  curses 
and  blessings  of  rival  saints  sometimes  came  into  awkward  conflict". 

And  so  the  new  creed  inherited  not  merely  the  material,  but  also 
a  good  deal  of  the  spiritual,  properties  of  the  old ;  and  the  saint 
was  regarded  as  a  superior  kind  of  medicine  man,  with  his  bachall, 
or  pastoral  staff,  and  bell  as  the  chief  instruments  of  his  art  •".    The 

'  Maed.  5  35  ;  C.  S.  c.  874  (§  6^1  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  218  :  Elder  Faitlis,  i.  275  ;  cf. 
Magh  Lena,  p.  120 ;  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  57-8  ;  Campbell,  u.  s.,  p.  19  ;  Outer  Isles, 
p.  235.  Transference  to  an  animal,  as  in  the  scape-goat  and  Hdt.  ii.  39,  does  not 
occur  in  the  lives  ;  cf. ,  however,  LU.  54*^.  Diseases  are  transferred  to  other 
persons,  Aed,  §  13  ;  Fel.''  p.  44  ;  cf.  Capg.  i.  472;  or  to  inanimate  objects.  L.  S. 
pp.  143-4  ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  147''  (§  17  =  Stowe  MS.  ix.  pp.  51-2)  ;  cf.  Elder 
Faiths,  ii  50,  95  ;  Campbcll,  u.  s.,  p.  238.  So  the  dangers  of  one  saint  are 
undertaken  by  another,  Las.  |  20. 

2  Col.  E.  §  2  ;  Maed.  §  43;  Mochoem.  §  18;  V.  Tr.  p.  162;  L.  S.  p.  77; 
Adamn.  i.  36  sub  finem  (cf.  with  this  Ail.  §  14  note).  Dr.  Reeves  suggests 
that  Job  xxxi.  22  may  havc  suggested  the  idea.  f"or  some  curious  matter  as  to 
the  use  of  the  Psahns  for  purposes  of  malediction  see  Hib.  Min.  pp.  44-6  ; 
Three  Fragments,  pp.  78  S.  =  LL.  307".  Both  these  documents  have  to  do 
with  Adamnan. 

3  e.  g.  Car.  §§  32,  45,  55  ;   Maed.  §§  18,  23:   Fel.=  pp.  146,  198. 

*  Ger.  §  11;  so  Br.  Adamnan,  c.  9,  in  Anccdota,  ii.  16;  Martin,  p.  264; 
Outer  Isles,  p.  58. 

^'  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  T7. 

^  e.  g.  Ir.  Mohng,  §§  28,  30,  33  ;  a  curious  instance  in  C.  B.  S.  p.  43. 

'  F.  M.  ii.  1096. 

*  Ber.  §  10  ;  Lug.  §  50  note ;  L.S.  p.  55  ;  Br.  Berach,  c.  23  '  tficcbaidh  mii  .  .  . 
go  mulLich  an  tsleiphe,  go  iiaicer  uaim  ferann  Beraigh,  co  ro  mallachar  e ',  said 
by  a  dying  druid,  i.e.  'carry  me  to  the  top  of  the  hill  that  I  may  sec  thc  territory 
of  Berach,  aiiti  cnise  it' ;  cf.  Balaam,  Num.  xxii.  41,  xxiii.  13,  27.  But  it  is  not 
only  saints  and  druids  who  exercise  this  maletiictory  power.  In  the  great  cursing 
scene,  Rua.  §  17,  it  is  evidently  assumed  that  the  l<ing's  curses  arc  as  certain  of 
fulfilment  as  those  of  the  saint.  For  otlier  prophecies  by  secular  pcrsons  cf. 
Fcch.  §  15  ;   Ita,  §  9  ;  Maed.  §  4  ;  Lug.  §  27  ;  C.  S.  c.  374  l^§  35). 

"  Mochoem.  §  30. 

^"  '  Bockr  Irskar  ok  bjullur  ok  baglar,'  i.  e.  Irish  books,  bells,  and  bachalls 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxxv 

wonder-working  power  of  the  saint's  bachall  occurs  constantly  in  our 
lives.  We  have  already  seen  how  it  discovers  or  produces  fountains, 
and,  when  planted,  grows  into  a  tree,  also  how  a  line  dravvn  with 
it  separates  calves  from  their  mothers.  But  it  does  much  more  than 
this.  It  raises  the  dead  ',  it  heals  diseases  '^  ;  it  drives  baclc  a  flooding 
river  or  the  sea';  it  divides  the  sea*,  or  supports  the  saint  in  it^  It 
splits  rocks,  cuts  stone,  and  cleaves  the  ground''.  It  pierces  a  moun- 
tain  for  water  to  flow  through ',  and  leads  a  stream  uphill ".  It 
brings  down  mountains  on  the  heads  of  the  enemies ',  or  defeats 
them  by  its  own  power'".  It  keeps  off  enemies  like  a  'druid's 
hedge'"';  but  it  also  pacifies  enemies,  and  reconciles  them  to  one 
another'-.  It  subdues  wild  animals"  and  monsters",  and  keeps  off 
ghostly  foes'\  It  deflects  the  bough  of  a  tree";  it  flies  through  the 
air  and  extinguishes  a  fire  ",  and  comes  of  itself  when  lost ".  It  saves 
a  prisoner  from  execution  ",  enables  a  captive  to  pass  unseen  through 
his  enemies^",  and  protects  from  shipwreck"  It  catches  fish''',  and 
discovers  goW.  Finally  it  overthrows  idols",  and  expels  demons^'. 
Bachalls  are  themselves  the  subjects  of  miracles-''. 

were  what  the  Irish  anchorites  left  behind  in  Iceland,  when  they  were  driven 
out  by  the  hcathen  Norsemen,  Landnama,  Prologue. 

'  Br.  i.  §  91  ;  Coem.  5  38  ;  Col.  E.  §  37  ;  Maed.  §  49  ;  C.  S.  c.  918,  §  7  ;  L.  S. 
p.  126  ;  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  72  ;  Capg.  i.  502  ;  St.  Malo,  pp.  62,  148  (a  dead  animal 
raised). 

"  C.  S.  c.  103  (§  4),  c.  198  (§  16) ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  359  ;  Capg.  i.  502. 

'  Co.  E.  §  21  ;  Dec.  §  16;  C.  B.  S.  p.  169;  R.  C.  v.  423,  444  ;  Capg.  i.  501. 

*  Capg.  ii.  566  ;  cf.  Rennes  MS.  f.  84''.  =  Ab.  §  17. 

*  Enda,  §  24 ;  V.  Tr.  p.  78  :  Capg.  i.  443. 

'  Fech.  §  14  ;  R.  C.  xii.  344  ;  L.  S.  p.  139. 

*  Capg.  i.  298,  ii.  205.  °  C.  S.  c.  193  (§  8). 

'"  L.  S.  pp.  92-3  (this  bachall  was  called  '  cenn-chathach',  headed  'cathach', 
a  name  literally  meaning  warlike  or  warrior,  and  often  applied  to  relics  used  as 
battle-standards,  the  best  known  being  Columba's  famous  Psalter,  Reeves, 
Adamn.  p.  310 :  a  bachall  of  Columba's  called  '  Cathbuaid ',  or  Battle-victorj', 
is  mentioned,  Three  Fragments,  p.  230.  A  hazel  cross  given  by  Caillin  was 
the  cathach  of  the  Conmaicne,  B.  Fenagh,  p.  194;  we  hear  of  a  'cathach 
larlaithe'  in  Tigernach  1134  (R.  C.  xviii.  152,  cf.  ib.  153,  where  cailmirc  should 
be  cathaigh\ ;  cf.  Br.  Grellan,  ad  finem  :  '  meirge  catha  na  cloinne  mo  bachall,' 
i.  e.  my  bachall  as  the  battle-standard  of  the  clan  ;  so  Rennes  MS.  f.  87''. 

''  Maed.  §  24  ;  on  the  '  airbe  druad  '  see  above,  p.  clxi. 

'-  C.  B.  S.  pp.  190-1 ;  in  this  respect  it  represents  the  crdcb  sida,  lit.  bough  of 
peace,  of  the  secular  tales ;  e.  g. '  atracht  Sencha  7  ro  chroth  in  craeb  sida  6sna 
sluagaib,  combtar  sidaig ',  i.  e.  Sencha  arose.  and  shook  the  branch  of  peace  over 
the  hosts,  so  that  they  were  peaceful,  LL.  iii"  45;  so  Ir.  T.  i.  281  =  LU. 
•03''  33  ;  LL.  177''  15  ;  it  is  called  '  craeb  sidamail ',  the  peaceful  branch,  Bk.  of 
Fermoy.  f.  62''.  cited  by  0'Curry,  M.  and  C.  iii.  317. 

"  C.  S.  c.  873  (§  5I ;  Capg.  ii.  199. 

"  R.  C.  V.  448 ;  St.  Malo,  p.  58.  '^  Cain.  §  27  note ;  Maed.  §  26. 

"  Sam.  §  19.  "  Dec.  5  35. 

>»  Cain.  §  25  (cf.  Adamn.  ii.  i^") ;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  56. 

'»  Ail.  §  35  note.  20  Xr.  Th.  p.  433'  (§  13). 

2'  N.  and  K.  p.  152.  22  Cain.  §  13.  '^'  Br.  i.  §  90. 

'♦  V.  Tr.  p.  90.  26  c.  S.  c  103  (§  3). 

-'  Fin.  C.  §  4  ;  Sam.  §  17. 


clxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

The  bachall  seems  to  be  regarded  as  the  most  characteristic  mark 
of  the  Christian  missionary*;  saints  bear  it  when  they  appear  in 
visions'' ;  and  it  is  borne  by  female  saints  as  well  as  niale'.  It  seems 
sometimes  to  have  been  carried  by  a  special  minister  *.  Saints 
exchange  their  bachalls  as  a  marlc  of  affection  and  confraternity  '. 
We  hear  of  their  being  enshrined  in  precious  metals  * ;  and  several 
of  these  enshrined  bachalis  are  still  in  existence''.  The  biographer 
of  St.  Kentigern  notes  correctly  the  character  of  these  primitive 
bachalls,  not  spiral-headed  like  the  later  crozier,  but  a  simple  staff 
with  a  crook  '.  Several  of  these  bachalls  had  special  names  ;  Mochoe's 
was  called  '  in  Etech  ',  or  the  winged,  because  it  flew  down  from 
heaven ' ;  Colman  EIa's  was  called  '  in  cochlach  ',  or  the  cowled, 
because  of  its  drapery  '",  Mochua  of  BaIIa's  was  called  '  in  buide  ' ; 
or  the  yellow,  because  to  it  the  saint  transferred  the  yellow 
plague  which  was  afflicting  the  Sil  Muiredhaigh";  but  the  most 
famous  was  the  Bachall  Isa,  so  called  because  it  was  believed  to 
have  been  given  by  our  Lord  Himself  to  Patrick,  which  was  used  for 
the  collection  of  the  dues  of  Armagh,  and  so  was  a  great  object 
of  contention  between  rival  claimants  of  the  see "'.  Bachalls,  like 
bells,  are  used  for  cursing",  and  for  the  administration  of  solemn 
oaths". 

Scarcely  less  potent  than  the  bachall  in  working  miracles  is  the 
saint's  bell.  It  raises  the  dead  '^ ;  it  keeps  away  or  cures  diseases 
and  plagues  of  men  and  cattle  '* ;  disease  is  transferred  to  it ",  and 
it  restores  sense  and  speech  to  a  dying  man  ".  It  checks  murderers  ", 
repels  enemies'",  or  causes  them  to  be  swallowed  up".  It  destroys 
monsters",  and  disperses  demons''.  It  keeps  cattle  from  straying", 
and  suckles  a  child^".     It  speaks  with  a  human  voice"',  or  remains 

'  Cf.  '  hic  est  baculatus  modicus."  '  o  baculate,'  Cain.  §§  37  note,  38. 

-  Maed.  §  26;  Sam.  §  16;  St.  Malo,  pp.  117-18. 

'  Sam.  §  16  ;  Capg.  ii.  199. 

'   'baculum  tenens  apud  Columbam,'  Cain.  §  21  note. 

^  V.  Tr.  p.  82 ;  N.  and  K.  p.  232  ;  L.  S.  p.  62 ;  Rennes  MS.  f.  86''. 

"  Sam.  §  17  ;  C.  S.  c.  679. 

'  Miss  Stokes,  Early  Christian  Art,  pp.  96-105. 

*  '  Non  sperica.  sicut  nunc  temporis  est  cernere,  sed  de  simplici  ligno  tantum 
reflexa,'  N.  and  K.  p.  184  ;  cf.  ib.  p.  343. 

9  V.  Tr.  p.  40.  '"  Rennes  MS.  f.  87''.  "  L.  S.  p.  143. 

'2  V.  Tr.  pp.  28-30  ;  L.  S.  p.  7  ;  Gir.  Camb.  v.  180.         '»  Magh  Rath,  p.  38. 

'*  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  179  ;  cf.  the  swearing  on  the  fftcrjnTpovj  lliad,  x.  331, 
328. 

'■■  Rennes  MS.  f.  81'' ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  60  ;  R.  C.  v.  446. 

"  Br.  Berach,  cc.  12,  18;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  cc.  9.  17;  Rennes  MS.  f.  78''. 

"  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  147''  (§  17I.  '*  Br.  M.ic  Cruiche,  ad  finem. 

"  Macd.  §  19.  -"  Br.  Mac  Crciche,  c.  17  ad  fin. :   Rcnnes  MS.  f.  82°. 

'-'   Br.  Beracii,  c.  27.  '"  Br.  Mac  Cieichc,  cc.  9,  16. 

«  V.  Tr.  p.  114  ;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  54.  "  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  11. 

2'  Capg.  ii.  105-6.  .    "  C.  B.  S.  p.  60. 


HEATIIEN   FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     clxxvii 

miraculously  dumb'.  It  flies  through  the  air  by  itself,  and  when 
stolen  is  miraculously  restorcd'.  A  bell  of  Molaisse  vvas  called 
'the  fugitive',  from  its  habit  of  ahvays  flying  back  to  its  master'. 
A  stock  miracle  is  that  a  bell  remains  dumb  until  the  place  destined 
for  the  saint's  settlement  is  reached,  and  then  it  sounds  again^ 
Bells  ring  of  themselves ' ;  there  is  a  mysterious  bell  on  Croagh 
Patrick,  which  is  heard,  but  never  found'.  Munnu's  bell  was  rung 
only  as  a  passing  belP.  Like  the  bachalls,  these  bells  were  used 
for  collecting  ecclesiastical  revenue',  for  cursing  offenders'",  and  for 
tlie  adniinistration  of  solemn  oaths". 

Naturally  these  bells  were  treasured  as  relics  "' ;  several  of  them 
are  still  in  existence  ".  Some  of  them  were  said  to  have  been  made 
by  the  saints  ".  Many  of  them  have  special  names,  some  derived 
from  the  colour  of  the  metal  of  which  the  bells  were  made,  which 
was  generally  iron  '•' ;  others  from  their  size,  tone,  or  condition  "^. 

>  C.  B.  S.  pp.  59,  175. 

'  C.  S.  c.  229  (§  II'),  c.  935  (§  9"!.  '  C.  B.  S.  pp.  179-81. 

*  Las.  I  32  note  ;  cf.  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  120  ;  Colgan,  A.  S.  March  8,  Metrical 
life  of  Senan,  §  17.  In  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  579  ff ,  a  bell,  when  stolen,  loses  all  its 
svvcetness  of  tone. 

'  Ci.  S.  §§  3, 4  ;  Mochoem.  §  14  ;  L.  S.  p.  87  ;  Br.  Bairre,  c.  12  ;  an  exaggerated 
form  of  this  incident  is  in  Rennes  MS.  f.  78"^ :  '  tabair  siu  clocc  doib  cin  tengaid 
and  ;  7  ait  illebrae  acu  he,  is  and  bias  a  n-esergi  7  a  fognam.'  i.  e.  give  them 
a  bell  without  a  tongue  in  it ;  and  the  place  in  which  they  shall  hear  it  speak, 
there  shall  be  their  resurrection  and  their  service ;  cf.  Ab.  §  28  ;  Mochua,  §  12. 

"  Z.  C.  P.  V.  86 ;  Br.  Maed.  c.  15  (cf.  Capg.  i.  483,  ii.  730 ;  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  750, 

954~- 

■^  V.  Tr.  p.  120.  '  Mun.  §  19. 

'  Ci.  S.  §  4  ;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  15  ad  fin.,  c.  17. 

'•  Car.  §  58  ;  Rua.  §  16 ;  Br.  Maedoc,  c.  58  sub  finem  ;  Z.  C.  P.  v.  54  ;  L.  S. 
p.  311  :  Magh  Rath,  p.  38. 

"  See  above,  p.  cv.  '-  Ci.  S.  §  4  ;  Dec.  §  10  ;  Br.  Berach,  c.  9. 

"  Miss  Stokes,  Early  Christian  Art,  pp.  57-66  ;  Reeves,  Eccl.  Ant.  pp.  369  fT. 

"  Ger.  §  15  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  59  ;  C.  S.  c.  893.  For  saints  as  artisans  see  above, 
pp.  xcvii  f. 

"  V.  Tr.  p.  248 ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  59. 

"  '  Dub,"  black,and  '  glas ',  blue  or  grey,  are  frequent  elements  in  the  names 
ofbells  ;  Duibin  Declain,  the  little  black  i^bell^i  of  Declan,  Dec.  §  10  ;  Dub  labar, 
the  black  speaking  (belh,  C.  S.  c.  229  (§  ir);  Dub  duaibsech,  i.  e.  the  black, 
execrable  (bell\  Z.  C.  P.  v.  54  (no  doubt  from  its  use  in  cursing;  Cuchulainn's 
spear  was  called  Duaibsech,  the  execrable,  LL.  177''  5^ ;  St.  Moenacan's  bcll  was 
called  ClogGlas,  B.  Lecan,  f.  76'' ;  several  bells  are  called  Giassan.  the  little  grey 
(bein.  Z.  C.  P.  V.  82  ;'where  cloc,  bell,  is  translated  as  if  it  were  f/"f//,  stone^  ; 
Rennes  M.  S.  f.  77"*;  Br.  Berach,  c.  27  ;  a  bell  called  'hir-glas,  i.  e.  longiim 
fuluum  ',  R.  C.  V.  446  ;  another  called  Finn-clocc.  i.  e.  the  white  bell,  Br.  Maedoc, 
c.  58  ad  fin.  Sorae  bells  were  called  Bdban,  lit.  little  cow,  i.  e.  calf,  perhaps 
from  their  small  size,  Bbban  Coeimhgin,  L.  S.  p.  133  ;  B.  Molaga,  Stowe  MS.  ix. 
51  ;  others,  Findfaidech,  i.  e.  melodious,  from  their  tone.  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  7 
?nd  passim  ;  Rennes  MS.  fif.  81'',  84",  87"*  ,here  two  saints  exchange  their  bells, 
both  bearing  this  name') ;  we  have  bells  called  Beman,  lit.  little  gap  orbreach, 
from  thcir  cracked  condition.  B.  Brigte,  V.  Tr.  p.  114;  B.  Mochuta,  Rennes 
MS.  f.  78'';  others  called  Glijnan  (lit.  little  knee,  but  the  reason  of  the  name  is 

FLUMMER  m 


clxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

And  in  the  same  way  other  objects  and  formularies  connected 
with  the  new  religion  came  to  be  regarded  as  having  not  a  spiritual 
and  sacramental  value,  but  a  magical  and  material  force.  Thus 
a  saint's  gospel-book  causes  '  sight-shifting ' ',  prevents  cattle  from 
straying',  restores  speech  to  a  dumb  boy'.  Water  blessed  by 
a  saint  acts  as  a  love-charm*.  Special  virtue  is  attributed  to  his 
spittle,  which  cures  diseases"  and  wounds",  turns  earth  into  salt", 
becomes  gold',  sphts  rocks',  makes  an  ugly  man  handsome'",  pro- 
tects  a  fugitive  from  his  enemies  ". 

The  mere  breath  of  a  saint  lias  miraculous  powers  ;  it  kindles 
lamps''',  cures  dumbness",  takes  three  different  colours'*. 

obscure'),  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  743'';  Tr.  Th.  p.  431"  ;  Gerran  Churaigh.  ib.  T?  little 
short  bell  of  the  coracle)  ;  another  obscure  name  is  the  Bardan  Ciarain  (?  Ciaran's 
little  bard  i,  Ci.  S.  §  4  ;  bells  named  from  trees,  cymbalum  buxi,  Las.  §22; 
Bethechan,  lit.  little  beech,  V.  Tr.  p.  248.  For  the  bell  named  'Cloc  robaid 
Blathmeic  ',  see  Car.  §  58  note. 

'  *  dar  leo  do  bensat  a  chenn  de  .  ,  .  7  ba  sop  sescca  boi  i  n-ait  a  chinn  acu,' 
i.  e.  they  thought  they  had  cut  his  head  off,  but  it  was  (really)  a  wisp  of  sedge 
which  they  were  holding  instead  of  his  head,  Br.  Mac  Crciche,  c.  3. 

2  ib.  c.  12  (f.  91  v"). 

^  ib.  f.  92  v°.  In  Com.  §  22  the  sainfs  '  chrismale ',  i.  e.  the  vessel  in  which 
the  reserved  sacrament  was  carried  on  the  person,  is  taken  by  the  heathen  Ibr 
his  God. 

■*  Tr.  Th.  p.  531''  (§  45") :  '  the  priests  sprinkle  holy  water  into  the  bays  as  an 
iiifallible  means  to  procure  plenty  of  herring,'  Martin,  p.  29  ;  cf.  Grimm,  iii.  1237, 
iv.  1591.  1771,  1775-  From  Lug.  §25  note  it  would  seem  that  love-charms  were 
made  from  the  hair  of  the  person  on  whom  they  were  intended  to  work.  The 
idea  underlying  this,  that  the  possession  of  anything  closely  connected  with  a 
pcrson,  hair,  nail-parings,  &c.,  gives  the  possessor  magical  power  over  that 
person  is,  of  course,  very  widely  diffused,  Elder  Faiths,  ii.  85-6,  201-2;  Mac- 
culloch,  Childhood,  pp,  125,  144-5,  213,  343.  Love  spells  on  nuts,  R,  C,  xv,  333; 
by  washing  in  watcr  in  which  magic  herbs  have  been  steeped,  Acc,  Sen.  p,  28, 

'^  Com.  §  10  (blindness  cured  ;  this  shows  biblical  influences,  cf  Capg.  ii.  561^  ; 
Maed.  §  55  V  ^this  is  a  very  curious  instance,  and  has  been  obliterated  in  the  M 
text,  §  56)  ;  Rua.  §  la  ;  Fin.  C.  §  2  (here  it  is  the  saliva  of  the  sainfs  mother 
during  her  pregnancy) ;  C.  S.  c.  834  (§  17"!  ;  St.  Malo,  p.  75  ;  cf.  ib,  63  (dumb- 
ness  cured)  ;  Com.  §  14  is  deserving  of  notice.  because  the  saliva  is  that  of  a 
fasting  person,  to  which  special  virtue  is  ascribed  in  folk  mediciiie,  Elder  Faiths, 
ii.  193  5,  285-6;  Grimm,  iii,  1173.  iv.  1664;  R.  C.  xii,  156-7;  Irish  Moling, 
§  37.  But  spittle  had  also  a  malignant  efficacy  ;  *  Fergus  Glutt  .  .  .  sputis 
uenenatis  maleficorum  hominum  obiit,'  Ann,  Ult.  738  ;  so  F.  M.  734.  The 
parallel  entry  in  Tigernach  looks  like  a  bit  of  rationalism  ;  '  Fergus  Cilut  .  .  . 
7  is  e  bes  donidh,  seledha  imdha  do  chur  asa  bei.  conidh  dibh  fuair  bass,'  i.  e.  this 
was  his  custom,  to  be  constantly  spitting,  so  that  he  died  thercof,  R.  C.  xvii. 
242  ;  cf.  Hastings,  D.  B.  v.  554". 

"  .St.  Malo,  p.  154  ;  in  Dec.  §  20  the  wound  is  healed  by  the  sign  of  the  Cross  ; 
but  in  the  Irish  life  we  read  ;  '  tucc  sele  fuirre,  7  do  bi  slan,'  i.  e.  he  put  spittle 
on  it,  and  it  was  healed. 

'  Der.  §  31  ;  here,  conversely,  the  Irish  version  omits  this  touch. 

^  Com.  §  38. 

•  Com.  §  47 ;  V.  Tr.  p.  218  (a  very  curious  instance)  ;  here  also  it  is  fasting 
spittle. 

'»  R.  C.  xii.  328   Fechin).  "  Rcnnes  MS.  f.  88». 

"  Ab.  §  13  ;  Ci.  S,  §  28.  "  Lug,  §  1 2.  '«  Tig,  §  4. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY     clxxix 

Christian  psalms  and  hymns  act  as  charms  of  various  kinds, 
especially  as  magical  protections  on  a  journey,  either  making  the 
protected  persons  wholly  invisible,  or  causing  them  to  appear  in 
a  different  form  to  their  enemies '.  The  ii8th  (iigth)  psahn  is  used 
in  this  way,  no  doubt  because  of  its  commencement,  '  Beati  im- 
maculati  i'«  iriVz^';  so  for  a  similar  reason  the  hymn  beginning 
'  A  Brigit,  bennach  ar  set',  i.e.  O  Brigit  bless  our  path'.  A  hymn 
of  Diarmait  of  Inis  Clothrand*  is  headed  '  celltair  dichill '  or  cloak 
oi  concealment,  tantkappe^.  But  the  most  famous  poem  of  this  kind 
is  Patrick's  Lorica,  which  caused  him  and  his  companions  to  appear 
to  their  enemies  as  deer".  It  is  headed  '  fded  fiada',  often  absurdly 
translated  '  the  deer's  cry ',  though  the  right  explanation  was  given 
as  far  back  as  the  days  of  CCurry'  and  0'Donovan'.  This  also 
means  a  tarnkappe,  a  magical  mist  or  darkness '. 

A  Christian  hymn  also  acts  as  a  charm  against  fire",  or  poison"; 
or  makes  barren  land  fruitful'".  A  verse  addressed  to  a  saint  protects 
sheep  from  wolves  ". 

'  The  technical  name  for  these  spells  in  the  secular  literature  is  '  coimge 
conaire ',  lit.  path-protection,  Magh  Lena,  p.  36  ;  so  a  poem  ascribed  to  Columba 
is  headed  ;  '  is  coimge  donti  nod  get)a  ag  dul  ("or  sed,'  i.  e.  it  is  a  protection  to  any 
one  who  shall  sing  it  when  going  on  a  journey,  Misc.  I.  A.  S.  i.  3.  Many  of 
Coluraba's  poems  had  these  virtues,  Adamn.  i.  i  ;  cf.  Tr.  Th.  p.  409"  (§  3^ 
Other  names  are  *  bricht  comga '  =  a  spell  of  protection  ;  '  celtar  comga,'  a 
cloak  of  protection,  i.  e.  tanikappe,  T.  B.  C.  pp.  359,  367  (the  latter  brought  by 
Manannan  mac  Lir  from  the  Land  of  Promise)  ;  cf.  '  bricht  draoidheachta ', 
'  celltair  draoidheachta,'  spell  or  cloak  of  druidism,  Oss.  Soc.  iii.  166  ;  Keating, 
ii.  222. 

'  Co.  E.  §  33  and  note  ;  for  the  special  virtue  of  this  psalm  in  freeing  souls 
from  torment  see  LL.  278''  26-8,  286"  22-3  ;  L.  S.  p.  x.  For  other  cases  of 
freeing  souls  from  torment,  which  in  some  cases  is  effected  gradually,  see  Br.  i. 
§  100;  Ita,  §  29;  Sam.  5  13  :  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  33-4  ;  Mart.  Don.  p.  66.  For  souls 
resmed  from  demons,  see  Cain.  §§  10,  22.  42  ;  Coem.  §  44  ;  Rua.  §  29  ;  B.  Lecan, 
f.  183^.  There  is  a  different  version  of  this  incident  in  C.  S.  c.  438  ^§  40).  In 
this  the  loss  of  the  soul  is  inferred  from  the  fact  that  no  grass  would  growon  the 
grave.  As  soon  as  the  rescue  was  effected  the  turf  grew  luxuriantly.  Grimm 
cites  a  German  superstition  :  '  Itisluckj'  when  a  grave  turfs  it^elf  over,'  iv.  18 12. 

'  Moling,  §  19  sub  finem.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  hymn  a  cloud  falls  between 
the  saint  and  his  pursuers. 

*  Mart.  Don.  Jan.  10. 

^  LBr.  262"  27  ;  cf.  '  celtair  diclithe ',  R.  C.  xxv.  348. 

°  V.  Tr.  pp.  46  ff.  :  cf  Coem.  §  37.  ■"  Atlantis,  iii.  386. 

*  Supplement  to  0'ReiIIy,  s.  v.fedh  fiadh. 

'  T.  B.  C.  p.  551  and  note  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  143  {fia  fiad^  :  ib.  p.  221  {felh 
fi/htiais,  cf.  •  fiad  draidechta',  ib.  p.  209)  ;  L.  H.-  ii.  209.  The  expression  still 
survives,  apparently,  in  the  Hebrides  in  the  form  '  fath  fithe',  R.  C.  xiv.  78. 
The  idea  that  the  three  last  verses  of  a  hymn  of  this  kind  had  the  efiicacy 
of  the  whole  appears  Cain.  §  42.  The  references  on  this  point  bave  been  col- 
lected  by  Lawlor,  Book  of  Mulling,  c.  7. 

1»  L.  S.  p.  305 :  L.  H.2  i.  87.  "  L.  H.'  i.  107 ;  L.  S.  p.  333. 

12  1 1"  ymnum  quem  fecisti  ca>ita  siiper  aquam,  et  de  illa  aqua  agros  tuos  as- 
perge '' . .  .  [et]  ex  illo  die  ager  suus  fructuosus  factus  est,'  C.  S.  c.  202  (§  23). 

"  '  gebsiu  an  randsa  impa  matan  7  fescar,  7  nis  tomlet  na  conu  altae  iat  co 

m  2 


clxxx  INTRODUCTION 

Material  objects  connected  with  the  saints  act  in  the  same  magical 
way.  A  sainfs  tunic,  or  girdle,  or  cowl,  acts  as  a  tanikappe  or 
cloak  of  darkness',  making  the  wearer  invisible,  or  rendering  him 
invulnerable'.  Rain  is  produced  by  a  sainfs  garments  and  books', 
or  by  carrying  his  relics  *.  Earth  from  a  saint's  grave  expels  demons ", 
and   calms   a  whirlpool",    and   dew  from    the    same   source    heals 

brath,'  i.e.  sing  this  verse  round  them  morning  and  evening,  and  the  wolves 
shall  never  devour  them,  Rennes  MS.  f.  82"^.  Ofanother  cffusion  in  honour  of 
the  same  saint,  Colman  mac  Luachain,  it  is  said  '  gach  duine  gebus  so,  7  fon 
gebthar,  nocha  cuirfither  he,  7  ticfa  slan  dia  tigh,  7  dligid  Colman  screpul  de  % 
i.  e.  every  one  who  sings  this,  or  over  whom  it  is  sung,  shal!  not  be  overthrown, 
but  shall  return  safe  to  his  home,  and  Cohnan  claints  a  screpal  [a  certain  weight 
of  silver  or  gold]  fwni  liim,  ib,  f,  88",  A  sainfs  genealogy  recited  has  the 
same  effect,  Outer  Isles,  p,  231, 

'  Coem,  §39;  Mun,  §22;  R.  C.  xiii.  84;  L.  S.  p,  308.  The  fact  that  a  woman 
bears  in  her  womb  a  future  saint  acts  as  a  tarnkappe  to  her,  L.  S,  p,  85,  The 
cowl  of  badger  skin  in  which  Molaisse  of  Devenish  visiled  the  infernal  regions 
and  rescued  150  souls  is  doublless,  as  Dr.  Farnell  suggests  to  me,  a  tarnkappe, 
the  badger  being  a  nocturnal  animal.  (Silva  Gad.  i,  21,  cf.  supra,  p,  cxlv,  note  3,) 
For  secular  parallels  cf,  R,  C.  xvi,  274,  xxv,  348;  Oss.  Soc.  iii,  70,  150;  Klder 
Faiths,  i,  365  ;  Grimm,  ii,  462-3,  870-1,  iv,  1418,  1629-31,  Bertrand  cites 
Tacitus,  Germ.  c,  45  ;  *  Aestii  matrem  deum  uenerantur  ;  insigne  superstitionis 
formas  aprorum  gestant  ;  id  pro  armis  omiiique  tutela  securum  deae  cultorem 
etiam  intcr  hostes  praestat,'  We  have  instances  of  persons  passing  unseen 
through  their  enemies  without  any  special  charm  being  mentioned,  Aed,  §  28  ; 
Cain,  §  40 ;  Ci,  C.  §  19 ;  Tig.  §  15.  The  magic  mist  whirh  is  raised  bydemons, 
Cain.  §  39 ;  Z,  C,  P,  v,  52  ;  or  by  druids,  to  prevent  a  saint  from  finding  the 
land  which  has  been  granted  to  him,  Rennes  MS.  f,  83'';  is  also  raised  by 
saints,  notonly  against  secular  foes,  ib,  ff.  84''  ad  calcem  ;  87''  (cf,  C,  B.  S,  p.  51  ; 
Ci.  S.  §  20  ;  Moling,  §  tg  ;  Irish  Moling,  §  67  ;  Sam,  §  18)  ;  but  also  against  a  rival 
saint  of  whom  they  are  jealous,  ib,  f,  83'',  The  magic  mist,  or  '  mist  of  druidism  ', 
occurs  constantly  in  the  secular  literature,  R.  C,  xiii,  114  ;  xxii,  33;  Ir,  T,  iii,3i8; 
MS,  Materials,  p.  618;   Keating.  i,  212,  ii,  82, 

-  Ger,  §  4  ;  Mun,  §  22 ;  C,  S.  c,  8g6  (§  9)  ;  Adamn,  ii,  24  ;  Capg.  i,  201  (R,  C, 
xiii,  84,  L,  S,  p.  308,  given  in  the  last  note,  may  possibly  belong  here) ;  this  is 
analogous  to  the  '  congancness  ',  lit,  horn-skin,  which  confers  inviilnerabiiity  on 
the  heroes  of  the  secular  tales,  especially  Ferdiad,  T,  B.  C,  pp,  317  note,  439, 
553,  563  (cf.  ib.  p.  I53\  There  is  a  Congancness  mac  Oedad,  Oitle,  p,  26,  who 
can  only  be  killed  by  red-hot  spikes  bcing  driven  into  the  soles  of  his  feet,  His 
promised  bride  plays  the  part  of  Dalila  in  wheedling  this  secret  out  of  him, 
A  Coemgen  Congancness  mac  Degad  occurs  in  thc  Dindsenchus,  R,  C,  xv.  445. 
For  magically  protecting  clothes,  cf.  R.  C,  vi,  183  ;  Grimm,  iii,  1099;  iv,  1631, 
In  Car,  §  13  is  a  very  curious  process  of  makinga  man  invulnerable  by  walking 
over  him  ;  cf,  C,  S,  cc.  659  f, 

^  Adamn,  ii,  44  ;  cf,  St,  Greeory's  Dialogues,  iii.  15, 

«  L,  Land,  p,  81  85^  ;  St.  Malo,  p.  109  ;  the  saint's  image  is  bathed  in  some 
countries  with  the  same  object,  MaccuIIoch,  Childhood,  pp,  76,  220  ;  Bertrand, 
Religion,  p,  207.  Martin,  p.  59,  mentions  a  cross  which  was  raised  when  raiii 
was  wanted,  and  lowered  whcn  enough  had  fallen, 

'  R.  C,  xxi.  162, 

•  Ci,  C,  §  3  ;  dust  from  the  grave  of  a  saint  is  scattered  round  the  whole  of 
thelerritory  granted  bya  chief,  L.  Land.  p.  157  165^  The  idea  underlying  this 
ceremony  is  iio  doubt  that  of  consecration  b^'  contact,  In  the  same  way  earth 
or  relics  are  brought  from  Rome  or  Palestine  for  the  consecration  of  ccmcleries, 
above,  p,  cx,  note  7.    The  same  idea  scems  to  undcrlie  the  incident  in  Mochocm. 


HEATIIEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxx.xi 

diseases '.  Licking  a  saint's  garment  caiises  a  covv  to  give  a  miraculous 
yield  of  milk^.  Tlie  saint's  girdle  cures  diseases',  represses  lust*, 
causes  a  trec  to  fall  in  the  right  direction".  Ilis  cowl  vvorks  cures", 
as  does  his  blood '. 

We  have  seen  that  saints  in  many  legends  have  taken  the  place 
of  heathen  divinities.  In  the  same  way  angels  have  evidently  taken 
tlie  placc  of  fairies'.  They  perform  just  the  services  which  popular 
lore  ascribes  to  friendly  sprites.  They  clean  the  hearth",  grind  the 
mill"',  transport  books,  bells,  barrels,  boats,  and  timber",  pull  oxen 
out  of  a  bog",  remove  stones  ",  reap  crops",  coUect  fish '°,  recover 
lost  property",  and  even  hold  races  to  amuse  a  saint's  disciples". 

§  18;  a  man  has  to  be  buried  in  unconsecrated  ground  ;  the  sainfs  '  bachall ' 
aud  '  chrismale  '  are  buried  with  him,  to  give  partial  consecration  till  the  body 
is  removed  to  a  consecrated  cemetery.  The  same  idea  is  found  in  other  con- 
nexions,  Fin.  C.  §  25  ;  Z.  C.  P.  v,  64  :  cf.  Aur.  Leg.  p.  406  ;  and  has  probably 
given  rise  to  the  general  practice  of  depositing  relics  in  a  church  at  its  consecra- 
tion.  Possibly  the  same  idea  underlies  the  curious  cases  in  which  part  of 
a  person's  body  seeras  treated  as  equivalent  to  the  whole,  Cain.  §§  6,  7  ;  C.  S. 
c.  451  ^§  la)  ;  cf.  Fel.'  pp.  70,  156;  Rennes  MS.  f.  80"  ;  Campbell,  Supersti- 
tions,  p.  243  ;   Ir.  T.  iii.  362,  419. 

'  Fel.^  pp.  94,  274.  In  some  cases  there  was  a  real  analogy  between  a  Christian 
and  a  heatlicn  rile  ;  there  is  evidence  for  some  kind  of  heathen  baptism  in  Ire- 
land  :  '  tangadar  druid  baidsidhe  in  maic  i  n-geintliucht,  gur  chansat  an  m-baithis 
n-geintlidhe  fair,'  i.  e.  the  druids  came  as  baptizers  of  the  child  in  gentilism,  and 
sang  their  gentile  baptism  over  him,  Coir  Anm.  p.  392  ;  other  references  are 
given  by  Stokes,  ib.  p.  423.  Some  of  the  early  Fathers,  when  confronted  with 
similar  analogies,  regarded  the  heathen  rites  as  invented  by  the  devil  with  the 
deliberate  intention  of  bringing  discredit  upon  Christianity. 

^  Coem.  §  7  ;  cf.  Capg.  ii.  m  ;  in  Ir.  T.  i.  72  this  effect  is  produced  by  music. 

'  Car.  §  38  note  ;  Cron.  §  24;  Tr.  Th.  p.  531  (§  46);  cf.  Bran,  i.  69:  '  as 
amlaid  do  bi  an  cris,  7  ni  gabad  galar  na  aincis  an  taeb  tar  a  m-bith,'  i.  e.  thus 
was  that  girdle,  so  that  neither  disease  nor  pain  could  seize  him  round  whose 
ioins  it  was. 

«  Car.  §  38 ;  C.  S.  c.  907  (§  8). 

"  Sam.  §  15.  '  Ger.  §  13.  '  Cain.  §  20  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  529''  (§27"). 

*  The  hostility  of  the  fairies  to  the  new  faith  is  shown  by  the  condition  made 
by  a  fairy  mistress :  'cen  na  clerig  do  thoidecht  i  n-oenteach  rium  co  brath,' 
i.  e.  no  clergy  ever  to  enter  the  same  house  with  me,  R.  C.  xxiii.  398  ;  cf. 
Grimm,  ii.  459.  Thomas  Wrigiit  in  1844  laid  stress  on  the  close  connexion  of 
saints'  legends  and  fairy  tales,  St.  Patrick's  Purgatory,  pp.  79  S. 

»  V.  Tr.  p,  14. 

'"  Ci.  C.  §§  II,  15  ad  finem  ;  C.  S.  c.  916  (§  2)  ;  L.  S.  p.  25. 

"  Com.  §  37  ;  Enda,  §17;  Fin.  C.  §  10  ;  Maed.  §  48 ;  C.  S.  cc.  187,  192-3. 

'■  Bo.  §  26.  "  V.  Tr.  p.  236. 

'^  Ail.  §  9  ;  Car.  §  48  ;  cf.  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  97. 

'»  Com.  §  41.  '6  C.  S.  c.  350,  §  33. 

"  '  araile  fecht  ro  batar  a  manaig  ac  buain  cruthLnechta]  .  .  .  ;  ro  airigsim 
bron  forro  .i.  an  laa  rogniatt  oenachTaillten  .  .  .  Uoronesim  .  .  .  ernaigti,  co 
langcatar  aingil  cugcisim  focettoir  do  neim  ;  .  .  .  7  rognisitt  tri  grafne  oenaich 
do,'  i.  e.  one  day  his  monks  were  reaping  wheat;  he  noticed  that  they  were 
depressed  — it  was  the  day  men  were  celebrating  Telltown  Fair.  He  prayed, 
and  angels  came  to  him  at  once  from  heaven,  and  performed  three  races  for 
bim,  as  men  do  at  fairs,  Rennes  MS.  f.  86'' ;  cf.  p.  cv,  note  6. 


clxxxii  INTRODUCTION 

Less  incongTuous  is  it  when  they  teach  a  little  child',  or  play  with 
him  and  take  him  with  them  from  earth  for  a  timc  - ;  vvhen  they  mark 
out  the  site  of  the  saint's  monastery',  erect  a  cross',  join  with  him 
in  the  ceremonies  of  the  Mass ',  or  take  part  in  his  consecration  ^ ;  nor 
will  those  who  have  seen  the  great  masterpieces  of  Irish  illumination 
quarrel  greatly  with  the  tradition  that  the  artists  were  inspired 
by  the  instruction  of  an  angeP.  Many  of  the  saints  of  Ireland 
were  blessed  with  angelic  visitations" ;  the  most  favourcd  of  all  being 
Columba'. 

Another  point  where  the  secular  and  ecclesiastical  traditions  meet 
is  in  the  beliefs  connected  with  the  Tir  Tairngire,  or  Land  of  Promise. 
From  the  Christian  side  came  the  name  itself,  and  the  figures  and 
allegories  connected  with  the  entry  of  the  Israelites  into  Canaan, 
the  legends  connected  with  the  quest  of  the  earthly  Paradise  from 
which  Adam  was  expelled.  From  the  pagan  side  came  the  Celtic 
doctrine  of  the  Happy  Other-world '°,  the  land  of  the  living ",  the 
land  of  the  (ever)  young  ".  How  much  the  latter  idea  has  prevailed 
over  the  former  seems  indicated  by  the  fact  that  I  have  only  noted 

^  Lug.  §  i6  ;  C.  S.  c.  904,  §  2  ;  Capg;.  ii.  107.  ^  Lug.  §  13. 

3  Mun.  §  17.  ■•  N.  and  K.  p.  233.  '  Com.  §  18. 

°  Ail.  §  14.  '  Gir.  Camb.  Opp  v.  123-4. 

*  Ab.  §§  35,  45  ;  Ail.  §  9  ;  Mochua.  §  5  ;  Lug.  §  53  ;  Mun.  §  25  ;  the  form  of 
story  in  which  the  saint  complains  of  the  unwonted  absence  of  his  angelic  visitant, 
occursfrequentlyin  Breton  llegend  ;  cf.  Luzel,  Legendes  Chretiennes,  ii.  12, 17.  68. 

'  Adamnan's  third  book  is  devoted  almost  exdusively  to  this  subject.  For 
Patrick's  attendant  angel  see  V.  Tr.  Index,  s.  v.  Victor.  Moreover,  the  angcls 
work  under  much  the  same  conditions  as  fairies  ;  e.  g.  they  must  not  be  watclied 
at  their  labours,  Maed.  §  48  ;  Tig.  §  13  ;  metrical  life  of  Seiian  (Colgan,  A.  S. 
March  8)  |  11  ;  Adamn.  iii.  16.  This  ischaracteristic  also  of  some  of  the  miracles 
wrought  by  saints,  Coem.  58;  Cron.  §  22  ;  Mun.  §  29;  C.  S.  c.  188  (§  .^4)  ;  cc. 
339.  352  (§§  II.  36not  in  M);  c.  389  (§57  not  in  Ml  ;  c.  648  (§51;  c.  9ii(§  14); 
Tr.  Th.  p.  537''  (§  82  I ;  L.  S.  pp.  124-5  ;  Forbes,  Calendars,  p.  342  ;  Aur.  Leg. 
p.  860  ;  cf.  ib.  p,  925.  In  sevcral  of  thesc  instances  blindness  is  inflicted  as 
a  penalty  for  seeing  the  forbidden  thing;  cf,  R,  C  xv.  315;  Rhys,  Folk-lorc, 
i.  98  ;  Grimm,  iv.  1589.  Anothcr  point  in  which  the  benefits  of  the  saints 
resemble  those  of  fairies  is  that  thcy  are  liable  to  berendercd  nugatory  byintcr- 
ruption,  or  by  some  ungraleful  or  tactless  speech,  Car.  §  13;  Co.  E,  §§  4,  25 
(cf.  L.  H.'  p.  6:,  28  note  ;  Dec.  5  16  ;  Sam.  §  4  ;  C.  S.  c.  922  ;§  16;  ;  Hardy, 
Holy  Wells,  pp.  29,  34  ;  cf.  Campbell,  Supcrstitions,  pp.  99.  151,  153.  Once 
more  the  gifts  of  the  saints  resemble  those  of  the  fairies,  in  that,  in  the  case  of 
the  unvvorthy,  they  vanish  altogether,  or  return  to  thc  worthless  elements  out 
of  which  they  h.ive  been  made,  Aed,  §  20;  Ci,  S.  §  13;  C.  B.  S.  p.  49;  V.  Tr. 
pp.  ai-2  ;  cf.  Early  Faiths,  i.  188;   Luzel,  Legendes  Chrctiennes,  ii.152. 

'"  See  Mr.  A.  Nult's  elaborate  essay  on  this  subject  in  The  Voyage  of  Bran. 

"  Tir  na  m-Beo  ;  this  phrase  occurs  in  a  Christian  scnse,  L.  S,  p.  77  ;  for  the 
pagan  sense,  cf.  LU.  120"  8  fT. ;  'dodcochadsa  ,  .  .  a  tirib  beo,  ait  innabibas  no 
peccad ;  .  ,  .  domelom  fleda  biiana,'  yc,  i.  e.  t  am  come  from  the  lands  of  the 
living,  where  there  is  neither  death  nor  sin  ;  we  consume  perpetual  feasts. 
The  '  sinlcssness '  is  no  doubt  a  Christian  importation. 

"  Tir  na  n-6c  ;  the  jdea,  though  not  the  name,  occurs  in  the  Maelduin  story  : 
'  ni  toeth  aes  foraib,'  i.  e.  age  shall  not  fall  upon  you,  R.  C.  x.  64  ;  cf.  V.  Tr. 
p.  38. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY   clxxxiii 

one  instance  in  the  Latin  lives  of  Irish  saints  in  vvhich  the  phrase 
'Terra  Rcpromissionis'  is  used  in  its  iiteral  sense  tbr  Palestine'. 
In  the  other  sense  it  is  the  object  of  the  quest  of  Brendan  according 
to  one  forni  of  his  legend '.  It  occurs  in  a  very  interesting  passage 
in  the  S  life  of  Munnu  ■ ;  the  voyage  of  Ailbe  at  the  end  of  his  life 
is  evidently  to  be  understood  in  the  sanie  way,  and  the  vine  sprout 
vvhich  he  brings  back  vvith  him  is  parallel  to  the  mystic  flovver  vvhich 
in  one  version  occasions  Brendan's  voyage*. 

Primitive  society  is  often  entangled  and  hidebound  in  an  elaborate 
system  of  taboos  or  prohibitions ;  it  is  not  therefore  vvonderful  that 
certain  of  these  taboos  and  the  evils  resulting  froni  their  violation 
should  have  come  to  be  stock  motives  in  particular  types  of  popular 
stories.  The  Irish  secular  literature  gives  many  indications  of  the 
existence  of  taboos,  or,  to  use  the  native  vvord,  'gessa,'  a  vvord 
which  goes  through  a  very  interesting  series  of  meanings,  which 
cannot  be  investigated  here,  because  of  the  taboo  in  its  strictly  Irish 

1  C.  S.  c.  926  (5  5V 

*  See  Essay  on  the  Brendan  Legend,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  124  fl. 

'  Mun.  §  28  note  ;  here,  as  in  the  Nauigatio  Brendani,  the  quest  is  connected 
with  the  Slieve  League  district  in  DonegaJ,  Z.  C.  P.  v.  129. 

*  Ail.  §  46 ;  here  Ailbe  returns  after  a  few  hours'  absence  in  the  mystic  ship. 
But  according  to  the  Litany,  LL.  373''  4,  it  would  seem  as  if  there  was  another 
tradition  that  Ailbe  remained  permanenlly  in  the  Land  of  Promise  :  '  Cethrur 
ar  ficliit  de  Jlumain  lotar  la  Ailbi  for  fargi  do  athascnam  tiri  tarngiri,  filet  and 
i  m-bethaid  co  brath,'  i.  e.  the  twenty-four  from  Munster  who  went  on  the 
ocean  with  Ailbe  to  visit  the  Land  of  Promise.  who  are  there  alive  till  doom. 
In  the  Nauigatio  Brcndani  the  monastic  family  of  Ailbe  is  found  in  an  island 
which  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  the  Land  of  Promise,  though  not 
identical  with  it  ;  but  it  seems  to  be  implied  that  Ailbe  himself  is  dead,  Br.  i 
§  31  ;  Moran,  Acta  Brendani,  p.  104.  In  the  Brussels  life  of  Mac  Creiche,  c.  8, 
we  seem  to  have  yet  another  version,  which  I  do  not  wholly  understand  :  '  As 
as  an  b-port  sin  dochtjaidh  Ailbhe  do  Thir  Thairngire  i  n-dail  an  moirsheisir  ro 
fhaidh  da  mhuinntir  issin  fairge  siar.  .  .  .  Is  ass  dano  raghass  moirseiser  do 
mhuintir  Ailbhe  7  Meic  Creiche  do  Thir  Thairngire.  Is  ann  dano  raghus  Ailbhe 
co  n-a  mhancaibh  dochum  Tire  Tairngire  dia  laithe  bratha,'  i.  e.  It  is  from  this 
harbour  that  Ailbhe  went  to  the  Land  of  Promise  to  meet  the  seven  of  his 
family  whom  he  had  sent  westwards  on  the  ocean.  It  is  thence  that  the  seven 
of  the  family  of  Ailbe  and  Mac  Creiche  will  come  to  the  Land  of  Promise.  It 
is  there  further  that  Ailbe  wiil  come  with  his  monks  tovvards  the  Land  of 
Promise  at  the  Day  of  Judgement.  The  Isle  of  the  lamily  of  Ailbe  comes  also 
into  the  story  '  Imram  curaig  h-Ua  Corra,'  which,  as  Zimmer  has  shown, 
Keltische  Beitrage  ii,  is  a  late  ri/aciniento  of  earlier  materiais.  Here  the 
•  family  '  say  :  '  is  sinn  muinter  indara  curaig  do  Ailbe,  co  fuilem  i  n-ar  m-bethaid 
annso  cu  brath,'  i.  e.  we  are  the  company  of  one  of  Ailbe's  two  coracles  and  we 
are  alive  here  till  doom,  R.  C.  xiv.  56.  In  the  Litany  quoted  above  we  have 
further:  '  Da  fer  dec  lotar  la  Ailbe  dochum  n-eca,'  i.  e.  the  twelve  men  who 
went  to  death  with  Ailbe,  I.L.  373''  56.  Are  these  the  crew  of  the  other 
coracle,  lost  at  sea !  Compare  the  words  of  Columba  of  Terryglass  :  '  in 
nouissimis  temporibus  populus  meus  cum  meis  reliquiis  de  hac  petra  migrabit 
ad  terram  repromissionis  in  mari,'  C.  S.  c.  455  (§  21').  In  T.  B.  C.  p.  367  Tir 
na  Sorcha,  Land  of  Light.  and  in  Eriu,  iii.  156  Tir  na  n-Ingnad,  Land  of 
Wonders,  are  used  as  synonyms  for  Tir  Tairngire. 


clxxxiv  INTRODUCTION 

form  I  have  found  no  trace  in  the  Latin  lives,  and  only  very  slight 
traces  in  the  Irish  lives  '.  Of  the  folk-tale  type  of  taboo  a  few 
instances  are  to  be  found,  which  are  cited  in  the  note'. 

Closely  akin  to  this  is  the  idea  of  sacred  places  which  are  not 
to  be  polluted  by  blood'  or  any  crime*.  The  mere  use  of  a  coracle 
covered  with  skins  of  dead  animals  is  sufficient  to  account  for 
Brendan's  want  of  success  in  his  quest".  So  the  sleeping  of  an 
unauthorized  person  in  a  sainfs  bed  is  a  grievous  presumption  ° ; 
aud  things  placed  on  an  altar  are  thrown  off  when  it  is  used  as 
a  common  table'. 

Lastly  there  are  a  number  of  stories  which  may  be  classed  together 
as  being  of  the  fairy-tale  type.  Broken  articles  are  instantaneously 
mended*,  a  cloak  divided,  like  St.  Martin's,  for  charity  is  made  whole ' ; 
food  and  other  articles  are  consumed  and  yet  remain  intact'",  or  they 
are  changed  into  other  things".  The  form,  complexion,  height,  and 
age  of  persons  are  altered,  sometimes  for  the  better,  sometimes 
for  the  worse'l     Even  sex  is  no  obstacle  to  the  saint's  power  ot 

1  L.  S.  p.  91.  The  instance  in  c.  13  of  the  Br.  life  of  Ruadan  is  borrowed 
bodily  from  the  secular  literature. 

-  Of  the  theft  taboo  \ve  have  a  clear  instance  in  the  Brendan  story,  Br.  i. 
55  19,  20;  ii.  §§  II,  13  ;  cf.  the  parallel  incident  in  the  Maelduin  story,  R.  C. 
ix.  478.  The  offence  recorded  in  Ail.  §  18  was,  in  the  original  form  of  the 
slory,  almost  certainly  a  violation  of  the  sex  taboo  ;  cf.  Capg.  i.  190;  Gregory, 
DialogUfS,  i.  10.  We  find  it  in  the  O.  T.  i  Sam.  xxi.  4,  5,  and  elsewhere. 
Of  the  food  taboo  I  have  found  no  clear  instance  in  our  iives.  A  modified  form 
of  the  theft  taboo  is  seen  in  those  cases  in  which  saints  in  giving  up  their 
abodes  to  other  saints  forbid  their  followers  to  take  any  of  their  possessions 
wilh  them  ;  the  violation  of  this  order  brings  condign  punishment,  Ail.  §  28; 
Cron.  §  16;  Enda,  §8;   Mun.  §  12  ;  C.  S.  c.  171  (§  11'. 

'  Cf.  Acd,  §  24,  where  note  that  it  is  not  the  murder  in  itself,  but  shedding 
blood  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  saint  which  is  punished  ;  cf.  Aur.  Leg.  p.  75  ; 
Rehgion  of  Semites,  p.  156.  The  stain  of  innocent  blood  can  never  be  oblitcrated, 
Capg.  ii.  419:  and  the  appearance  of  drops  of  blood  is  a  presage  of  slaughter, 
C.  S.  c.  658  (§  17).  On  these  last  two  points  see  a  paper  by  myself  in  the 
Guardian  of  Dec.  23.  1903. 

*  Car.  §  5  (^criminals  cannot  live  there) ;  L.  S.  p.  114  (criminals  cannot  be 
buricd  there,  cf.  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  216).  ^  13r.  i.  §  71. 

6  Maed.  §  58  ;  cf.  ib.  §  33  (M )  ;  Capg.  i.  66  ;  ii.  257  ;  contrast  Rennes  MS.  f.  86" 
ad  calcem  :   *  luid  Colman  .  .  .  co  Glais  Naeidcn  do  coblidhi  for  ieppa  Mobi  Clarc- 
naich,'  i.  e.  Colman  went  to  Glasnevin  to  lie  upon  the  bed  of  Mobi  the  Flatfaced. 
'  C.  B.  S.  p.  99.  »  Ail.  §  17  ;  Ci.  C.  §  14  ;   Fin.  C.  §  26.  "  Sam.  §  3. 

">  Aed,  §  15  ;  Ail.  §  13  ;  Coem.  §  8  ;  Co.  E.  §  26  note  ;  C.  S.  c.  436  (5  35,  not 
in  Mj ;  L.  S.  p.  60 ;  Capg.  ii.  318.  With  these  may  be  compared  the  instances, 
above,  p.  cxliii,  of  eaten  animals  being  restored  to  life.  A  secular  parallel,  Oss. 
Soc.  iii.  220. 

"  Aed,  §  31  ;  Ci.  C.  §  20  note  ;  Lug.  §  38  ;  Rua.  §  21  ;  C.  S.  c.  368  (§  15,  not 
in  M) ;  c.  422  (j  12,  not  in  M) ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  532''  (§  54),  p.  541"  (§  132) ;  Colgan, 
A.  S.  p.  138''  ^§  42).     A  secular  parallel,  R.  C.  xxiii.  408. 

'-  Ber.  §  19;  Com.  §49;  L.  S.  pp.  9,  97;  R.  C.  xii.  328  (Fechin);  V.  Tr. 
p.  152  ;  B.  Fcnagh,  pp.  82,  118;  Brev.  Aberd.,  Pars  Hiem..  Proprium  Sanct., 
t.  24  v" ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  434''  (§  20) ;  Br.  Maed6c,  c.  1 7  ;  Renncs  MS.  f.  81'';  Capg. 
ii.  200.  The  parents  of  Molaga  were  mysteriously  rejuvenated,  in  order  that 
they  might  produce  that  eminent  saint,  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  145''  (§  5) ;  cf.  Mac- 
cuUoch,  Childhood,  pp.  72,  90  ;  Hdt.  vi.  6x. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY    clxxxv 

transmutation '.  Gold  is  made  out  of  tlie  most  unpromising  materials, 
not  only  out  of  bread'  or  seed',  but  out  of  sweat  *,  spittle",  and 
mucus'.  It  is  vomited  by  a  saint ',  turned  up  by  animals',  or  found 
in  a  fish's  belly'.  This  last  instance  leads  naturally  to  a  very 
common  type  of  story^"  in  which  lost  or  stolen  articles  are  found  in 
the  interior  of  a  fish  ",  especially  the  key  of  the  shackle  with  which 
the  saint  has  bound  himself,  swearing  that  he  will  never  be  released 
until  the  key,  which  he  throws  into  the  sea,  shall  reappear".  The 
idea  of  food  which  has  the  taste  of  any  dainty  which  the  individual 
eater  may  desire  is  verj'  conimon,  but  niay  have  been  derived  from, 
or  at  least  been  influenced  by,  Jewish-Christian  sources,  for  the 
Rabbis  had  the  same  fancy  with  reference  to  the  manna  in  the 
wilderness".  Hands  blessed  by  the  saint  become  skilful,  though 
they  have  never  practised  the  craft  before  '*,  or  been  conspicuous 
only  for  vvant  of  success  in  it'^  Iron  blessed  by  the  saint  is  in- 
capable  of  wounding'*.  In  the  Irish  lives  of  Columba  is  a  weird  story, 
to  which  I  know  no  parallel  anywhere,  of  a  consecrated  sword  in 
the  presence  of  which  no  one  could  die.  'This  was  the  grace  that 
was  on  it,  that  no  one  could  die  in  its  presence.  And  a  certain  man 
asked  for  that  sword ;  and  it  was  sent  to  him.  A  whole  year  the 
sword  was  with  him,  and  all  that  time  he  was  neither  alive  nor  dead. 

'  Ab.  §  25  (Colgan  defends  this  at  great  length)  ;  Ger.  §  5.  A  very  curious 
instance  occurs  in  the  Dindsenchus.  Liath  of  Daire  Leith  had  three  daughters  : 
Muidset  dia  fothruccud,  ...  7  mar  sillset  foraib  fodesin,  batar  i  n-delbaib  tri  fer 
co  n-a  n-ulchaib,'  i.  e.  they  went  lo  bathe,  and  as  they  looked  upon  themselves 
[i.  e.  saw  their  reflexions  in  the  water]  they  were  in  the  form  of  three  bearded 
men.  Two  of  them  died,  the  third  was  restored  to  her  natural  form  by 
St.  Sinchell  the  Elder,  R.  C.  xv.  424  ;  cf.  Mol.  §  15  ;  MaccuUoch,  Childhood, 
pp.   157,  186,  386.  2  Cain.  §  44. 

'  Maed.  §45  ;  Lug.  §36;  L.  S.  p.  128.  In  LU.  117''  11  ff.  (=  Z.  C.  P.  iii.  ai8) 
sand  is  turned  to  gold.  ■•  Z.  C.  P.  iv.  298.  ^  Com.  §  38. 

'  Fech.  §  13  ;  Mochua,  §  6  ;  Br.  Colnian  Ela,  c.  6. 

'  Cain.  §  44  note  ;  in  Acc.  Sen.  p.  151,  gold  is  vomited  by  a  dog. 

*  V.  Tr.  pp.  21,  94.  ^  Irish  Moling,  4  40. 

'"  Saintyves,  pp.  134-6;  Delehaye.  p.  38;  Luzel.  Legendes  Chretiennes, 
i.  88,  90,  262,  266.  "  Tr.  Th.  p.  540''  (5  112) ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  64. 

'-  Cain.  §  15  ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  559''  (^§  63)  ;  Brev.  Aberd.,  Pars  Hiem.,  Propr.  Sanct, 
f.  25  v»  ;  Hy  Fiaehrach,  pp.  36-41  ;  Br.  Mac  Creiche,  c.  6. 

'^  *  Carnes  ille  .  .  .  tanquam  manna  alterum,  .  .  .  verse  sunt  .  .  .  in  saporem 
ciborum  quibus  iibentius  quisque  discumbentium  refici  solebat,'  C.  S.  cc.  816-17  ; 
Tr.  Th.  p.  538''  (§  891;  L.  S.  p.  125  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  165  ;  cf.  Silva  Gad.  i.  28. 
Secular  parallels,  R.  C.  ix.  486,  490  ;  Acc.  Sen.  p.  153  ;  cf.  Campbell,  Supersti- 
tions,  p.  55  ;  Rhys,  A.  L.  p.  312.  For  the  manna,  cf.  Wisdom,  xvi.  20-1 ;  and  in 
Irish,  LBr.  257"  77.  In  R.  C.  xxvi.  164  we  have  a  fountain  which  was  of  the 
temperature  which  any  bather  desired.   This  may  be  derived  from  Nennius,  §  67. 

'*  Br.  i.  §  73  ;  Com.  §  36  ;  Maed.  §  46  ;  Rua.  §  11  ;  A.  S.  Apr.  ii.  547  (§  17) ; 
C.  S.  c.  892  (§  3),  c.  910  (§  12,  here  it  is  the  mouth  that  is  blessed,  to  make 
a  skilful  singerj ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  536''  (§  76) ;  L.  S.  p.  27  ;  V.  Tr.  p.  200;  cf.  Aed, 
§  4  note.     I  cannot  produce  any  secular  analogue. 

"  Com.  §  29  :  'puer  discebat  scribere  ;  sed  .  .  .  quod  scribebat,  uix  agnosci 
poterat,  utrum  manus  hominis  aut  ungula  auis  illud  depinxerat.'  For  miraculous 
grace  of  penmanship  in  a  saint,  cf.  C.  S.  c.  439  ^§  42,  not  in  M). 

"  C.  S.  c.  875  ;§  10) ;  Adamn.  ii.  29,  37. 


clxxxvi  INTRODUCTION 

Then  the  sword  was  taken  from  him,  and  he  died  at  once'.'  In- 
animate  things  travel  by  themselves  -,  especially  articles  inadvertently 
forgotten  by  the  saint^;  and  implements  and  other  things  perforni 
their  functions  automaticallj',  without  any  human  hand  to  guide 
them*,  or  they  continue  to  discharge  their  functions  although  the 
effective  part  of  them  may  be  wanting'.  So  thc  saints  themselves 
are  transported  from  place  to  place  in  an  incredibly  short  time,  or 
cause  others  to  be  so  transported  ^  And  as  space  is  thus  marvellously 
traversed,  so  also  is  time.  Mochoe,  abbot  of  Nendrum  or  Inish 
Mahee,  went  into  a  wood  to  cut  wattles  to  build  a  church.  A  bird 
'  more  beautiful  than  all  the  birds  of  the  world'  came  and  sang  three 
strains  to  him.  It  seemed  that  he  was  listening  only  for  one  bricf 
hour ;  but  the  bird  was  an  angel,  and  each  strain  represented  the 
lapse  of  fifty  years ;  and  he  returned  to  his  monastery  to  find  that 
no  one  knew  him,  and  that  an  oratory  had  been  erected  to  his 
memory'.  Lastly  may  be  recalled  here  the  stories  in  which  moral 
properties  are  ascribed  to  inanimate  things,  the  miil  which  will  not 
grind  stolen  wheat,  or  work  on  Sunday,  or  when  the  saint  is  ill- 
treated ' ;  the  vessels  which  burst  when  milk  is  put  into  them 
contrary  to  the  sainfs  wishes';  the  cauldron  which  would  not  boil 
because  it  was  the  price  of  the  sainfs  betrayal '". 

'  L.  S.  p.  27. 

2  Aed,  §  33  ;  Ail.  §  28  ;  Co.  E.  §  22  ;  Enda,  §  9 ;  Ita,  §  18  ;  C.  B.  S.  pp.  41-2; 
C.  S.  c.  935  (^  9) ;  sometiines  articles  are  conveyed  by  sea  or  river  without 
failure  to  their  destinalion,  Ci.  C.  §  29;  C.  S.  c.  172  (§  13"),  c.  753  (§  15"!; 
Tr.  Th.  pp.  540-1  (§§  115-16);  Capg.  ii.  419,  420;  C.  B.  S.  p.  201;  R.  C. 
V.  445  ;   St.  Malo,  p.  42. 

'  Cain.  §  25  ;  Las.  §  22  ;  Maed.  §  20  ;  Tig.  §  7  ;  C.  S.  c.  424  (§  13)  ;  C.  B.  S. 
PP-  133-4.  136;  Colg.  A.  S.  p.  147"  (§  12) ;  cf.  DecL  §  15. 

'  Some  instances  of  this  have  becn  given  above,  C.  S.  c.  232  (§  15)  ;  L.  S. 
pp.  60.  122;  a  magic  spear  which  slays  by  itself,  Hib.  Min.  p.  78. 

^  Aed,  §§  4,  5  ;  Bo.  §  23  ;  Com.  §  9  note  ;  Lng.  §  20  note  ;  in  the  text  this  has 
been  toncd  down  and  rationalized  ;  C.  S.  cc.  159  (§  i  r\  358  (§  49,  not  in  M),  899 
(§  20)  ;  Fcl.-  pp.  200.  244  ;  cf.  Grimm,  iii.  11 12.  Here  also  bclong  the  cases  in 
which  saints  voyage  in  coracles  without  any  sUin  covcring,  Ail.  §  4  note  ;  Colgan, 
A.  S.  p.  147"  (§  12) ;  L.  S.  p.  71  ;  Fel.  Dec.  8;  Mart.  Don  p.82;  Hy  Fiachrach, 
p.  38  ;   N.  and  K.  p.  152  ;  C.  B.  S.  p.  186. 

«  Col.  E.  §.s  5,  9;  Fin.  C.  §§  i6  note,  17;  Ita,  §  20;  Maed.  §§  9,  38; 
Mochoem.  §  25  ;  Tig.  §  13  ;  C.  S.  c.  742  (§  71,  c.  912  (§  i8\  c.  931  (§  i).  The 
biblical  parallel  of  the  transport  of  Habal<i(ul<  ;from  the  apocryphal  Bcl  and  the 
Dragon)  is  sometimcs  cited  ;  v.  Index  Nominum,  s.v.  Abachuch. 

'  Mart.  Don.  p.  176 ;  less  extreme  cases,  Cron.  §  9  ;  Tr.  Th.  p  534"  (5  63)  ; 
cf.  ib.  p.  44"  (§  72) ;  Luzel,  Legendes  Chretiennes,  i.  82,  222,  240,  249.  For 
secular  parallels  see  Bran,  i.  31-3,  168,  206;  R.  C.  xxiv.  146.  Sir  John  Rhys 
cites  several  Welsh  fairy-stories  with  the  same  motive,  F.  L.  i.  151  IT.  The 
most  popularly  known  instance  is  Rip  van  Winklc. 

'  Lug.  §  II ;  N.  and  K.  pp.  368-9;  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  635"  (§  7) ;  Gir.  Camb. 
Opp.  v.  133  ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  216. 

*  Fint.  §  4  ;  cf.  the  vesscl  which  breaks  for  lics,  and  rcunites  for  truth,  Ir.  T. 
iii.  191,  197  ;  cf.  R.  C.  xvi.  52  ;  contrast  Grimm,  iv.  1693.  1777. 

^"  Tr.  Th.  p.  69".  This  is  a  variant  of  the  story  of  Ihe  cauldron  to  which  the 
hands  of  the  treachcrous  host  and  all  his  family  stuck  fast,  above,  p.  clxviii. 


HEATHEN  FOLK-LORE  AND  MYTHOLOGY  clxxxvii 

On  the  other  hand  many  things  in  these  lives  which  are  regarded 
as  miraculous  may  be  explained  by  perfectly  natural  causes ;   the 

I  place  togethcr  here  a  niimber  of  miscellaneous  parallels  between  the  hagio- 
logical  and  secular  literature  forwhich  no  place  has  been  lound  in  the  foregoing 
sketch  ;  the  secular  references  are  divided  off  from  the  others  by  the  mark  ||. 
A  man  with  a  monstrous  and  unnatural  appetite  is  cured  by  the  saint,  Tr.  Th. 
p.  540''  (§  110=  L.  H.'  i.  123) ;  Fel.^  p.  92  ;  R  C.  xii.  334  ;  ||  LL.  106''  27-9  ; 
R.  C.  xvi.  37 ;  Coir  Aumann,  No.  40 ;  Magh  Rath,  p.  22  ;  the  cure  of  such 
a  '  hunger  man '  (Ir.  fer  gorta)  is  the  main  thcme  of  the  satirical  Irish  piece 
'Aislinge  Meic  Conglinne  (ed.  K.  Meyer) ;  cf.  Irish  Penny  Journal,  p.  189. 
The  saint  drives  his  chariot  over  a  man  who  had  offended  him,  Aed,  §  5  and 
note  ;  L.  H.'  i.  5  ;  Stowe  MS.  ix.  p.  48  ;  ||  LU.  69"  23  :  'talleci  inna  slechtain, 
co  n-dechaid  carpat  Kergusa  taris  co  fo  thri,'  i.  e.  he  prostrated  himself.  and  the 
chariot  of  Fergus  went  over  him  thrice.  A  monstrous  eel  entwines  itself  round 
the  loins  of  a  criminous  clerk  as  he  crosses  a  river,  Sam.  §  1 1 ;  ||  The  Morrigu 
or  Badb  in  the  form  of  an  eel  entangles  Cuchulainn's  feet  in  order  to  bring  about 
his  destruction,  T,  B.  C.  p.  315  and  note ;  cf.  OCurry,  M.  and  C.  ii.  280.  (Hence 
the  phrase  of  Scotch  Gaelic, '  Buarach  Bhaoibh,'  for  some  kind  of  eel  or  laraprey, 
i.e.  the  Badb's  spancel,  cf.  Campbell,  Superslitions,  p.  219;  Outer  Isles, 
pp.  192-3.)  The  man  who  could  slay  with  a  look,  Ci.  S.  §  23  note ;  ||  LL. 
267"  6;  R.  C.  xii.  loo,  xxii.  312  (Cormac,  Glossarj',  p.  28,  derives  milled, 
destruction,  from  >ni-silled,  mis-Iooking).  An  infant  speaks  before  birth,  Ba. 
§  a  ;  L.  S.  p.  85  ;  L.  H.^  p.  99  (cf.  Ir.  Nenn.  p  202  and  note) ;  Three  Fragments, 
p.  50;  or  immediately  after,  Ba.  §  2  ;  Col.  E.  §  a6;  Silva  Gad.  i.  19  ;  cf.  Dele- 
haye,  p.  59;  ||  LL.  126"  30  ff. ;  Ir.  Nenn.  p.  208;  Ann.  Ult.  884;  cf.  Ir.  T. 
i.  67,  69.  In  Hrussels  MS.  2324  f.  46  is  a  piece  entitled  :  '  cetbriathra  Bicc 
meic  De  iar  n-a  breith  focedoir,'  i.e.  the  first  words  of  Becc  mac  De  immediately 
after  his  birth.  As  Becc  was  first  a  heathen  prophet  and  afterwards  a  Christian 
saint,  this  instance  may  be  credited  to  either  side  of  the  account.  An  infant 
declares  its  own  father,  Ail.  §  23 ;  Tr.  Th.  p.  53"  (§  39) ;  N.  and  K.  p.  146 
(cf.  Aur.  Leg.  pp.  710,  751 ;  the  object  of  this  miracle  always  is  to  clear  some 
cleric  of  the  charge  of  incontinence)  ;  ||  Nennius.  ed.  Stevenson,  p.  30.  Weapons 
fall  mysteriously  from  their  place  on  the  wall,  Com.  §  45  ;  ||  LL.  119"  15  ;  254"  i. 
The  idea  that  a  human  victim  is  necessary  to  make  a  new  building  secure,  L.  S. 
p.  30  ;  Reeves,  Adamn.  pp.  203-4,  417  ;  |1  Three  Glossaries,  p.  xli  note  ;  Nennius, 
ed.  Stevenson,  pp.  31-2  ;  Pagan  Ireland,  pp.  212-13  ;  Elder  Faiths,  i.  303  ff., 
376 ;  Religion  of  Semites,  p.  159 ;  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  p.  19 ;  Grimm, 
iii.  1141-4;  Anthropology  and  the  Classics,  p.  82.  Pretended  sickness  of 
lover,  Ci.  S.  §  16  ||  Oided  Cloinne  Lir,  §  14  ;  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  131. 
Shaving  a  man's  hair  as  a  form  of  insult.  and  miraculous  re-growth,  Ci.  C. 
§  31  note  ;  ||  Eriu,  ii.  22  ;  LU.  52''  (  =  Silva  Gad.  i.  83') ;  Keating,  ii  224  (loss 
of  hair  is  inflicted  as  a  punishment,  the  hair  growing  again  on  repentance,  Aed, 
§  30  ;  Coem.  §  41  ;  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  42).  Showers  of  miraculous  food,  Ail.  §  15 
II  Coir  Anm.  No.  124  ;  F.  M.  716,  759.  Sea  beasts  fighting,  Br.  i.  §  86  ;  ||  Ir.  T. 
iii.  237.  There  are  several  other  parallels  to  the  Brendan  story  in  Bran  :  the 
island  supported  by  four  feet,  Bran,  i.  5,  the  birds  singing  the  hours,  i.  7,  the 
hundred  and  fifty  islands,  i.  13.  Here  again  the  resemblance  of  names  may 
have  helped  the  mutual  assimilation  of  the  two  legends. 

I  have  alluded  above  to  the  curious  tale  called  the  Vision  of  Mac  Conglinne, 
published  by  Professor  Kuno  Meyer  in  two  recensions  in  1892.  It  is  a  highly 
satirical  compusition,  and  on  re-readirg  it  during  the  progress  of  the  present 
work  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  its  salire  is  directed  largely  against  the  lives 
of  Irish  saints,  and  those  eleraents  in  the  secular  literature  which  have  influenced 
the  hagioiogists.  The  following  enumeration  will  show  how  many  of  the  points 
discussed  in  PartVof  this  introduction  are  included  in  the  wriler's  parody : — 
an  enormous  appetite  and  its  cure,  pp.  2.  44  ;  spells  on  food,  p  4  ;  oaths  by  the 
elements.  p.  4  ;  poets'  vituperation,  which  is  used  as  a  legal  sanction,  pp.  8,  44, 
148;  going  deisel,  p.  10;  voice  heard  at  a  great  distance,  p.  12;  'gessa'  or 
taboos,  p.  14;  accomplishment  of  a  journey  in  marvellously  short  time,  p.  22; 


clxxxviii  INTRODUCTION 

production  of  fire  from  a  stone',  or  from  tvvo  pieces  of  wood'.  Loss 
and  recovery  of  speech  '  or  memory  *  are  not  unknown  phenomena. 
There  are  authenticated  instances  of  males  suckhng'.  One  at  least 
of  the  alleged  raisings  from  the  dead  reads  merely  like  an  ordinary 
fainting  fit ' ;  while  in  all  cases  of  nervous  disease  the  mere  expecta- 
tion  of  a  cure  might  have  a  powerful  curative  effect. 

Again  it  should  be  borne  in  niind  that  many  of  the  customs  and 
modes  of  thought  discussed  in  this  section  are  in  themseives  neither 
pagan  nor  Christian,  but  simply  human.  The  heathen  rite  or  formula 
preceded,  and  in  many  cases  influenced,  the  corresponding  Christian 
observance  or  expression.  But  the  attempt  to  discover  heathenism 
everywhere  in  Christianity  has  been  carried  in  some  quarters  to 
very  uncritical  lengths'. 

But  the  persistence  of  a  heathen  element  alongside  of,  or  in  fusion 
with,  Christianity  suggests  some  serious  reflexions.  It  is  one  more 
illustration  of  the  truth  that  'the  past  never  wholly  dies*',  one 
more  proof  of  the  ingrained  conservatism  of  man's  nature,  of  his 
slowness  to  'expel  the  savage  from  his  temples  and  his  heart". 
It  shows  us  that  it  is  not  enough  for  a  religion  to  conquer  man's 
intellect ;  it  must  subdue  and  bring  into  captivity  all  the  dim  instincts, 
emotions,  and  aftections  of  humanity,  which  reach  back  into  a  past 
compared  with  which  the  earliest  recorded  history  is  a  thing  of 
yesterday.  And  so  we  learn  lastly  a  lesson  of  great  patience.  In 
the  world  of  spirit,  as  in  the  world  of  nature,  the  mills  of  God  grind 
slowly.  We  in  our  little  lives  of  a  span  long  crave  for  immediate 
results  and  dramatic  successes.  But  God,  it  has  bcen  finely  said, 
can  afford  to  be  patient,  for  He  has  eternity  to  work  in. 

a  stone  heated  by  an  angel  sitting  on  it,  p.  30;  pedigrees  (mock)  inserted, 
p.  32;  angels  sent  to  raect  a  soul,  p.  40;  fasting  on  persons,  pp.  40,  56; 
bargaining,  pp.  44,  54-6 ;  visions  and  Iheir  intcrpretation.  pp.  66,  149 ;  tlie 
*  faith  liaig ',  or  prophet-leecli,  p.  74  ;  the  story  acts  as  a  path-protection,  and 
confers  many  othcr  blessings,pp.  110-12  ;  magic  mist,  p.  151 ;  an  evident  parody 
of  the  Brendan  story,  p.  152;  the  rclation  ol"  the  clcrgy  to  the  secular  tales,  ib. 

'  Ci.  S.  §  33  ;  in  the  Dublin  Irish  life  the  words  are  '  ro  ben  a  caisre  teincadh 
aisde ',  i.  e.  he  struck  its  spark  of  fire  from  it. 

2  Las.  §  7. 

^  Ab.  §  38 ;   Fin.  C.  |  19  ;  Ita,  §  19  ;  cf.  Campbell,  Superstitions,  p.  109. 

'  Mochua,  5§  2,  3  ;  c(.  Gir.  Camb.  Opp.  v.  181. 

'  L.  S.  pp.  go,  348  ;  in  Ber.  §  4  the  saint  is  suckled  at  his  foster-father's  ear. 
According  to  the  Br.  lile  of  Colman  Ela,  c.  5,  onc  of  that  sainfs  brcasts  yielded 
milk,  and  the  otlier  honey;  cl.  Eldcr  Faiths,  ii.  44  ;  MaccuIIoch,  Childhood, 
p.  109  ;  Orig.  Island.  ii.  649.  ^  Mochoem.  §  23. 

'  The  acme  is  perhaps  rcached  when  Hampson  in  his  very  useful  and 
interesting  work,  Mcdii  Aeui  Kalendarium,  says,  following  Dresser,  tliat  the 
observance  of  Passion  Week  (a  strict  fastj  is  derivcd  from  the  Bacchanalia, 
a  riolous  feast,  ii.  310. 

•  Bcrtrand,  Religion,  p.  14.  "  Lang,  Myth  and  Ritual,'  i.  340. 


LIST    OF    ABBREVIATIONS     USED,    AND    OF 
WORKS  CITED  IN  THE  INTRODUCTION 


For  the  Lives  contained  in  the  present  volumes  the  following  abbreviations 
are  used  : — 

Ab.  =  Abban  ;  Aed  =  Aed  ;  Ail.  =Ailbe(Albeus') ;  Ba.  =  Bairre;  Ber.  =Berach; 
Bo.  =Boecius;  Br.  i  =  Brendan,  Vita  Prima;  Br.  ii=Brendan,  Vita  Secunda 
(Appendix');  Cain.  =  Cainnech  ;  Car.  =  Carthach  (Mochuda);  Ci.  C.  =  Ciaran  of 
Clonmacnois  ;  Ci.  S.  =  Ciaran  of  Saigir;  Coem.  =  Coemgen  ;  Co.  E.  or  Col.  E.  = 
ColmanEla;  Com.  =  Comgall;  Cron.  =  Cronan  ;  Dec,  or  Decl.  =  Declan  ;  Enda  = 
Enda;  Fech.  =  Fechin  ;  Fin.  C.  =  Finan  of  Cenn  Etigh  ;  Fint.  =  Fintan  ;  Ger.  = 
Gerald  ;  Ita  =  Ita  ;  Las.  =  Lasrianus  '  (Molaisse);  Lug.  =  Lugaid'  (Molua);  Maed. 
=  Maedoc  (where  necessary  the  two  te.Kts  are  distinguished  as  M  and  V 
respectively  ;  where  these  letters  are  not  added,  the  references  apply  to  both 
te.\ts);  Mochoem.  =  Mochoemog  ;  Mochua  =  Mochua  ;  Moling  or  Mol.  =^  Moling  ; 
Mun.  =  Munnu  l^Fintan);  Rua.  =  Ruadan;  Sam.  =  Samthann  ;  Tig.  =  Tigernach. 


Aberdeen  Breviary  =  Breuiarium  Aber- 

donense,  a  vols.  4to,  1854. 
Ace.  Sen.  =  Accallam  na  Sendrach,  ed. 

WhitleyStokes;  in  IrischeTextelV, 

i,  1900. 
Adamn.  =  Adamnan's  Life  of  Columba. 
Anecdota  =  Anecdota  from  Irish  MSS., 

ed.  Bergin  and  others  (3  vols.  have 

so  far  appeared"). 
Ann.    Clonm.  =  Annals    of   Clonmac- 

noise,    ed.    Rev.    Denis    Murphy, 

1896. 
Ann.  Loch  Ce  =  Annals  of  Loch  Ce, 

ed.  W.  M.  Hennessy  (R.  S.),  a  vols., 

1871. 
Ann.  Ult.  =Annals  of  Ulster.  ed.  W.  M. 

Hennessy  and  Rev.  B.  MacCarthv, 

4  vols.,  1887-1901. 
Archaeology  and  Authority, . . .  Essays 

.  .  .  edited  by  David  G.  Hogarth, 

and  ed.  1899. 
A.  S.  =The    BoUandist    Collection    of 

Acta  Sanctorum  ;  many  vols.  foljo. 
Aur.   Leg.  =  Aurea   Legenda  lacobi  a 

Voragine,  ed.  T.  Graesse,  1846. 
B  (in  thecritical  notes)  =  TheBoIlandis 

text  in  the  Acta  Sanctorum. 
Baring-Gould   and   Fisher,  v.   British 

Saints. 
Baumer,  Brdviaire=  Histoire  du  Bre- 

viaire   par  Dom    Suitbert    Baumer, 

traduction  franfaise  par   Dom  Re- 

ginakl  Biron,  2  vols. ,  1905. 
BB.  =  Book  of  Ballymote,  published  in 

facsimile  by  R.  I.  A.,  folio  1887. 


Bertrand,  Religion  =  Bertrand,  La 
Religion  des  Gaulois,  1897. 

B.  Fenagh  =  Bookof  Fenagh.ed.  W.  M. 
Hennessy  and    D.    H.    Kelly,   410, 

1875- 
Book    of    Mulling  =  Chapters   on    the 

Book  of  Mulling,  by  H.  J.  Lawlor, 

1897. 
Br.  (before  the  number  of  a  MS.  or  the 

life  of  a  saint)  =  Brussels. 
Bran=The   Voyage   of  Bran   son    of 

Febal  .  .  .  Kuno    Meyer  and  Alfred 

Nutt,  2  vols.,  1895-7. 
Breu.  Aberdon.  v.  Aberdeen  Breviary. 
Brigit  =  UItan's     Life    of    St.   Brigit 

in     Colgan's     Trias    Thaumaturga, 

pp.  527  ff. 
British   Saints  =  Lives   of  the   British 

Saints,  by  S.  Baring-Gould  and  John 

Fisher   (2  vols.   out  of  4  have  ap- 

peared),  1907-8. 
Cain  Ad.  =  Cain  Adamnain,  ed.  Kuno 

Meyer,   Anecdota  O.xoniensia,   4to, 

1905. 
Campbell,     Superstitions  =  Supersti- 

tions  of  the   Highlands  and  Islands 

of    Scotland,    by   John   Gregorson 

Campbell,  1900. 
Capg.    or  Capgrave  =  Noua    Legenda 

Anglie,  by  John  of  Tynemouth,  John 

Capgrave,  &c.,  ed.  Carl  Horstman, 

2  vols.,  igoi. 
Cath  Finntraga  (or  the  Battle  of  Ven- 

tryl,    ed.    Kuno    Meyer,   Anecdota 

Oxoniensia,  410,  1885. 


'  In  the  case  of  these  two  saints  I  have  abbreviated  their  real  rather  than 
their  hypocoristic  names,  for  fear  of  their  being  confused  vvith  one  another  and 
with  St.  Moling. 


cxc 


LIST   OF  ABBREVIATIONS 


Cath    Ruis  =  Cath   Ruis   na   Rig,   ed. 

Edmund  Hogan,  R.  I.  A.,  Todd  Lec- 

ture  Series,  iSga. 
C.B.S.  =  Lives  of  the  Cambro-British 

Saints,  ed.  Rev.  W.  J.  Rees,  1853. 
Christian   Inscriptions  =  Christian    In- 

scriptions    in   the    Irish    Language, 

collected  by  G.  Petrie,   and   edited 

by  M.  Stokes,  2  vols.  410,  1872-8. 
Chron.   Scot.  =  Chronicon    Scotorum, 

ed.  W.  M.  Hennessy  ^R.S.),  1866. 
C<5ir  Anm.  or  Coir  Anmann  (Fitness 

of    Names),    ed.    Whitley    Stokes, 

Irische  Texte  III,  ii,  1897. 
Colgan,    A.    S.  =  Colgan,    Acta    San- 

ctorum  Hiberniae,  folio,  1645. 
Cormac,  Glossary,  in  Three  Irish  Glos- 

saries,  ed.  Whitley  Stokes,  1862. 
Cormac,  Transl.  =  Cormac's  Glossary, 

translated  by  John  0'Donovan,  ed. 

Whitlcy    Stokes,    Irish   Arch.    and 

Celtic  Soc,  4to,  1B68. 
C.S. -Acta  Sanctorum   Hiberniae  ex 

Codice  Salmanticensi,  ed.  de  Smedt 

et  de  Backer,  4to,  1888. 
D'Arbois,  Catalogue  =  Essai  d'un  Cata- 

logue  dela  Littirature  Epique  dellr- 

lande,  par  H.  D'Arbois  de  Jubain- 

ville,  1883. 
D.  C.  B.  or  Dict.  Christ.  Biog.  =  Dic- 

tionary     of     Christian     Biography, 

4   vols. ,   ed.    Wm.    Smith   and    H. 

Wace,  1877-87. 
Delehaye,    Legendes  =  Les   Legendes 

Hagiographiques,      par     Hippolyte 

Delehaye,  1905.      (There  is  also  an 

English  Translation.") 
Duchesne,  Origines  =  Origines  du  Culte 

Chretien,  par  L.  Duchesne,  3™"  ed., 

1903.      ^There   is    also   an    English 

Translation.) 
Elder    Faiths  =  Traces     of    the    Ekler 

Faiths    of    Ireland  . .  .  by    W.    G. 

Wood-Martin,  2  vols.,  1902. 
Eriu  =  Eriu,  the  Journal  of  the  School 

of  Irish  Learning,  Dublin,  1904  ft". 
F.     V.  Introduction,  pp.  xviii  f. 
F6l.'^Fdlire  of  Ocngus,  ed.  Whitley 

Stokes,   R.  I.  A.,  Irish  MS.  Series, 

vol.  I,  4to,  1880. 
F6l.*  =  The  same,  ed.  Whitley  Stokes, 

Henry  Bradshaw  Society,  1905. 
Fled    Bricrend2=Fled    Bricrend,    ed. 

George     Henderson,    Irish     Texts 

Society,    1899  (the  first   edition   of 

this  tale  was  given  by  Windisch   in 

Irische  Textc  I ). 
F. M.  -  Annals  of  the  Kingdom  of  Ire- 

land  by  tlie  Four  Masters,  ed.  John 


CDonovan,  and   cd.,    7  vols.   4I0, 

1856. 
Forbes,  Calendars=  Kalendars  of  the 

Scottish   Saints,   by  A.    P.   Forbes, 

Bishop  of  lirechin,  4to,  1872. 
FornsOgur,  ed.  Vigfusson  and  Mobius, 

1860. 
G.  G.  =  Cogadh  Gaedhel   re  Gallaibh, 

The  War  of  the  Gaedhil  with   the 

Gaill,    ed.    J.    H.    Todd    (R.    S.), 

1867. 
Gir.  Camb.  Opp  v.  =  Giraldi  Cambren- 

sis  Opera,  ed.  J.  F.  Dimock  1  R.  S.)  : 

vol.  V,   1867,  containing  the  Topo- 

graphia   Hibernica  and   the    Expu- 

gnatio  Hiberniae,  is  the   only   one 

cited. 
Gott.    gel.     Anz.  =  Gottingische    ge- 

lehrte  Anzeigen. 
Grimm  =  Tcutonic  Mythology  by  Jacob 

Grimm,  Eng.  Transl.  by  Stallybrass, 

4  vols.,  1883-1900. 
Harnack,   MiEsion  =  Die   Mission  und 

Ausbreitung  des    Christentums  .  .  . 

von  Adolf  Harnack,  1902. 
H.D.B.  or  Hastings'  D.B.  =  Hastings' 

Dictionary    of    the    Bible,    5   vcls., 

1898- 1904. 
Hdt.  =  Herodotus. 
Hib.  Min.  =  Hibernica  Minora,  ed.  K. 

Meyer,  Anecdota  Oxoniensia.  1894. 
Hy   Fiachrach  =  Genealogies,    Tribes, 

and  Cusloms  of  Hy-Fiachrach,  ed. 

John  0'Donovan,  Irish  Arch.  Soc, 

4to,  1844. 
Hy  Many  =  The  Tribes  and   Customs 

of  Hy-Many,  ed.  John  0'Donovan, 

Irish  Arch.  Soc,  4to,  1843. 
I.A.S.  =  Irish  Archaeological  Society. 
Ir.  Nenn.  =  The  Irish  Version  of  Nen- 

nius,   ed.  J.   H.  Todd,  Irish  Arch. 

Soc,  4to,  1848. 
Ir.  T.  =  Irische  Texte,  a  series  edited 

by  Windisch,   Stokes,    and   others, 

1880,  fl'. 
Joyce,  Social  History  =  A  Social  His- 

tory  of  Ancient  Ireland,  by  P.  W. 

Joyce,  2  vols.,  1903. 
Jubinal  =  La    Legende    latine    de    S. 

Brandaines  .  .  .  par  Achille  Jubinal, 

1836. 
Keating  =  Keating's  History  oflreland 

(Foras    Feasa   ar    tirinn),    ed.    D. 

Comyn,   and    Rev.    P.    S.    Dineen, 

3  vols.,  Irish  Texts  Society,  1903-8. 
L  (in  critical  notes",  v.  L.  S. 
Laud  =  Laud  Collection  of  MSS.,  Bod- 

leian  Library. 
L.Br.  =  Lebar  Brecc,  or  the  Speckled 


LIST   OF  ABBREVIATIONS 


CXCl 


Book,  published  in  racsimile  by  the 

K.I.  A.,  folio,  1876. 
L.H.'  =  Liber  Hymnorum,   ed.  J.   H. 

Todd,  3  Parts,  Irish  .Arch.  and  Celtic 

Soc,  4to,  1855-69  (imperfect). 
LH.*=Liber   Hjmnorum,  ed.  J.   H. 

Bernard  and   R.   Atkinson,    Henry 

Bradshaw  Soc,  2  vols.,  1898. 
Lib.     Land.  =  Liber    Landauensis,    or 

Book  of  Llan  Dav,  ed.  i,  Rev.  W.  J. 

Rees,  1840  :  ed.  2,  J.  G.  Evans  and 

John  Rhys,  1893  (the  pagination  of 

both  editions  is  given  . 
LL.  =  Lebar  Laigen,  or  Book  of  Lein- 

ster,  publishedin  facsimile  by  R.I.A., 

folio,  1880. 
L.  na  g-C.  =  Leabhar   na   g-Ceart,  or 

Book  of  Rights,  ed.  John  0'Dono- 

van,  Celtic  Soc,  1847. 
L.  S.  =  Lismore  Saints,   i.  e.  Lives  of 

Saints  frora  the    Book  of  Lismore, 

ed.  Whitley  Stokes,  Anecdota  Oxo- 

niensia,  1890. 
LU.  =  Lebar  na  h-Uidre,  or  Book   of 

the    Dun    Cow,    published    in   fac- 

simiie  by  R.  I.  A.,  4to,  1870. 
Luzel,     Legendes    Chretiennes,  =  L6- 

gendes   Chretiennes    de    la    Basse 

Bretagne,  par  F.  M.  Luzel,  2  vols., 

1881. 
Lyall  =  Asiatic  Studies,  by  Sir  A.  C. 

Lyall  (as  a  rule  the  and  ed.,  1884, 

in   I   vol.,  is  referred  to,  but  occa- 

sionally  vol.  2  of  ed.  3,  1899.  which 

contains  some  additional  Essays,  is 

cited). 
M  ^in  critical  notes),  v.  Introduction, 

p  ix. 
Macculloch,    Childhood,  =  The   Child- 

hood   of  Fiction,  a   Study  of  Folk 

Tales,  by  J.  A.   Macculloch,  1905. 
Macculloch,    Western    Isles,  =  A   De- 

scription  oftheWestern  Islands  of 

Scotland,    by   John    MaccuIIoch,   3 

vols.,  1819. 
Magh    Lena  =  The    Battle   of  Magh 

Leana,    ed.    Eugene   Curry,    Celtic 

Soc,  1855. 
Magh    Rath  =  The    Battle    of  Magh 

Rath,   ed.  John   0'Donovan,   Irish 

Arch.  Soc,  4to.  1842. 
M  and  C.  =  v.  0'Curry. 
Mart.     Don.  =  The    Martyrology    of 
Donegal,  ed.  John  0'Donovan,  J.  H. 

Todd,  and  Wm.  Reeves,  Irish  Arch. 

and  Celtic  Soc,  1864. 
Mart.     0'Gorman  =  Martyrology    of 
0'Gi'rman,     ed.     Whitley    Stokes, 
Henry  Bradshaw  Soc  1895. 


Mart.  Tall.  =  MartyroIogy  of  Tallaght, 

in   LL.  (and  ed.    by  Rev.  Matthew 

Kelly,  1857). 
Martin  ^  A  Description  of  the  Western 

Islands  of  Scotland,  by  Mr.  Martin, 

2nd  ed.  1716. 
Mesca  Ulad,   ed.  W.    M.    Hennessy, 

R.  I.  A.Todd  LectureSeries,  i88g. 
M.     H.     B.  =  Monumenta    Historica 

Britannica,  vol.    i    (all   published), 

folio,  1848. 
Misc.   Celt.    Soc.  =  Miscellany  of  the 

Celtic  Society,  ed.  JohnO'Donovan, 

1849. 
Misc.    I.    A.    S.  =  MisceIIany    of    the 

Irish  Arch.  Soc.  vol.  i,  410,  1846. 
Moran  =  Acta   S.    Brendani,   ed.    Rt. 

Rev.  P.  Moran,  1873. 
MS.  Mat.,  V.  0'Curry. 
Myth    and    RituaI  =  A.    Lang,    Myth, 

Ritual,  and  Religion,  2  vols.,  ed.  i, 

1887  ;  ed.  2,  1906  (the  paginationof 

both  editions  is  given). 
N  and  K  =  Lives  of  S.  Ninian  and  S. 

Kentigern,  ed.  A.  P.  Forbes,  Bishop 

of  Brechin,  1874. 
Naemsenchus,  Metrical  genealogies  of 

the    Saints,   in    BB.   and    Book    of 

Lecan. 
0'Currj',    M.  and    C.  =  Manners    and 

Customs   of  the  Ancient  Irish,  by 

Eugene  0"Currj',  3  vols.,  1873. 
0'Curry,  MS.  Mat.  =  Lectures  on  the 

ManuscriptMaterialsofAncientlrish 

History,  by  Eugene  0'Curry,  1878. 
0'Haherty,  larConnaught  =  A  Choro- 

graphical  Description  ofWest  or  h- 

lar  Connaught,  by  Roderic  0'FIa- 

herty,  ed.  J.  Hardiman,  Irish  Arch. 

Soc,  4to,  1846. 
0'Hanlon  =  Lives  of  the  Irish  Saints, 

by  Very  Rev.  John  0'HanIon,  N.D. 

(9  vols.  and  part  of  vol.  10  had  been 

published  at  the  time  of  the  author's 

recent  death). 
Oide    Chloinne   Lir,   or  Fate   of  the 

Children   of  Lir.     Reprint   by  the 

Soc.  for  Preservation  of  the  Irish 

Language,  1883. 
Oitte  =  Death    Tales    of    the     Ulster 

Heroes,  ed.  Kuno  Meyer,  R.  I.  A. 

Todd  Lecture  Series.  1906. 
Orig.  Island.  =  Origines  Islandicae,  ed. 

Vigfiisson  and  York  Powell,  2  vols., 

1905. 
Oss.    Soc.  =  Transactions   of  the  Os- 

sianic  Society    (vol.  iii.    1B57,  con- 

taining     Toruigheacht      Dhiarmuda 

agus  Ghrainne,  &c.,  and  vol.  v,  1860, 


cxcu 


LIST   OF  ABBREVIATIONS 


containing    Imtheacht      na    Trom- 

dhaimhe,  &c.). 
Outer  Isles  =  Outer  Isles,  byA.  Good- 

rich-Freer,  1902. 
Pagan    Ireland  ^  Pagan     Ireland,    an 

Archaeological    Sketch,    by   W.    G. 

Wood-Martin,  1895. 
Petrie,    Round  Tovvers  =  The  eccle- 

siastical   Architecture    .    .    .    [and] 

Round    Towers    of     Ireland,  .  .  . 

by  George  Petrie,  and  ed.  1845. 
Petrie,  Tara  =  The  History  and   An- 

tiquities  of  Tara,  by  George  Petrie, 

Trans.    R.  I.  A.,    vol.     xviii,     4to, 

1838. 
R',  R-,  V.  Introduction,  p.  ix. 
Rawl.  =  RawhnsonCoUection  of  MSS. 

in  Bodleian  Library  ;  of  these  Rawl. 

B.  502   has  been  published  in  fac- 

simile  by  the  Clarendon  Press,  ed. 

Kuno  Meyer,  folio,  1909. 
R.  C.  =  Revue  Celtique,  1870  flf. 
Reeves   Adamn.  or  Rs.  Ad.  =Adam- 

nan's  Life  of  St.  Columba,  ed.   Dr. 

Wm.  Reeves,  Irish  Arch.  and  Celtic 

Soc,    and    Bannatyne    Club,     4to, 

1857- 
Reeves,  Culdees,  =  The  Culdees  of  the 

British  Islands^by  Dr.  Wm.  Reeves, 

Trans.  R.  I.  A.,  vol.  xxiv,  4to,  1864. 
Reeves,    Eccl.     Ant.  =  Ecclesiastical 

Antiquities  of  Down,  Connor,    and 

Dromore,    by    Rev.   Wm.    Reeves, 

4to,  1847. 
Religion  of  Semites  -  Lectures  on  the 

Religion    of   the    Semites,     by   W. 

Robertson-Smith,  new  ed..  1894. 
Rennes     MS=The     Irish     MS.      at 

Rennes  (cited  for  the   Irish  Life  of 

St.  Colman  mac  Luachain  ;   ed.  by 

Prof.  K.  Meyer  in  preparation). 
Rhjs,  A.  L.  =  Studies  in  the  Arlhurian 

Legend,  by  John  Rhys,  1891. 
Rhys.F.L.  =  CelticFo!klore,Welshand 

Manx,byJohn  Rhys,2vols.,  igoi. 
Rhys,   H.  L.  =The  Hibbert  Lectures 

for  i886,  on  Celtic  Heathendom,  by 

John  Rhys.  1888. 
R.  I.  A.  =  Royal  Irish  Academy. 
R.  S.  =  Rolls  Series. 
S.  (in  critical  notes),  v.  Introducticn, 

p.  ix, 
St.    Malo  =  Deux    Vies    incdites  de 

Saint  Malo,  ed.    Dom   F.  Plaine  et 

A,  de  la  Borderie,  1884. 
Saintyves  =  Les    Saints    Successeurs 

dcs  Dieux,  P.  Saintyves,  1907. 
Silva  Gad.  =  Silva  Gadelica,  a  Collec- 


tion  of  Tales  in  Irish,  ed,  Standish 
H,  0'Grady.  2  vols. ,  1892. 
Sim.    Dun.  =  Simeon  of  Durham,  ed. 

T.  Arnold  (R,  S.),  2  vols,,  1882-5. 
Skene,    C.    S.  =  Celtic    Scotland    by 

W.  F.  Skene,  3  vols.  1876-80. 
T  (in  critical  notes),  v.  Introduction, 

p.  ix. 
TainBoFraich.ed.  J.O'Beirne  Crowe, 
R.    I.    A,    Irish    MSS.    Series.  8vo, 
vol.   i,  1870  i  other  eds,  in  Z.  C.  P., 
iv.  32  fT,  :   R.  C.  xxiv.  143  ff,). 
T.   B.   C.  =Tain   B6  Cualgne,  ed.  E. 

Windisch,  1905. 
T.  C,  D,  =  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 
Three    Fragm.  =Three    Fragments  of 
Annals  of  Ireland,  ed.  John  0'Dono- 
van,    Irish   Arch.  and   Celtic  Soc, 
4to,  1860. 
Three  Glossaries,  v.  Corraac. 
Three  Homilies  =  Three  Middle  Irish 
Homilies,  ed.  Whitley  Stokes,  Cal- 
cutta,  1877. 
Todd,  Obits,  =  Obits  and  Martyrology 
of  Christ  Church,  Dublin,  ed.  J.  H. 
Todd  and  J.  C.  Crosthwaite,  Irish 
Arch.  Soc,  4to,  1844, 
Togail  Troi  (or  The  Taking  of  Troy), 
ed.  Whitley  Stokes,  Calcuita,  i88a. 
Top.    Poems  =  Irish     Topographical 
Poems,  ed.  John  0'Donovan,  Irish 
Arcli,  and  Celtic  Soc,  1863. 
Tr.    Th.  =  Triadis    Thaumaturgae  .  .  . 
Patricii,  Columbae.  et  Brigidae  .  .  . 
Acta,  ed.  J.  Colgan,  folio,  1847. 
Trans.    Gael,    Soe.  =  Transactions    of 
theGaelic  Society  of  Dublin,  vol.  i, 
1808  (lall  published). 
v,  l.  =  varia  lectio. 

V.  Tr,  =  Vita  Tripartita,  The  Tripartite 
Life  of  Patrick,  ed.  Whitley  Stokes 
(R,  S,^.  2  vols.,  1887, 
Wasscrschleben,     Irische     Kanonen- 

sammlung,  2tc  Aufl,,  1885, 
Y.  B,  L,  =  Yellow  Book  of  Lecan,  pub- 
lished    in    facsimile    by    R.    I.    A., 
folio,  1896. 
Z.C.P.  =  Zeitschrift  fOrCeltische  Philo- 

logic.  1897  ff. 
Z.   f,    deutsches   Alt.  =  Zeitschrift    fQr 

deutschcs  Alterthum. 
Zimmcr,  Celtic  Church,=The  Celtic 
Church  in  Britain  and  Ireland,  by 
H,  Zimmer,  translated  by  A.  Meyer, 
1903. 
Zimmer,  K.  B.  =  KeItische  Beitrage, 
von  H,  Zimmer,  in  Z.  f.  deutsches 
Alt,,  vols.  xxxii,  xxxiii,  xxxv. 


VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 


Vita  sanrti  ^iibani  ^i)t)atis  tir  JHag  ^rnaitir  r.  .38' 

Incipit  Vita  Sancti  Abbani  '  Abbatis^ 

i.  In  occidentali*  plaga  tocius  orbis  est  insula  possita,  cuius 
nomen  Hybernia  dicitur.  Eadem  ucro  insula  est  magna  ct  clara 
atque  ainena  terra,  in  qua  continentur  maxime  quinque  prouinchie, 
in  qua  etiam  nulla  bestia  venenosa,  nec  genus  vllum  serpentinum 
Iiabitat ;  set  terra  sana  est,  morbis  carens,  habitabilis  valde,  fructifera 
in  diuersis  fructibus,  tam  in  aquis,  quam  in  terris  et  lignis.  Habita- 
tores  autcm  eius  bino  nomine  nominantur  ;  id  est  ab  Hibero  flumine 
Hibernia  vocatur,  et  ab  Hibernia  Hibernienses  vocantur.  Scoti  vero 
a  Scota,  matre  eiusdem  gentis,  dicuntur,  que  fuit  filia  regis  Egypti. 
Quomodo  de  Egypto  ipsa  venit  ad  Hiberniam,  causa  breuitatis  omit- 
timus,  quia  satis  inuenitur  de  illa  in  libris,  qui  narrant,  quomodo  in 
primis  tcmporibus  habitata  est  Hybernia^.  Cultores  vero  Hybernie 
probati  sunt  in  fide  catholica,  et  in  dogmatibus  ecclesiasticis ;  et  plus 
omnibus  nacionibus  hospitalitatem  sectantur. 

ii.  De  illa°  silicet  gente  maximum  sanctorum  agmen  sibi  Deus 
elegit  ;  sicut  veritas  in  euangeho  ait :  '  Alias  oues  habeo,  que  non 
sunt  ex  hoc  ouiH".'  Et  alibi:  'Multi  venient  ab  oriente  et  ab  occi- 
dente,  et  recumbent  cum  Abraham  ','  etc.  De  quorum  collegio  fuit 
vir  vite  venerabilis',  Abbanus  nomine,  quem  Deus  preelegit,  ante- 
quam  natus  fuissef;  quia  multi  sancti  viri  per  multa  tempora,  ante- 
quam  natus  esset,  predicauerunt  ipsum  nasciturum.  De  quibus" 
sanctus  Patricius  arciepiscopus,  tenens  portum  in  australi  parte 
Laginensium,  id  est  Hua  Cennselaidh'",  cum  venisset  ad  predicandum 
in  Hibernia,  dixit :  'Tres  filii"  vite  |  eterne  de  gente  Laginensium  f.  138" 

'  In  M  the  stroke  of  the  second  b  is  often  placed  so  near  the  first  b  that  there 
is  no  room  for  the  loop  of  the  latter,  so  that  the  name  looks  like  Albanus.  In 
other  cases  a  later  corrector  has  deliberately  altered  it  to  Albanus.  But 
instances  in  which  the  first  b  comes  at  the  end  of  a  line,  wliile  the  second  h 
begins  Ihe  next  hne,  show  clearly  that  the  name  is  Abbanus  ;  in  T  it  is  always 
so  written,  and  I  have  printed  it  so  throughout.  The  editors  of  S  print  Albanus 
throughout.  -  On    the    lower    margin    M    inserts    an    Irish    pedigree   of 

Abban,  which  agrees  very  nearly  with  that  in  LL.  352".  ^    =  S  §  i. 

*  i.  e.   the  Lebar  Cabiilii,  or  Book  of  Conquests ;  a  well-known  work,  which 
exists  in  several  recensioiis.  ^   =  S  §  i.  ^  John  x.  16.  '  Matt. 

viii.  II.  '  Fuit  virvite  ven.  was  probably  the  original  commencement  of 

the  Life  ;  the  prologue  about  Ireland  and  the  Irish  being  subsequently  added. 
'  =  Ir.  c.  3.  '"  Chens-  T.  "  Nota  tres  sanctos  maiores  Laginensium 

T  marg. 

B2 


4  VITAE   SANCTORUM   HIBERNIAE 

nascentur,  quorum  nomina  vocabuntur  Abbanus,  Coemgenus,  et 
Molyng^  Ipsi  maiores  sanctorum  Laginensium  erunt;  et  per  merita 
eorum,  quamuis  nondum  nati  sunt,  Deum  modo  rogabo.  Quia  illi 
\enturi  sunt  lucerne  clarissime  hominibus,  pia  opera  et  Deo  placita 
ciarificaturi,  et  propter  eos  conuertam  Laginenses  ad  Christi  fidem, 
set  non  modo  ;  quia  Deus  predestinauit  mihi  prius  ire  in  aquilonales 
partes  Hybernie,  et  postea  ociosius  venire  ad  Laginenses,  quia  ipsi 
beliigeri  sunt.'  Nomina  vero  aliorum,  et  quomodo  predicauerunt  de 
sancto  Abbano,  propter  breuitatcm  omittimus,  nisi  quomodo  in  hora 
natiuitatis  eius  predicauit  de  eo'  sanctus  Ybarus  episcopus. 

iii.  Sanctus'  ergo  Abbanus  de  claro  genere  Laginensium,  silicet 
de  Dal  Macscorb ',  ortus  cst ;  cuius  pater  vocabatur  Corniacus,  qui 
erat  rex  Laginensium.  Mater  autem  eius  vocabatur  Mella,  que  fuit 
soror  Ybari  episcopi.  Illa  uero  mater  nimiis  partus  doloribus 
tenebatur.  Cum  tempus  parturiendi  Abbanum  venisset,  episcopus 
Ybarus  vocatus  est  ad  sororem  suam  pene  mortuam.  At  illa  videns 
eum  uenientem  versum  sequentem  Scotica  lingua  dixit '" : — 

Easpoc  Ibhair  dom  chabhair'; 

Ise  raiter"  mar  urra"; 

Cuinngheadh  dilgeadh  mo  cheanadh  ' ; 

Romghabhsat  idhun  ghura '". 

Et  cpiscopus  alterum  eadem  lingua  dixit : 

Easpoc  Ibhair  atarradh  "  ; 
Rotghabhsat  idhun  '-  gura  ; 
Bera  abb  "  uasal  amhra  ; 
Rotcabhra  righ  nannula". 

'  -ling  T.  2  deo/orde  eo  T.         '    =  S  §  2;  Ir.  c.  i.         '  Mhachscorp  T. 

''  On  margin  of  M  :  rann  annso,  i.  e.  '  this  is  a  verse.'  *  espoc  Ibhuir  dom 

chobhuir  T.  '  se  raitir  T  ;  se  ro  fidir  Colg.  from  Ir.  (Br.')  ;  '  railir '  is  con- 

tracted  for  ro  fitir,  '  knows.'  '  mo  runa  Colg.  from  Ir.  (Br.) ;  and  the  Latin 

rendering  'secreta'  shows  that  this  is  right.  "  Cungedh  dilguidh  mo 

chenadh  T ;  dilgadh  mo  chinadh  Ir.  (Br.).  '»  On  this  line  M  and  T  both 

have  the  follovving  quite  erroneous  gloss :  idhun  .i.  pura.  gura  .i.  ut  sim  .1. 
ut  sim  pura.     The  whole  verse  may  be  rendered  : 

Bishop  Ibar  to  my  aid  ! 
It  is  he  who  knoweth  my  secrets  ; 
Let  him  ask  forgiveness  of  my  sins  ; 
Sharp  travail-pangs  have  overtaken  me. 

"  for  atfharrad,  whicli  is  the  reading  of  Ir.  "*  idhain  Ir.  (Br.)  and  so  above. 
'■'  niac  Ir.  Colg.  ;  which  is  also  confirmed  by  the  Latin  rendering  'filium'. 
"  na  n-dula  Ir.  Colg.     The  whole  may  be  rendered  : 

Bishop  Ibar  is  bcfore  thee  ; 
Sharp  travail-pangs  have  overtakcn  thee. 
Tliou  shalt  bcar  a  noble  wondrous  abbot;  (o/-son) 
May  thc  king  of  the  elcracnts  aid  thee ! 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  5 

Isti  versus  possunt  sic  latine  interpretari.  Regina  'in'  primo  rogauit 
episcopum  seientem  secreta  eius,  iit  orarct  pro  ea,  et  pro  rcmissionc 
sibi  peccatorum.  Et  episcopus  in  secundo  ipsam  a  Deo  adiuuandam 
a  doloribus  suis  predicat,  et  sibi  filium  nasciturum  altissinium  et 
mirabilem  esse  coram  Deo  et  hominibus.  Statim  ucro  regina  sine 
uila  tribulacione  sanctum  infantem  genuit ;  et  in  illa  hora  baptissatus 
est,  eratque  plenus  gratia  Dei.  Diligentissime  sanctus  puer  Abbanus 
a  nutritoribus  suis  nutritus  est,  putantes  eum  regem  esse  post  patrem 
suum. 

iv.  CuM  '  autem  beatus  puer  potuisset  ambulare,  ad  ecciesiam  ibat; 
et  ibi,  quasi  senex  religiosus,  assidue  orabat ;  grauiaque  ieiunia 
fortiter  in  infancia  sustinebat.  Et  ita  permansit  usque  ad  obitum 
suum,  studiosissimus  in  vigiliis  et  ieiuniis,  atque  orationibus -,  et' in 
elymosinis,  ac  in  dilectione  proximi,  et  in  ceteris  diuinis  mandatis. 
Verbaque  scienter  diuina,  ut  loqui  potuit,  omnibus  hominibus  predi- 
cabat*,  quasi  fuisset  peritus  in  scripturis.  Et  vere  erat  peritus  in 
scripturis  ;  quia  a  natiuitate  sua  Sanctus  Spiritus  eum  docebat.  Sua- 
debatque  verbis  et  operibus  homines,  ut  hoc  caducum  seculum 
despicerent,  et  sequerentur  Christum  crucifixum  pro  eis;  et  sibi  vitam 
eternam  a  Deo  postularent. 

v.  Parentes'  autem  eius  et  ceteri  homines  mirabantur  de  vita  et 
moribus  eius  honestis,  dicentes  ad  invicem  :  'Nescimus  qualis  est  iste 
puer,  qui  nec  didicit  apud  ullum  hominem,  et  opera  religiosorum 
seniorum  facit,  et  studia  doctorum  docet.'  De  hoc  contigit,  ut  alii 
aduiantes  ei,  alii  vero  volentes  placere  menti  eius,  alii  autem  temp- 
tantes  eum,  si  sibi  placeret  regnum  terrenum  habere,  vocarent  eum : 
'  O  rex,'  et  loquerentur  ei  de  regalibus  rebus,  et  promisissent  eum 
regem  futurum  |  post  patrem  suum.  Puer  sanctus,  audiens  homines  f.  139" 
talia  verba  de  se  loquentes,increpauit  eos,  dicens :  'Miseri  homines, 
cur  me  regem  dicitis  .'  quia  non  solum  non  ero  rex,  set  nullam  aliani 
curam  secularem  habebo ;  quoniam  volo  seruire  Domino  meo  lesu 
Christo,  qui  dat  sibi  seruientibus  regnum  indeficiens.'  Pater  autem  eius 
et  mater,  scientes  quod  ipse  hec  verba  dixisset,  vocatus  ad  eos,  dixerunt 
ei :  'Fili,  curnon  vis  esse  propagator  regni  post  patrem  tuum  ?  Plus  te 
oportet  equitare,  venatum  ire,iam  vti  ludis  militaribus,  vt,  cum  senuerit 
pater  tuus,  tu  exires  ante  Laginenses  contra  alienos  pro  patria  certare.' 
■  Ouare  ',  inquit,  '  vvltis  prohibere  me  famulari  Deo  Patri  omnipotenti, 
Creatori  celi  et  terre,  qui  Vnigenitum  suum  propiciacionem  pro  toto 
mundo  misit;  et  Filio  eius,  qui  obediens  fuit  Patri  usque  ad  mortem  ; 
et  Spiritui  Sancto,  qui  suis  donis  illustrauit  humanum  genus  ?  quia 
vaticinatus  sum  a  famulis  Domini,  Dei  miles,  et  non  miles  huius  seculi. 

'   =  S  5  2  ;  Ir.  c.  2.  5  et  oratione  T.  ^  atque  T.  *  pred.  omn. 

hom.  T.  =  =  S  §  3 ;  Ir.  c.  3. 


6  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

Ergo  scitote  me  famulum  semper  sanctc  Trinitatis,  id  est,  Patriset  Filii 
ct  Spiritus  Sancti.' 

vi.  Cum'  autem  audisset  rex  eum  loquentcm  talem  sententiam,  iratus 
iussit  eum  constringi  et  cathcnari  cathenis,  donec  hec  vcrba  mutarct. 
Et  iurauit  rex,  nisi  puer  promisisset  quod  °  esset  secularis,  martirium 
acciperet.  Compulsus  uero  sanctus  Dei  a  facie  regis,  cum  esset 
paratus  ad  martirium,  hylaris  magis  ac  magis  voce  magna  clamabat : 
'SeruusDei'  ego  sum ;  a  cuius  seruitute  potestas  huius  mundi  me 
separare  non  potest.'  In  sequenti  etiam  nocte,  cum  esset  in  custodia, 
omnia  vincula  eius  diuina  virtute  confracta  sunt,  et,  circumstantibus 
custodibus,  solutus  inventus  est.  Moc  cum  nunciatuni  esset  regi,  non 
iussit  eum  itenmi  ligari ;  set  motus  pietate,  et  rogante  eum  regina 
flebili  rogatu,  Hberum  illum  dimisit. 

vii.  CuJi '  ergo  omnipotens  Deus  famulum  suum  Abbanum  ad 
ecclesiam  ad  discendos  ecclesiasticos  mores  cum  licentia  parcntum 
suorum  adducere  uoluisset,  ut,  sicut  dignum  est,  esset  prius  sub 
niagisterio,  qui  a  Deo  predestinatus  est^  pater  et  magister  multorum 
futurus,  hoc  miraculum,  quod  audituri  estis,  patrauit  per  eum,  ne  plus 
contra  uoluntatem  sancti  pueri  parentes  'sui'  retinerent  eum  ;  quia 
noluit  ire  ab  eis  nisi  cum  licentia  et  benedictione.  Quodam  dic  cum 
aliis  pueris  coetaneis  suis  exeuntibus  ad  ludendum  in  agro  sanctus 
Abbanus  perrexit,  et  cum  alii  luderc  cepissent,  ipsc  seorsum  exiuit,  ut 
Deum  adoraret.  In  loco  quidem  stetit,  in  quo  circa  eum  vituli  ville 
fuerunt.  Tunc  venit  misera  luppa  cum  catulis  suis  de  silua  propinqua 
per  vitulos,  et  steterunt  ante  eum.  Videns  uero  piissimus  puer 
miseriam  eorum,  et  cos  macilcntos '  fuissc,  motus  miscricordia  precepit 
eis,  ut  comederent  vnum  de  vitulis.  Statim  luppi  irruentes,  occiderunt 
vitulum,  ef  comederunt  velociter.  Nonne  mirandum  est,  quod  luppi 
esurientcs  per  suam  escam,  et  non  tangcntcs,  ad  sanctum  vcnirent,  et 
vituli,  videntes  deuoratorcs  suos  ad  sc  uenientes,  non  fugerunt  a  ser\'o 
Dci  ?  Tamen  non  est  mirandum,  quia  Deus  subiccit  iumenta  famulo 
f.  139''  sibi  seruienti  pro  duabus  causis.  Pro  vna  quidcni,  ut  ipsc  |  plus  arderet 
in  amore  Dei ;  pro  alia,  ut  dimittcrctur  ipsc  liber  ad  seruicndum  Deo. 
Saciatis  autem  lupis,  ire  ceperunt  circumeuntes  eum,  ct  quasi  bcne- 
dicentes  ei  pro  suo  prandio.  Tunc  contigit,  ut  pueri,  dc  ludo  ccssantes, 
ct'  querentes  dominum  suum,  vcnirent  ad  locum,  in  quo  erat  sanctus 
puer";  videntesque"'  luppos  cum  crucntis  capitibus  sanguine  vituli, 
accussare et  increpare  atrocissimis"  vcrbis  sanctum  pucrumcepcrunt. ''' 
Pastorcs  ucro  vlularc,  et  sc  laccrare  prc  timorc  non  ccssant,  dicentes 
quoil  non  viueret  vituli  mater.     Porro  Cliristi  milcs,  audiens  quod  non 

'  S.  Ir.  u.  s.  =  ut  T.  s  Dei  dixit  T.  <   =  S  §  4.  ^  pred.  est  a 

Dco  T.  "  -lentcs  T.  '  et  bis  T.  *  ccssantes  et  om.  T.  "  om.  T. 

'"  viJcntcs  igitur  T.         "  atrosissis  T.         '-  fecerunt  T. 


VITA   SANCTI   ABBANI  7 

viuerct  vac[c]a  post  mortcm  vituli  sui,  ct  pastores  timoratos,  motus 
uiisericordia  orauit  ad  Dominuui,  dicens  :  '  Dominc  Dcus  meus,  qui 
lccistihanc  creaturam  dc  nichilo,  reuiuilicaistum  vitulum.ut  ueniat  viuus 
ad  matrem  suam.'  Hec  et  hiis  simiHa  sancto  pucro  diccntc,  signauit 
signaculo  crucis  Christi  cadaver,  et  ilico  ante  omnes  qui  erant  ibi,  caro 
ct  pellis  ossa  nuda  inducrunt,  eratque  eiusdem  coloris  et  magnitudinis 
quahs  prius  fuerat ;  ct  surgens  de  terra,  cucurrit  ludens  et  mugiens' 
nd  aiios  vitulos.  Pueri  vero  videntes  hoc  magnum  miraculum,  pro 
viribus  suis  ad  castcllum  cucurrerunt,  et  nunciauerunt  regi,  quod 
factum  fucrat.  Audicns  rex  tale  miraculum  per  tilium  suum  factum, 
in  corde  suo  gauisus  est,  et  ante  omnes  regni  sui  principes  -  cum  rcgina 
inatre  eius  decreuit  eum  cum  licentia  omnium,  sicut  placuit  anime  sue' 
stabiiis  pueri,  semper  Dco  seruire. 

viii.  PosTE.-v '  sanctus  Abbanus  a  parentibus  suis  ad  sanctum 
Ybarum '  episcopum,  germanum  matris  sue,  adductus  est ;  et  gloriosus 
pontifex  suscepit  illum  gaudens.  Non  ideo  tantum  ^  sanctus  epi- 
scopus  gavisus  est  in  adventu  eius,  eo  quod  filius  regis  et  sororis  sue 
esset,  set  quia  eum  plenum  Spiritu  Sancto  esse  sciuit,  et  pium  patrem 
futurum '  multorum  ser\'orum  Dei,  et  hominum  exercitum  multum 
conuersurum  per  eum  de  iugo  dyaboli  ad  Christum.  Videamus, 
karissimi,  ne  simus  in  concupiscentiis  huius  seculi,  sicut  nec  iste 
sanctus  fuit ;  quia  sanctus  Abbanus  regis  filius  erat,  et  a  patre  suo 
ligatus  est  constringi  in  hoc  seculo,  etpene  ad  martirium  estadductus; 
atque  cum  esset  electus  rex  post  patrem  suum  a  toto  regno,  puerulus 
et  indoctus,  res  caducas  ex  corde  suo  spreuit,  et  Christo  famulari, 
sicut  promisit,  compleuit '.  Igitur  oportet  nos  eum  preponere  nobis 
in'  exemplum,  ut  fugiamus  hunc  mundum,  et  cum  eo  mereamur 
habere  dominicam  promissionem,  qua  dicitur  :  '  Qui  vicerit,  faciam 
eum '"  columpnam  in  templo  Dei  mei,'  "  et  cetera.  Diuina  misericordia 
nos  adiuvante,  sermonem  modo  vertamus  narrarc  de  vita  sancti 
Abbani,  et  de  miraculis  que  Deus  fecit  per  eum. 

ix.  DuoDECiM '-  annorum  erat  sanctus  Abbanus,  quando  venit  ad 
sanctum  Ybarum  episcopum,  ut  Deo  nutriretur  sub  magisterio  eius ; 
et  cum  eo  in  sanctitate  et  lenitate,  atque  in  mira  conuersacione 
multis  annis  vixit.  Cepit  namque  statim  in  scripturisproficere",  non 
solum  in  diuinis,  set  ceterarum  artium,  sicut  mos  est  iuuenum  in 
iuuentute  aliquid  gustare  de  dulcedine  et  astucia  disciplinarum 
auctonim  ;  ita  ut  mirarentur  ceteri  de  profunditate  scientie,  sapientie, 
atque  eloquiorum  eius  ;   set'*  tunc  ipsi  non  debelrent  de  sapientia  f.  139' 

'  Here  there  is  a  change  of  ink,  and  probably  of  hand  in  T.  -  princ. 

regni  sui  T.          »  sue  oni.  T.          *   =  S  §  5  ;  §§  viii-x  =  Ir.  c.  5.  ^  15.  1 

«  tam  T.          '  from  T  ;  om.  M.         »  sicut  compl.  prom.  T  (inepte).  '  om.  T. 

'»  ei  T.         "  Apoc.  iii.  13.          "*   =  S  §  5.          ^  proficecere  T.  '*  de  prof. 
sapientie  eius  et  eloquio  ;  set  T. 


8  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

eius  mirari,  quia  in  domo  patris  sui  puerrulus  et  indoctus,  disputans 
cum  omnibus,  de  divinis  scripturis  testimonia  proferebat,  docente 
se  Spiritu  Sancto.  Et  ab  eodem  Spiritu  semper  inspirabatur  diuinitus. 
Innumerabiles  enim'  sancti  monachi,  clerici,  et  sancte  moniales' 
in  diuersis  locis  per  totam  Hiberniam  tempore  illo  sub  magisterio 
sancti  Ybari  erant.  Set  beatus  episcopus  Ybarus  in  famosissimo  et' 
optimo  suo  monasterio,  quod  vocatur  Beag  Erinn*,  plus  habitabat 
quam  in  aliis  locis,  quia  multum  locum  illum  °  diligebat.  Illud  uero 
monasterium  in  australi  parte  Hua  Cennselaidh "  est  possitum  in 
insula  mari  vallata';  et  insula  et  monasterium  vno  nomine  dicuntur, 
id  est  Beag  Erind ',  quod  latine  interpretatur "  parua  Hibernia '".  In  illo 
autem  monasterio  reliquie  beatissimi  antistitis  Ybari  iacent,  et 
honorifice  coluntur,  atque  ipse  locus  honoratur  ab  Hyberniensibus 
pro  nomine  sancti  Ybari  ualde ; "  quia  ipse  vnus  erat  egregius 
dispensator  diuini  dogmatis  de  prioribus  predicatoribus,  quos  elegit 
Deus,  ut  Hibernienses  de  gentilitate  ad  fidem  Christi'^  conuerterent. 
Ibique  clara  et  maxima  miracula  per  eum  non  cessant  a  Deo  ostendi. 
Ipse  uero  de  gente  Ultorijm  ortus  est,  que  est  quinta  pars  Hibernie  ; 
set  Deus  illum  Laginensibus  largitus  est,  ut  in  regionis  eorum  humo 
sanctissimum  corpus  eius  iaceret;  et  ut  hic,  et  in  futuro,  sufTragio 
ipsius  defenderentur. 

X.  RoGAMUs"  et  adiuramus  vos,  fratre  karissimi,  in  Christo  lesu, 
ut  omnia,  que  audistis,  et  audituri  estis  patrante  Deo  per  famulum 
suum  Abbanum,  omni  credulitate  credatis.  et  nichil  in  eis  dubitetis, 
scientes  scripturam  dicentem  :  '  Omnia  possibilia  sunt  credenti  ".'  Et 
sicut  dicit  lacobus  apostolus :  '  Postulet  in  fide,  nichil  hesitans".' 
Et  in  Apochalipsi  dicitur :  '  Potestatem  habent  super  aquas  '^'  Et 
beatus  Petrus  apostolus  dicit :  '  Quis  est  qui  noceat  uobis,  si  boni 
[acmulatores] "  fueritis  ".'  '  Humiliamini  sub  potenti  manu  Dei,  ut  uos 
exaltet ".'  lohannes  apostolus  dicit :  '  Omnis,  qui  habct  spem  in 
Domino  lesu,  sanctificat  se,  sicut  et  ille  sanctus  est'".'  Et  Dominus  in 
euangelio  in  aure  apostolorum  credentibus  in  se:  'Amen,  amen, 
dico  uobis,  qui  crcdit  in  me,  opera  que  ego  facio,  et"  ipse  faciet  ; 
et  maiora  horum  facict.  Et  quodcunque  petieritis  Patrem  in  nomine 
meo,  hoc  faciam -'.'  De  hoc  autem  testimonio  nemo  potest  dubitare. 
Hinc  lohannes  apostolus  dicit :  '  Si  testimonium  hominum  accipimus, 
testimonium  Dei  maius'''  est  "*.'     Ideo  ergo,  dilectissimi  clientes,  vobis 

'  autem  T.  -  sanctimon.  T.  ^  et  in  T.  '  Becherinn  T.  ''  ill.  loc.  T. 
'  Chensealay  T.  '  vall.  mari  T.  *  Bec  h  Erind  T.  '  int.  lat.  T. 

'"  insula  uero  .  .  .  sita  est  .  .  .  iuxta  villam  que  dicitur  Loch  Garmun,  aiid.  S. 
"  Nota  quod  reliquie  sancti  Yba[ri]  sunt  in  insulade  Bec  h[Ennd]  queest  prope 
Vasfordia[m]  T  marg.  "  Chr.  fid.  T.  "  Not  in  S.  "  Mk.  ix.  aa. 

'^  James  i.  6.  '«  Apoc.  xi.  6.  "  om.  M  T.  "  i  Pet.  iii.  13.  "  ib.  v.  6. 
'"  I  John  iii.  2.  ■'  et  om.  M.  "  John  xiv.  I3,  13.  -'  magis  M. 

"  I  John  V.  9. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  9 

omnia  sunt  credenda,  que  Christus  per  se  credentem,  et  custodientem 
omnia  eius  mandata  a  natiuitatc  sua  usque  ad  obitum  suum  [fecit] '. 
Ad  hcc  igitur  narranda,  et  erga  ea  vos  prcmonuimus,  ne  sit  dubium 
vobis  in  eis,  Deo  suffragante,  nos  modo  stilum-  conuertimus. 

De  ambulacione  eius  super  mare 
xi.  QuoDAM "  tcmpore  sanctus  Ybarus  cpiscopus,  cum  esset  in 
supradicto  loco,  volens  se  presentare  sedi  apostolice,  decreuit  Romam 
adire,  ardens  peregrinacionis  dcsiderio  pro  Christi  amore.  Et  iussit 
sibi  nauim  cicius  cum  omnibus  necessariis  suis  preparari.  Audiens 
autem  beatus  Abbanus  quod  sanctus  Ybarus  se  peregrinum  esse 
uolebat,  venit,  et  inclinauit  se  ante  pedes  eius,  rogans  eum  cum 
suspiriis,  |  ut  sibi  hcentiam  eundi  sccum  in  peregrinacione  donaret,  f.  739'' 
ardens  sanctus  adolescens  simili  ardore  amoris  peregrinandi.  Sanctus 
autem  Ybarus,  et  qui  sub  eo  erant,  vno  animo  optauerunt  beatum 
Abbanum  in  loco  Ybari  episcopi*  esse,  si  ipse  non  rediret ;  videntes 
eum  plcnum  Spiritu  Sancto,  et  signa  magna  a  Deo  per  eum  facta  ^ 
Decreucruntque  eum  omnes  cum  episcopo,  ut  in  illo  monasterio 
maneret,  donec  episcopus  reueniret  de  peregrinacione.  Rogaue- 
runtque  eum  omnes  cum  episcopo,  ut  hoc  uotum  et  consilium  admitteret, 
et  quodcunque  ei  iusserat  episcopus,  libencius  faceret.  Sanctus 
uero  Abbanus  nullo  modo  precibus  eorum  adhesit,  set  indubitanter 
in  peregrinacione  se  profecturum  promisit.  Tunc  sanctus  Ybarus 
iratus  cum  indignatione  a  se  iussit  eum  abire,  et  promisit  coram 
populo,  quod  non  dimisisset  eum  secum  in  naui ;  set  tamen,  cogno- 
scens  bonitatem  et  felicitatem  eius,  non  maledixit  ei,  nichilque  asperum 
sibi  euenire  uoluit,  quia  sciuit  eum  inspiratum  esse  a  Spiritu  Sancto. 

xii.  PosTEA  sanctus  pontifex  cum  omni  populo  perrexit  ad  locum, 
in  quo  nauis  erat  parata ;  et  valedicens  populo,  cum  preordinatis  di- 
scipulis  in  nauim  intrare  cepit.  Adhuc  vero  erat  sanctus  Abbanus  in 
comitatu,  et  iterum  rogavit  pontificem  pro  peticione  eadem,  atque 
iterum  sanctus  etiam  antistes  respuit  eum  cum  iuramento  secum 
venire.  Hoc  audiens  seruus  Dei,  tristis  redire  et  flere  cepit.  Sanctus 
vero  episcopus,  ut  vidit  eum  reuertentem,  flentem  et  lacrimantem, 
valde  amans  eum,  reuocauit  eum  ad  se,  et  dixit  ei :  '  Fili  mi, 
pone  capud  tuum  in  sinum  meum.'  Ut  ille  uero  posuit,  statim 
dormiuit.  Ipso  autem  dormiente,  episcopus  caput  eius  super 
terram  posuit  ^,  iussitque  populum  reuerti  in  domum  suam  ;  et  ipse 
cum  comitibus  suis  nauim  intrauit.  Famulus  autem  Domini  in  illo 
loco   dormiens,  solus  dimissus    est,   et   omnes   recesserunt   ab  eo. 

'  om.  M  T.  -  stilam  M  T.  =  Both  M  and  T  have  the  heading  to  this 

section  ;  while  M  in  addition  gives  the  word  '  quodam '  in  exceptionally  largc 
letters,  showing  that  a  new  beginning  is  here  made  ;  §§  xi,  xii  =  S  §  6;  Ir.  c.  6. 
*  bisT.         '  perfecta  T.         ^  repoposuit  in  ter.  T  m.  pr. 


lo  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

Interea  sanctus  Ybarus  iussit  nauis  gubernatoribus  operam  dare  ad 
nauim  gubernandam ;  et  cum  gubernatoresanchoram  in  nauimtulissent, 
eleuatoque  sursum  uelo,  et  inspirante  vento  ab  aquiione  ceperunt 
nauigare.  Tunc  nauis  velociter  currere  cepit,  tendens  ad  mare 
magnum.  Alii  quidem  fratres,  volentes  scire  quid  seruus  Dei  faceret 
post  dormicionem  suam,  longe  ab  eo  steterunt,  et  respiciebant  eum. 
Completa  autem  hora,  ipse  surrexit  de  sompno,  statimque  mare 
aspiciens,  vidit  nauem  vclantem  et  natantem  longissime  a  terra  in 
mari,  ita  ut  vix  potuit  discernere  quod  nauis  esset,  uel  nubes.  Tunc 
diuina  dispensacio  cor  eius  trino  amore  impleuit;  id  est  amore 
peregrinacionis,  amore  pii  magistri  sui,  atque  maiori  amore  silicet 
sancte  Trinitatis.  Et  tunc  intentissime  ex  profunditate  cordis  sui 
ad  Deum  orauit,  flectens  genua,  et  dicens :  Domine  Deus  omni- 
potens,  qui  in  Trinitate  permanes  et  vnitate  concordie,  subueniat 
mihi  volcnti  tibi  famulari  misericordia  tua,  qui  eduxisti  populum  tuum 
per  mare  rubrum  et  lordanem  siccis  pedibus,  cui  seruiunt  omnes 
creature  tue,  fac  me,  quidquid  de  me  vis,  facere ;  set  in  nomine  tuo 
atque  dilectissimi  Filii  tui,  Domini  mei  lesu  Christi,  Sanctique  Spiritus 
intrabo  nunc  super  mare,  confidens  in  dono  pietatis  tue.'  Hec  et  hiis 
f.  140°  similia  dicens,  cucurrit'  |  in  marc,  et  dixit".  '  In  manus  tuas,  Domine, 
commendo  spiritum  meum  \'  Exiuit  velocissimo  cursu  rectoque 
itinere  post  nauem,  non  respiciens  post  tergum,  nec  ad  dexteram, 
neque  ad  sinistram,  set  ante  se ;  et  angeli  Dei  concurrere  cum  co 
per  mare  videbantur.  Predicti  illi  fratres  videntes  hoc,  precabantur 
Deum  assidue  pro  eo,  glorificantes  Dominum,  et  sibi  gratias  agentes, 
atque  renunciantes  coram  populo ;  et  omnes  qui  hoc  audierunt, 
Deo  gloriam  dederunt.  Nauis  itaque  in  medio  maris  stctit  in  loco, 
in  quo  fuit  quando  sanctus  Dci  super  mare  intrauit ;  et  non  inde 
exiuit,  donec  ipse  ad  eam  peruenit.  Gubernatores  siquidem 
et  discipuli  episcopi,  videntes  quod  minime  nataret  nauis,  hoc 
indicauerunt  episcopo.  Tunc  repletus  cpiscopus  diuino  Spiritu,  ait 
eis  :  '  Signate  vos,  fratres,  signaculo  crucis  Christi,  quia  modo  videbitis 
maximum  miraculum  factum  a  Deo.  Ecce  cnim  famulus  Domini, 
qucm  non  dimissimus  nobiscum  in  nauim,  currens  supcr  vndas, 
commitantesque  eum  angeli  Dei,  cito  adueniet.'  Adhuc  episcopo 
loquente,  viderunt  eum  ad  se  velocissime  venientem ;  alii  dicebant 
quod  curreret,  alii  quod  uolaret,  pre  uelocitate  cursus,  quia  angelica 
conductionc  confortabatur.  Cum  autem  peruenit  ad  nauim,  valde 
gaudcntes,  et  pre  gaudio  flentes,  acceperunt  eum  ad  se  in  nauim. 
Ilico  soluta  est  nauis;  et  postca  cum  omni  screnitatc  nauigauerunt 
usque  ad  Britaniam. 
xiii.    PosT*  hec  die  quodam  perambulantes   famuli  Dei,  sanctus 

1  curritT.  2  dicit  T.  ^  p,,  xxx.  6.  <=S§7;Ir.  c.7.     In  Ir. 

tlie  incidents  of  §§  xiii-xvii  takcplace  at  Padua  in  Italy. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  ii 

Ybarus  et  sanctus  Abbanus,  cum  commitibus  suis  in  ausfrali  partc 
Britanie,  peruenerunt  ad  quandam '  ciuitatem  gentilcm,  ct  deditam 
ydolis.  Intrantibus  vero  iliis  forum  ciuitatis,  mirabantur  ciues  de 
habitu  et  loquela  eorum.  Alii  putabant  cos  fantasmata  csse,  alii  vero 
homines  de  terra  longinqua.  Statim  dc  ipsis  ante  regem  ciuitatis 
verbum  fuit,  et  rex  iussit  eos  ad  se  deduci.  Et  cum  venissent,  rex 
interrogauit  eos  vnde  essent,  et  quo  ircnt,  et  que  fuit  causa  iteneris 
eorum.  Tunc  promissione  dominica  completa,  qua  dicitur :  '  Linguis 
loquentur  nouis  -,'  dixit  ei  sanctus  Ybarus  episcopus :  '  Si  genus 
nostruni  queris,  Hybernienses  sumus  ;  si  ad  quem  locum  pergimus, 
Romam  ;  si  causam,  vt  ibi  Deum  omnipotcntcm  orcmus  pcr  merita 
apostolorum,  martyrum,  confessorum,  et  virginum,  qui  in  illo  loco 
post  diabolum  superatum  ad  regnum  celeste  migrauerunt.'  Set 
quando  rex  audiuit  episcopum  dicentem  Deum  omnipotentem,  ait : 
'  Quis  est  Deus  omnipotens  ? '  Tunc  episcopus,  plenus  Dei  gratia,  de 
Patre,  et  FiKo,  et  Spiritu  Sancto  diligentissime  predicauit.  Rex 
iterum  ait :  '  Quid  dicis  de  diis  nostris  ? '  Episcopus  respondit,  dicens : 
'  Non  est  nisi  vnus  Deus  ;  set  cogit  vos  dyabolus  adorare  simulacra, 
que  manibus  vestris  construitis.  Deus  autem  noster,  qui  fecit  celum 
et  terram,  mare,  et  omnia  que  in  eis  sunt,  super  vniuersas  creaturas, 
quas  fecit,  tonat ;  et  non  solum  qui  hec  viderunt,  set  qui  in  eum 
credunt,  signa  magna  in  nomine  eius  faciunt.'  Tunc  ait  rex  :  '  Facite 
igitur  signa  in  conspectu  meo  modo,  quia  vos  creditis  in  eum  ;  et  nisi 
feceritis,  decollabimini  iudicio  meo,  ct  canes  et  uolucres  comedent 
corpora  vcstra.'  Ait  episcopus  :  '  Si  ergo  fecerimus  signum  in  nomine 
Dei  nostri,  tu  credes'  in  eum  ? '  |  Promittente  rege  credere,  iussit  ei  ^.'140* 
episcopus,  ut  peteret  signum.  Et  rex  dixit:  'Vnus  ex  vobis  sine 
igne  set  sua  hanela  candelam  accendat,  ut  ante  me  ardeat.'  'In  illa 
uero  hora  sanctus  Abbanus  lassus  a  via  dormiebat'*.  Accipien'te'  ergo 
sancto  episcopo  candelam,  et  non  valente  eam  accendere,  appropin- 
quanti  sibi  de  suis  dedit,  et  ipse  non  valens,  simili  niodo  alter  ab  altero 
usque  ad  extremum  accipiebat,  et  candelam  non  accenderunt.  Videntes 
autem  lictores  quod  non  potuissent  accendere,  evaginare  gladios 
ceperunt,  iubente  rege,  volentes  eos  percutere.  Tunc  dixit  eis 
episcopus :  '  Expectate  paulisper,  quia  non  nobis  hoc  donum  Deus 
donauit,  set  illi  dormienti,  quoniam,  nobis  nauigantibus,  ipse  suis 
pedibus  super  mare  ambulauit,  et  nostra  nauis  eum  in  medio  maris 
expectauit.'  Steterunt  'autem'  illi,  audientes  hoc  uerbum.  Esperge- 
factus  ergo  sanctus  Abbanus  de  sompno,  signans  se  signaculo  sancte 
crucis,  ante  omnes  sua  hanela  candelam  accendit.  Flamma  vero  eius 
lucidissima  erat ;  mirum  dictu  nullo  modo  passa  est  extingui,  quousque 

'  Here  ends  T  mutilated,  at  the  end  of  a  fold.  -  Mk.  xvi.  17.  '  credis 

m.  pr.  ■*  in  illa  .  .  .  dormiebat,  on  margin. 


.  12  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

consumpta  erat  tota.    Pagani  iam  videntes  talia  miracula,  tremefacti 
sunt  in  semet  ipsis ;  Christiani  vero  gratias  Deo  dederunt. 

xiv.  In  diebus  '  illis  vxor  regis  eiusdem  graui  dolore  torquebatur, 
et  in  illo  die,  quo  sancti  viri  in  ciuitatem  que  dicitur  Abbaindun  vel 
Dun  Abbain  venerunt,  mortua  est :  set  sedente  rege  pro  tribunali  et 
iudicante,  nesciens  adliuc  suam  uxorem  mortuam  fuisse,  venit  ad  euni 
tristis  nuncius,  et  indicauit  ei.  Statimque  audiens  rex,  perrexit  ad 
corpus  eius  uelociter,et  fleuit  amare  ;  et  postea,  diuinaspirante  gratia 
in  se,  reuersus  est  ad  sanctos  Dei  cum  gemitibus  et  flebili  uoce, 
rogauitque  eos,  ut  in  nomine  Domini  Dei  sui  uxorem  suam  a  morte 
suscitarent,  promittens  se  indubitanter  credere  in  Deum,  et  cum  illa 
baptizari.  Tunc  ait  sanctus  Ybarus  ei :  '  Illum,  qui  candelam  ante  te 
hodie  sua  anhela  accendit,  duc  tecum,  ut  oret  pro  ea.  Sibi  enim 
tantam  gratiam,  ut  meretur,  dedit  Deus  mortuos  suscitare.'  Interea 
rex  adduxit  beatum  Abbanum  ad  tectum  triste,  obuiantes  sibi  turbe 
vrbane  funebria  carmina  canentes.  Intrans  Dei  sanctus  domum,  in 
qua  erat  corpus  exanime,  salutauit  ex  euangelico  imperio  illam,  et 
orauit  ex  intimo  rogatu  ad  Dominum,  ut  ostenderet  ibi  potenciam 
suam  ad  reginam  suscitandam,  et  ut  tali  testimonio  gentiles  ad  fidem 
conuerterentur.  Ipso  ita  orante,  anima  eius  in  suum  corpus  intrauit, 
et  statim  in  nomine  Patris,  et  Filii,  et  Spiritus  sancti,  vir  sanctus 
iussit  ei,  ut  surgeret  ;  et  sine  moraad  uocem  eius  illasurrexit.  Atque 
sanctus  eam  viuam  ante  omnes  viro  suo  reassignauit.  Illa  uero 
testificata  est,  que  a  sanctis  sunt  predicta,  vera  esse ;  et  clara  testi- 
monia  de  gloria  Trinitatis  perhibuit.  In  hora  uero  illa  rex  et  regina 
baptizati  sunt ;  et,  ipsis  iubentibus,omnes  qui  ibidem  erant,  similiter, 
totaque  ciuitas  de  errore  ad  vitam  veritatis  conuersi  sunt.  Ecclesia 
uero  Dei  ibi  edificata,  et  ecclesiasticis  viris  a  sancto  pontifice  ordinatis, 
famuli  Domini  omnia  ydola  et  simulacra  ipsius  loci  habentes  in  sua 
potestate  fregerunt,  et  igni  tradiderunt. 

f.  140'  I  XV.  Eodem''  tempore  ferus  erat  ualde  venenosus  et  incognitus  in 
illis  regionibus  in  territorio  ciuitatis  ipsius  ;  et  pene  obsedit  ciuitatem, 
et  magnam  partem  regionis  deuastauit.  Similis  quidem  forma  et 
fortitudine  leoni  erat,  set  rabies  eius  intoierabilis  apparuit,  quia 
p.ovincialis  exercitus  et  rex  cum  militibus  suis  sepe  contra  eum 
certauerunt,  et  nichil  ei  nocere  potuerunt,  set  ab  ipso  solo  supcrati  sunt; 
et  in  vniuersis  temptacionibus  trecentos  homines  occidit.  Homines 
uero  non  valentes  sibi  resistere,  recedebant  ab  eo ;  et  quocunque 
ucllet  ire,  secure  ambulabat,  et  in  propinquo  eiusdem  ciuitatis  magis 
habitabat.  De  hoc  illi,  qui  tunc  effecti  sunt  Christiani,  qucrimoniam 
fecerunt   ad    sanctum    Abbanum,   ut   talem    dyabolicam    bestiam   in 

»  =  S  5  8 ;  Ir.  c.  8.  2  ^  S  §  9  ;  Ir.  c.  9. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  13 

nomine  'Christi'  de  terra  expelleret.  Famulus  Dei  audiens  hanc 
miseriam,  cum  hominibus  scientibus  vbi  esset  bestia,  perrexit ;  et 
indicantes  ei  locum,  in  quo  erat,  reuersi  sunt  ab  eo  timentes,  et 
velocius  currentes.  Continuo  enim  leonalis  bestia  furens  de  sua 
spelunca  in  agro  odorans  hominem  ibi  accedere,  venit ;  et  miles 
Christi  inermis  contra  eam  audacter  '  accessit.  Erunipens  uerobestia 
in  viribus  suis  et  in  omni  impetu  obuiauit  seruo  Dei ;  et  ipse  signo 
crucis  Christi  e  contra  signauit,  dicens :  '  O  diabolica  radix,  tibi  dico 
in  nomine  Domini  mei  lesu  Christi,  depone  venenum  tuum,  et  morere.' 
Ad  hanc  vocem  ferus  in  terram  cecidit,  et  expirauit,  atque  apparuit 
mortuus.  Homines  autem  illi  ualde  gauisi  sunt,  audientes  'et  videntes' 
eum  esse  mortuum ;  et  inde  gratias  Deo  egerunt,  atque  firmiores  in 
fide  erant,  glorificantes  sanctum  Dei. 

xvi.  Iterum  -  ipsi  homines  ad  sanctum  Abbanum  de  bestiishabi- 
tantibus  in  stagno  quod[am]  ante  ciuitatem  eandem,  que  erant  ualde 
venenose  (quia  in  tempore  eorum,  qui  tunc  vixerunt,  centum 
homines  occiderunt ;  numerus  vero  peccorum  non  est  presto), 
aliam  querimoniam  fecerunt,  dicentes :  '  Adhuc  magnifica  nomen 
Christi  ante  nos  cui  per  te  credimus,  liberando  nos  ab  istis 
bestiis,  que  manent  in  stagno  illo,  et  cum  ad  horam  currunt 
in  terram,  et  homines  et  peccora  occidunt.'  Volens  uero  Dei 
famulus  nomen  Christi  magnis  rebus  illis  ostendere,  abiit '  cum  ipsis 
ad  stagnum,  et  solus  ante  omnes  in  aquam  intrauit,  et  statim  aspere 
bestie  cum  horridis  vvltibus  festinantes  venerunt  ad  eum  ;  et  videntes 
vvltum  eius  angelicum,  omnes  impetum  deposuerunt,  et  mites  steterunt 
ad  pedes  sancti.  Ipse  siquidem  iussit  eas  secum  ire  in  profundo  laci, 
et  ibi  constituit  locum  eis,  ligans  eas,  ut  in  eo  habitarent  usque  ad 
finem  mundi.  Et  de  piscibus  laci  omni  die  annonam  eis  constituit ; 
et  ab  illa  hora  usque  in  hodiernum  diem  inde  non  apparuerunt,  et 
nemini  nocuerunt.  Set  ex  illo  loco,  in  quo  sunt  ligate  bestie,  motus 
tocius  stagni  adhuc  in  septimo  anno  in  signum  virtutis  videtur. 
Redeunte  uero  sancto  Dei  de  stagno,  populus  videns  eum  incolumem 
de  immenso  periculo  venisse,  Deo  gratias  egit,  glorificans  sanctum 
virum;  et  gaudens  reuersus  est  in  ciuitatem  cum  ipso.  |  Interea  f.  140'' 
sanctus  Ybarus  et  sanctus  Abbanus  dimittentes  ibi  fundatores  ecclesie 
et  cultores  uere  fidei,  acceptaque  a  populo  licentia  et  benedictione, 
Romam  perrexerunt,  et  vota  sua  ibi  soluentes,  reuersi  sunt  ad 
Hiberniam. 

xvii.  Tribus*  vicibus  sanctus  Abbanus  in  peregrinacione  pro  Christi 
nomine  Romam  perrexit.  Quodam  igitur  die  contigit  sibi  esse  in 
littore  maris  orans,  et  benedicens   Deum ;   vidit  ingentem  vndam 

'  aucdacter  m.  pr.  ^   >=  S  §  lo ;  Ir.  c.  lo.  *  MS.  abbiit.  *   =  S 

§5  II,  13  ;  Ir.  c.  12. 


14  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

de  niedio  maris  ad  se  iam  dirigentem,  et  in  altum  in  modum  collis 
surgentem,  et  minantem  propinquam  terram  transire.  Hoc  sanctus 
videns  periculum,  recordatus  verbi  Domini  dicentis  :  '  Cum  audieritis 
prelia,  nolite  terreri '.'  Timetur  quidem  uere  plus  quod  videtur,  quam 
quod  auditur,  et  terribile  prelium  fragili  humanc  nature  fuit,  videre 
abyssum  tumentem,  et  non  fugere  eam  ;  et  forte  fuit  sibi  stare  contra 
vndosum  certamen.  Vir  beatus,  eleuatis  manibus  in  celum,  baculum 
suum  sub  plantis  posuit;  et  nichil  curans  de  suo  periculo,  rogauit 
Christum,  ne  mare  terram  habitabilem  humanis  vsibus  dissiparet. 
Quid  plura  ?  Vnda  preter  Htus  non  attigit,  set  Dei  famulum  stantem 
super  baculum  secum  traxit  in  pelago.  Cum  esset  in  medio  mari, 
horrida  turba  demonum  venit  ad  eum,  clamavitque  vocibus  horridis, 
dicens :  '  Miser  homo,  hora  hac  in  hiis  fluctibus  mergeris,  et  corpus 
tuum  comedent  belue ;  et  iiiiuriam,  quam  fecisti  nobis,  conuertendo 
gentilem  populum  ad  Christum,  et  frangendo  simulacra  in  quibus 
habitabamus,  occidendo  et  ligando  bestias,  que  ex  nostris  insidiis 
occiderunt  homines,  vindicabimus  in  te.'  Sanctus  autem  intente 
psalmos  et  diuinos  ympnos  canens,  nichil  eis  adhuc  respondens,  et 
circumuallabant  eum  ex  omni  parte,  minantes  ei  vitam  auferre,  et 
dicentes  quod  ipsi  eduxerunt  eum  ad  hoc  periculum.  Tunc  sanctus 
ait  eis:  'Magnus  'e'st  Dominus  Deus  noster,  et  magna  uirtus  eius  -; 
vos  autem  nichil  virtutis  habetis,  set  ex  insidiis  seducitis  mundum.' 
Interea  suauissimum  carmen  auditum  est  ab  angelis  Dei,  de  celo 
venientibus  et  dicentibus :  '  Mirabilis  Dcus  in  sanctis  suis'.  Vos 
igitur,  infernales  habitatores,  a  famulo  Dci  rccedite,  et  ne  inquietetis 
eum  ;  quia  vobis  nusquam  placuit.'  Expellentibus  uero  angelis  Dei, 
recesserunt  demones.  Tunc  angelus  Domini  accessit  ad  sanctum 
Abbanum  dicens :  '  Multis  usque  ad  finem  mundi  nauigium  tuum 
hodie,  famule  Christi,  proderit.'  Sanctusait:  'Quomodo?'  Angelus 
respondit :  '  In  ueritate  Dei  tibi  dico',  quicunque  inuocauerit  nomcn 
tuuni  intrans  in  nauem,  dicens  ter  in  nomine  Trinitatis: 

Curach  Abbain  ar  a  lind 
Muinnter  fhinn  Abbain  ind '. 

de  illa  nauigacione  non  mergetur,  set  incolumis  ad  terram  perueniet.' 
Ita  interpretatur  latine  quod  angelus  dixit  scotice  : '  Nauis  Abbani  supcr 
aquas,  familia  pulcra  Abbani  in  ea.'  Tunc  sanctus  Deo  gratias  egit 
de  ista  promissione  magis,  quam  ipsum  a  pelago  liberari.  Et  dixit 
angelus  ad  eum  :  '  Per  trecentos  et  dccem "  annos  a  natiuitate  tua  usque 
ad  obitum  tuum  viues,  Deo  militans  tanto  temporc  sinc  crimine ; 
{.  141 "  ct  multa  I  monasteria    in    honore   Domini  edifficabis,  et    patronus 

'  Luke  xxi.  9.  ^  Ps.  cxlvi.  5.  '  Ps.  Ixvii.  36.  *  tuc  Dia  nert  for 

muir  duit,  iiach  tuc  d'aoiii  necli  riam  Ir.,  i.  e.  '  God  lias  given  thee  powcr  ovcr 
the  sca,  such  as  He  ncver  gave  to  any  one  beforc.'  '  Thc  Latin  translation 

givcn  of  this  vcrse  is  quite  correct.  "  et  xvii.  S. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  15 

multorum  eris  in  die  iudicii.  Ilac  vice  venics  Romam,  et  reuerteris 
ad  Hyberniam  ;  et  iterum  tercia  vice  venies  Romam,  et  tunc  ordinabit 
tc  Gregorius,  pater  apostolice  sedis,  presbitcrum  •  et  abbatem  ;  et 
postea  reuerteris  ad  Hyberniam,  et  in  multis  locis  sub  tua  cura 
lamuli  Christi  erunt.'  Angelo  hec  prophetante,  cicctus  est  sanctus 
de  vnda  in  terram ;  et  peruenicns  Romam,  reuersus  est  ad  Hy- 
berniam. 

xviii.  QuoDAM '  quoque  die  sanctus  Ybarus  episcopus,  et  sanctus 
senior  Patricius,  et  sanctus  Abbanus  in  vna  naui  in  stagno  Garman 
nauigantes,  apparuit  cis  monstrum  bestiale  ct  incognitum  de  mari, 
.habens  centum  capita  diuersis  formis,  ducentos  oculos,  et  totidem 
aurcs  ;  et  extendit  se  usque  ad  nubes,  et  aquam  de  labio  emincntioris 
capitis,  quod  supcrabat  cctera,  alte  in  nubibus  ciiciebat ;  et  fecit 
ingentcs  fluctus.per  totum  stagnum,  ita  ut  pcne  mergerctur  nauis. 
Quamuis  autem  dicitur  stagnum,  verius  est  fretum  maris  maximum  ; 
et  invndacio  marina  eo  longius  invndat  cotidie  in  flumen  Slane,  quia  in 
stagno  Garman  fluit  Slane ;  et  in  eodem  loco  in  pelago  uadunt,  et 
nauigatores  videntes  tale  monstrum,  timuerunt  ualde.  Tunc  sanctus 
Ybarus  et  sanctus  Patricius  surrexerunt,  et  orauerunt  contra 
dyabolicam  bestiam.  Sanctus  autem  Abbanus  sedens  tacuit  proptcr 
humilitatem  ;  ct  tunc  diuina  vox  dc  celo  ait  illis :  '  Non  est  vestrum 
modo  orare,  set  Abbani ;  quia  per  orationem  cius  forma  dyabolica 
auferetur  a  vobis,  qua  se  dyabolus  finxit,  ct  vcnit  terrere  mentes 
vestras,  ct  naucm  vcstram  mergere,  ct  socios  vestros  secum  ad  infima 
ducere.  Idcoquc  oportet  Abbanum  pro  vobis  modo  orarc,  quia 
virtus  eius  scmper  supcr  aquas  prodcrit ' :  et  quod  Deus  promissit  sibi 
stanti  super  vndam  maris,  hoc  complebitur  in  euum.'  Tunc  velociter 
sanctus  Abbanus  orauit  contra  monstrum,  signans  signaculo  crucis 
Christi ;  et  ilico  illud  quasi  mortuum  apparens,  cecidit  pars  in  aqua, 
et  pars  in  terra ;  et  statim  sedati  sunt  fluctus,  ct  stagnum  uel  fretum 
serenum  totum  apparuit.  Siuc  stagnum  siuc  fretum  dicetur,  salsam 
aquam  continet.  Sct  nauis  sanctorum,  ipsis  Deo  gratulantibus,  ad 
optatum  portum  pcruenit.  Mirum  dictu,  nil  inuentum  cst  de  corpore 
monstri  diabolici,  in  aqua,  vel  in  terra,  postquam  a  sanctis  capita  eius 
numerata  sunt,  et  intenderunt  turpitudinem  et  terribilitatcm  ipsius  ;  et 
in  hoc  apparet  quod  dyabolus  fuit. 

xix.  QuoDAM*  tempore  sanctus  Abbanus  vidit  tres  naues  paratas 
transniaritare,  et,  naulo  dato,  in  vna  earum  intrauit ;  ct  tres  naues 
simul  navigabant,  atque  in  hiis  tribus  nauibus  centum  quinquaginta 
clerici  erant,  volentes  omnes  peregrinare.  Set  vnusquisquc  eorum 
per  se  erat,  et  non  habuerunt  magistrum ;    et  ecce  venit  magna 

'  sacerdotem  S.  '  =  S  5  13  ;  Ir-  c.  ii.  ^  huic  sancto  dedit  Deus 

uirtutem  specialem  in  mari  S;  cf.  p.  14  aote  4.        *  =  S  §  14;  Ir.  c.  13. 


i6  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

tempestas  ad  eos,  et  mare  mouebatur  a  profundo  ad  summum,  et 
orauerunt  omnes  ad  Deum,  et  tempestatem  Deus  misertus  abstulit  ab 
eis.  Et  cum  mare  serenum  esset,  retente  sunt  naues  in  medio  mari, 
et  non  natabant ;  et  omnes  videntes  naues  immobiles,  turbati  mente 
f-  14' '  fleuerunt,  non  dubitantes  mortem  ibi  pati  ;  |  et  nescierunt  pro  qua 
causa  talia  paciebantur.  Tunc  uox  Deiait  illis:  '  Idcircoangustia  hec 
tenuit  vos,  quia  non  curastis  vnum  ducem  liabere,  vel  esse  sub 
magisterio  vnius  ;  set  ego  dabo  vobis  pium  et  mansuetum  ducem,  ut 
Moysen,  qui  vos  de  hoc  mundo  ad  regnum  celeste  secum  perducet ; 
inter  vos  ipse  est,  et  uocatur  Abbanus.'  Ad  hanc  vocem  illi  non 
cognoscentes  eum,  et  ipse  non  indicans  se  illis,  miserunt  sortem  in 
nomine  sancte  Trinitatis,  ut  scirent  in  qua  naui  ipse  fuit,  et  sors 
cecidit  super  nauim  in  qua  erat  sanctus  Abbanus  ;  et  viderunt  angelum 
stantem  super  eum,  et  indicantem  ipsum  esse  Abbanum.  Statimque 
centum  quinquaginta  clerici  vnanimiter  acceperunt  eum  suum  magi- 
strum  ;  et  promiserunt  Deo  monachi  esse  semper  sub  eo.  Tunc  solute 
sunt  naues,  et  prospere  ad  terram  nauigaverunt.  Sanctus  uero 
Abbanus  cum  discipulis  suis  Romam  perrexit. 

XX.  Intrantibus'  siquidem  illis  Romam,  occurrit  eis  vir  bonus,  qui 
consuebat  Christi  peregrinos  in  domum  suam  recipere,  et  adduxit  eos 
secum  ad  cellam  hospitum  ;  habebatque  procuratorem  peregrinorum, 
qui  fuit  pius  et  sanctus  ;  et  ipse  procurator  recepit  eos  gaudens,  set 
per  omnes  ad  sanctum  Abbanum  perrexit,  et  salutans  et  adorans  eum 
humiliter,  honorificauit  ipsum,  ut  dignum  erat.  Et  omnes  mirantes, 
interrogabant  eum,  dicentes  :  'Cur  honoras  eum  pre  omnibus  nobis  .' 
Non  est  multum  nobis  senior ;  et  nec  vestes  eminenciores  habet.' 
Ille  respondit :  '  Testis  mihi  Deus  est,  quod  angelus  Domini  mihi  eum 
ostendit,  et  iussit  fieri,  quod  feci.'  Et  illi  Deo  gratias  agentes, 
retulerunt  ei  quomodo  coacti  sunt  ut  essent  discipuli  eius.  Interea 
sanctus  Gregorius  sanctum  Abbanum  ordinauit  presbiterum'  et 
abbatem  in  conspectu  suorum  monachorum  ;  et  benedictione  accepta, 
vir  Dei  cum  suis  discipulis  recessit. 

xxi.  Sed  '  quod  factum  est,  sancto  a  Roma  recedente,  non  est 
pretereundum,  set  dignitati  vestre  narrandum.  Tunc  duo  duces  ad 
dexteram  partem  monasterii  sancti  Petri  contigerunt*  eum  magno 
exercitu  accedentes  preliare.  Videns  vir  sanctus  aciem  belli,  et 
lanceas  directas  ante  se,  et  vnumquemque  illorum  comminus  litigare 
accedere,  de  tali  opere  doluit,  et  orauit  ad  Deum  pro  eis,  signans  eos 
signaculo  crucis  Christi.  Quid  plura?  Statim  acccpta  dilectione  pro 
odio,  omissis  °  armis  omnes  osculabantur  se  invicem,  et  duces  et  sui, 

'   =  S  §  15  ;  Ir.  c.  14.  '  sacerdotem  S.  '  =  S  §  16  ;  Ir.  c.  15. 

*  conting-  m.  pr.  '  MS.  am-. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  17 

ditati  sancta  benedictionc,  in  vita  sua  amici  fuerunt.  Omnes  audientes 
et  videntes  tale  niiraculuni,  Christum  glorificauerunt  in  suis  peregrinis, 
et  magis  ei '  qui  liberati  sunt.  Vir  uero  Dei  cum  suis  fratribus  post 
hec  ad  llybcrniam  pcrvenit. 

xxii.  PosTQUAM  "  sanctus  Abbanus  cum  donatis  sibia  Deo  discipulis 
in  Hiberniam  vcnit,  multa  loca  in  lionore  Domini  construxit.  In 
regione  quidem  Connactorum  in  campo  Cc,  id  est  in  campo  Triudi '', 
tria  monasteria  construxit.  Hiis  constructis,  diinissis  in  eis  suffici- 
enter  viris  catliolicis,  ad  regionem  Muminensium'  pcrrexit.  Et  in 
occidcntali  parte  Mumenie,  id  est  in  regione  Corcu  Dhvibhne,  con- 
struxit  mona|sterium  quod  dicitur  Ceall  Achaid  Conchinn.^  Hocf-i^i' 
edificato,  dimisit  ibi  fundatores  ecclesiasticos,  et  prophetauit,  quod 
ipse  locus  a  sancto  Finano  abbate  nominaretur,  qui  tunc  non  fuit 
natus ;  et  ita  factum  cst.  Et  postea  venit  ad  confines  Muscraighi  et 
Eoganacht ;  et  construxit  ibi,  in  terra  siquidem  Muscraighi,  mona- 
sterium  quod  vocatur  Huisneach  ^,  et  ipse  locus  a  viro  Dei  sanctissime 
virgini  Gobnaid '  diuino  instinctu  cum  suis  omnibus  donatus  est. 
Deinde  sanctus  Dei  aduenit  ad  terram  Hua  Lyathain,  et  ibi  cellam, 
que  dicitur  Ccall  Cruimthir*,  prope  ciuitatem  Cul  Collingi '  edificauit, 
et  alios  ex  discipulis  suis  ibi  dimisit.  Et  transiens  inde  in  confinio  na 
n-Desi  et  Feara'"  Muighc  ",  iuxta  ciuitatem  Brio  Gobain  cellam,  que 
scotice  vocatur  Cell  na  Marbhan,  id  est  cella  mortuorum,  edificauit. 
Ibi  fidelibus  viris  manentibus,  sanctus  vir  aquilonalem  plagam  montis 
Crott",  in  regione  Muscraighi,  perrexit ;  et  ibi  ad  radices  ipsius 
montis  magnum  et  regularissimum  monasterium,  quod  uocatur  Cluain 
Ai'r'd  Mobhecoc,  construxit.  Sanctus  silicet  Abbanus  inde  recessit, 
et  in  eadem  regione  monasterium,  quod  uocatur  Cluain  Findghlaise, 
edificauit.  In  predicto  uero  loco,  id  est  Cluain  Aird,  vir  beatissimus 
et  religiosissimus  Becanus  in  vita  mirabili  usque  ad  suum  obitum 
permansit,  totumque  cursum  vite  sue  in  lacrimis  et  ieiuniis  triduanis, 
in  orationc  assidua,  in  flectionibus  genuum,  in  lamentacionibus 
manuum,  et  in  vigiliis  noctumis  duxit  ;  ipseuero  locusex  eius  nomine 
nominatur.  Qui  etiam  fecit  sibi  crucem  lapideam  foris  seorsum,  et 
cotidie  diluculo  in  prima  parte  diei,  quamuis  esset  vel  serenum,  vel 
turbida  aut  frigida  vel  calida,  crucifigens  se  ad  illam  crucem,  totum 
canebat  psalterium ;  que  modo  in  magno  honore  habetur.  Omnem 
seriem  vite  eius,  neque  miracula  que  in  nomine  Domini  fecit,  hic 

'  MS.  eo.         '  =  S  §  17  ;  Ir.  c.  i6.         ^    ;„  campo  Ehe  [lege:   Che],  id  est 
in  c.  Triuidi  S.  *  go  crich  Eachach  Coincinn  a  g-crich  Chorca  Diiibhni 

Ir.  i.  e.  to  the  territory  of  Eochaid  Dog-head.  in  the  territorv  of  Corkaguiny. 
'  Cill  Aithfe  for  Magh  Coincinn  Ir.  «  Burnech  S  ;  and'Colgan  notes  on 

the  Huisneach  of  the  text  :  '  rectius  uocatur  Boirneac'  '  Gobnith  S. 

'  Cill  Cruimpir  Ir.  »  KilcuUen,  seventeenth-century  marginal  note  in  M, 

which  Colgan  incorporates  in  the  text ;  Cell  Chinni  S.  'd  MS.  neara. 

"  Nenese  et  Fermuege  S.  ^-  Crait  S. 


i8  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

non  scribimus,  quia  in  vita  eius  scribuntur  ;  set  hoc  audacter  dicimus, 
quod  nuUum  religiosiorem  eo  audiuimus,  necque  pulcriorem  ct 
regulariorem  suo  monasterio  [locum]  vidimus;  et  istud  monasterium 
a  multis  uocatur  Ceall  na  n-Der,  id  est  cella  lacrimarum,  eo  quod 
hominibus  ibi  a  Deo  penitentialcs  lacrime  postulantibus  per  merita 
beatissimi  patris  Becani  donantur.  Sanctus  uero  Abbanus,  constructo 
monasterio  Cluain  Finnglaisse,  pertransiuit  flumen  Siur,  etin  occiden- 
tali  parte  campi  Femyn  monasterium,  quod  dicitur  Cluain  Conbruin, 
edificauit ;  eoque  edificato  ad  aquilonalem  regionem  Mutnonie,  id  est 
Hely,  perrexit. 

xxiii.  QuE '  gens  adhuc  incredula  erat,  et  ydola  adorabat.  Siqui- 
dem  contigit,  ut  totus  populus  ipsius  regionis  in  vno  cctu  cum  suo 
duce  esset,  quando  sanctus  Abbanus  illic  peruenisset.  Tunc  sanctus 
Dei  predicauit  eis  de  regno  celorum,  et  suadebat  illis  credere  in 
Deum,  et  baptizari  in  nomine  eius.  Dux  ait  ad  virum  Dei:  'Quis 
est  Deus  ?  et  quid  facit  hodie  ? '  Vir  sanctus  respondit :  '  Deus  est 
conditor  celi  ct  terre,  qui  fecit  celum  et  terram,  mare,  et  omnia  que  in 
f.  i.;i  ^  eis  sunt ;  et  quod  cotidie  facit,  hodie  facit,  et  quod  hodie  ]  facit,  cotidie 
facit,  celum  et  terram  gubernat,  et  que  in  eis  sunt ;  et  omnia  sua 
elementa  sibi  seruiunt,  homines  saluat,  et  humiha  conspicit.'  Hec  et 
his  similia  sancto  dicente,  dux  temptauit  eum,  interrogans  de  longis- 
simo  lapide  qui  stabat  in  terra  ante  se,  dicens  :  '  Dic  mihi  ueritatem 
huius  rei,  ut  sciam  si  tuus  Deus  est,  sicut  tu  narras  de  eo,  vel  si  es 
verus  eius  seruus.'  Sanctus  ait :  '  Vt  scias  quia  ita  est,  interroga, 
quod  vis.'  Dux  ait ;  '  Ostende  nobis  que  pars  huius  lapidis  maior  est, 
in  terra,  an  super  terram.'  Vir  Dei  dixit :  '  Equaliter  constat  in  terra, 
et  super  terram.'  Dux  uero  non  credens  hoc,  set  putans  quod  sanctus 
tale  verbum  dixit,  ut  quasi  ipsi  non  potuissent  scire  qualiter  fuit, 
iussit  totum  populum  terram  effodere,  et  inde  lapidem  educere.  Et 
populus  efibdit,  et  cum  magno  labore  et  sudore  lapidcm  eduxit,  et 
inventum  cst,  quomodo  vir  sanctus  dixit.  Et  tunc  mirantes,  et  vno 
animo  credentes,  baptizauit  eos  famulus  Dei  Abbanus.  Ipsa  vero 
villa  in  qua  fuerant,  Raith  Becain  -  vocatur,  id  est  atrium  Becani ; 
eamque  et  multa  munera  argenti  et  auri  et  aliarum  rerum  dux  et 
populus  vnanimiter  sancto  Abbano  in  honore  Domini  obtulerunt. 
Tunc  angelus  Domini  venit  ad  virum  Dei,  dicens  :  '  Munera  horum 
ne  accipias,  set  precipe,  ut  pauperibus  ipsi  diuidant ;  villam  vero  tene 
ad  vssum  seruorum  Dei.'  Postea  sanctus  benedixit  illam  plebem 
promittentem  sibi  seruire  usque  in  finem  seculi ;  et  ipse  est  patronus 
ipsius  gentis. 

xxiv.   Eo'    tempore    in    illa    regione    inaudita    bestia,    et    ualde 
»    :=  S  §  i8;  Ir.  c.  i6.  '  Raech  Betain  S.  s   ,^  S  §  19;  Ir.  c.  il 


i 


VITA  SANCTI  ABBANI  19 

venenosa,  et  incognita  forma,  erat;  id  est  cattus  magniis  ut  vitulus 
anniculus,  ignitum  capucl  habens,  hanelam  igncam.caudam  flammeam, 
ingentes  dentes,  vngulas  longissimas.  Et  de  hoc  ante  omnes  quidani 
subulcus,  qui  ibi  erat,  querelam  fecit  ad  sanctum  Dei,  dicens :  '  O 
famule  Domini,  qui  plebem  a  Deo  tibi  creditam  Jiberasti  a  cultura 
dyaboli,  defende  candem  a  catto  dyabolico,  qui  mortificat  plures 
homines,  et  peccora,  regionemque  istam  deuastauit,  et  milites  non 
possunt  ei  resistere,  necque  moIos[s]i,  quia  a  toto  corpore  eius  arma 
vincuntur  quasi  a[daman]tico'  lapide,  et  est  modo  in  via  qua  tu  vis  ire. 
Vir  sanctus  respondit :  '  Scio  quia  ita  est,  sicut  tu  asseris  ;  et  scio 
quod  est  in  via  qua  volo  ire ;  set  in  Christi  nomine  dico,  quod  ab  hac 
die  usque  ad  finem  seculi  nulli  nocebit.'  Et  inde  sanctus  descendit, 
iubens  cathenas  sibi  adduci ;  et  venit  ad  ripam  fiuminis  Brosnay -,  et 
statim  occurrit  ei  bestia  ignifera  et  formidabilis.  Commites  autem 
viri  Dei  valde  timentes,  solus  ipse  accessit  contra  bestiam.  Bestia 
uero,  ut  respexit  vvltum  sancti,  quasi  domesticus  cattus  gaudens  in 
aduentu  domini  sui,  venit  ad  eum,  inclinans  se  ad  pedes  eius.  Hoc 
videntes  commites  sancti,  expulso  timore,  venerunt  ad  eum.  Sanctus 
uero  apprehendit  monstrum,  et  traxit  secum  ad  lacum  propinquum, 
et  ibi  eum  cathenis  ligauit.  Et  in  septimo  adhuc  anno  aliquod  signum 
de  eo  videtur  in  ostensione  virtutis.  Hoc  facto,  tota  regio  illa  repleta 
est  magna  leticia. 

XXV.  I  Quidam'  homo,  senex  decrepitus  et  diues  ualde,  de  nobiliori  f-  142 
genere  regionis  Hely,  non  habens  filium,  nec  fratrem,  neque  nepotem, 
duxit  in  senectute  vxorem  ad  querendum  heredem.  Et  illa  peperit 
sibi  filiam,  et  ea  ducta  est  ad  sanctum  Abbanum,  ut  baptizaretur  ab 
eo ;  et  ille  senex,  pater  suus,  venit  cum  ea,  et  dixit  ad  virum  Dei : 
'  O  homo  Dei,  audi  miseriam  meam.'  Et  narrauit  ipse  sancto  audienti 
omnia,  que  supra  diximus.  Sanctus  ait  illi:  '  Filium  habebis.'  Ille 
autem  risit,  dicens :  '  Mulier  nichil  pertinet  ad  me,  nec  ego  ad  eam  : 
quia  plenus  senectute  et  doloribus  sum.  Ideoque,  famule  Domini, 
scito  quod  femina  in  mea  cura  non  erit  plus.'  Sanctus  ait:  '  Mihi  hoc 
placet ;  set  expecta  paulisper,  et  potestatem  Domini  videbis.'  Tunc 
vir  Dei  baptizauit  filiam  ipsius  ;  set  cum  duceretur  de  lauacro  bapti- 
smatis,  fuit  filius.'  Et  ait  sanctus  patri  eius :  '  Ecce  filius  tuus.'  Et 
ille  gaudens  multum,  et  omnes  qui  erant  cum  eo,  dixit  ad  sanctum 
virum :  '  Ipse,  et  semen  suum  post  se  seruiat  tibi.'  Vir  sanctus 
respondit :  '  Ouamdiu  ipse  et  semen  suum  mihi  seruiat,  regnabitur 
ab  eo  regnum  istius  regionis.'  Et  ita  est.  Ille  quidem  homo  cum 
filio  suo  reuersus  in  domum  suam,  de  tali  prophetia  in  corde  suo 
gaudebat.     Sanctus    uero    circuiuit    regionem    illam    predicans,   et 

'  MS.  atico  cl".  TBC.  p.  534.  2  Brosnigi  S.  '   ^  S  §  20 ;  Ir.  c.  19. 

*  Marginal  note  in  seventeenth-century  hand  ;  Metamorphosis. 

C  2 


20  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

construens  ecclesias.  In  ipsa  siquidcm  regione  ipse  volebat  suam 
vitam  finire.  Sed  angclus  Domini  vcnit  ad  cum,  dicens :  '  Propera 
ad  fines  Laginensium,  quia  predestinatuni  est  tibi  a  Domino,  ut  sis 
ibi  resurrecturus  ;  et  ibi  in  honore  Domini  loca  edificabis.  Dimitte 
autem  liic  inter  istos  edificatores  fidei.'  Ita  siquidem  sancto  ordinante, 
et  benedicente  populo  flenti  et  danti  sibi  licentiam  non  voluntariam, 
cepit  ire  viam  suam. 

xxvi.  TuNc'  vir  bonus,  qui  multum  sanctum  Abbanum  diligebat, 
vcnit  ad  eum,  dicens:  'O  dilecte  Dei,  quidam  ex  regali  genere  istius 
terre  adhuc  est  incredulus  et  infidelis,  qui  est  heros  ct  tyrannus,  qui 
scmper  occidit  et  rapit,  et  viuit  in  latrociniis ;  qui  etiam  te  querit 
interficere,  et  ipse  misit  exploratores  scire  viam  tuam,  et  te  expectat 
in  insidiis.  Ideo,  domine,  remane  hic  per  aliquot  dies,  ut  possitis  per 
aiiam  viam  euadere.  Quamuis  enim  milites  tecum  irent,  ut  incolumis 
peruenisses  in  aliam  provinchiam,  timeo  si  sit  cedes  virorum  in 
conspectu  tuo.'  Tunc  sanctus  ait  ei :  '  Sis  tu  benedictus  Deo,  quia 
sermo  oris  tui  prudens  est,  et  dulcis.  Sed  hoc  dico  tibi  in  Christi 
nomine;  ego  noui  quecumque  de  eo  mihi  narrasti,  set  in  eo  comple- 
bitur  prophetia  que  dicit:  "  Ex  lupo  efficietur  agnus  ;  "  fihus  enim 
electionis  est  ipse,  quia  cor  eius  compungetur  a  Deo,  quando  me 
videbit.'  Et  benedicens  viro  illi,  sanctus  perrexit  in  viam  suam. 
Supradictus  uero  tjTannus  ex  insidiis  contra  virum  Dci  surrexit, 
accinctus  armis.  Videntes  autem  commites  sancti  Abbani  viruni 
armigerum,  tyrannum  horridissinium  in  incessu  et  habitu,  cuin  siinili 
turba  militum,  valde  timuerunt,  et  vnusquisque  eorum  hinc  et  inde 
cepit  se  abscondere.  Vir  autem  Dei,  fide  armatus,  intrepidus  viam 
ibat.  Ilico  autem,  sicut  prophetauit  de  eo  pridem  sanctus,  ille  -  arma 
sua  posuit  super  terram,  et  venit  humiliter  ad  Christi  famulum, 
f.  143  '  inclinans  se  ante  eum,  |  ct  rogans  cum  lacrimis  se  baptizari.  Tunc 
vir  sanctus  baptizauit  eum  cum  suis.  Et  illc  vir  vnicuni  habcbat 
filium,  et  adduxit  eum,  et  baptizatus  est.  Ille  siquidem  vir  habitum 
sanctum  accepit,  et  mansit  cum  sancto  Abbano  usque  ad  obitum  suum 
in  conuersacione  felici ;  et  gesta  sanctitatis  eius  narrantur.  Vir  autem 
sanctus  dixit  ad  eum  :  '  Filius  tuus  filios  et  filias  generabit,  et  de 
semine  eius  principes  et  potcntesciuitatis  mee,  in  qua  cgo  ipse  de  hoc 
seculo  ad  regnum  ccleste  migrabo,  erunt.'  Et  ita  factum  cst.  Ego 
autein,  qui  vitam  bcatissimi  patris  Abbani  collcgi  et  scripsi,  sum 
nepos  ipsius  filii,  quem  sanclus  Abbanus  baptissauit,  et  de  quo 
prophetauit '. 

xxvii.  PosT*  hec  sanctus  Abbanus  cum  suis  discipulis  fines  Lagi- 

'    =  S  §  ai  ;  5§  xxvi-xxix  are  not  in  Ir.  '  MS.  illa.  '  For  this 

sentence  '  Kgo  .  .  .  prophetauit'  S  lias   'Unde    compilator   uite   huius  nepos 
illius  fihi  fuit.'  *   =  S  §  22. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  21 

nensium  intrauit,  et  venit  in  plebem  Hua  Marchi';  et  ipsa  plebs 
honorifice  recepit  eum,  et  ualde  gauisa  est  in  aduentu  eius.  Et  vir 
sanctus  benedixit  eam  diligenter,  et  multis  diucrsis  languoribus  ibi 
sanatis,  et  miracuh's  perfectis,  inde  recessit  in  plebem  Hua  Midhi'. 
Ibique  magnum  monasterium  construxit,  et  propter  honorem  eius  in 
eodem  loco  ciuitas  edifficata  est;  ct  monastcrium  et  ciuitas  vno  nomine 
!-cotice  vocantur,  id  est  Ceall  Abbain,  quod  interpretatur  latine  cella 
Abbani. 

x.wiii.  Peracto  '  iam  ibi  multo  tempore,  venit  angelus  Domini  ad 
sanctum  Abbanum,  dicens  ei :  '  Vade  ad  regionem  Hua  Cennselach, 
et  manebis  in  loco  vbi  de  celo  audies  sonum  cymbali  post  occassum 
solis  in  campo  Midhi ;  quia  ibi  migrabis  ad  regnum  celorum.  Set  ex 
eo  loco  in  aliis  locis  in  eadem  regione  monasteria  et  cellas  ediffi- 
cabis,  quia  multum  tempus  restat  adhuc  usque  ad  obitum  tuum.  Et 
in  eodem  loco  in  honore  tuo  ciuitas  erit,  in  qua  migrabis  ad  Deum.' 
Postca  sanctus  Abbanus  benedicens  gratia  Dei  ciuitatem  suam,  Ceall 
Abbain,  et  benedicens  populo  et  clero  eiusdem,  et  constituens  viros 
sanctos  ibi  manere,  et  alios  secum  eligens,  iter  suum  ad  fines  Hua 
Cennselach  direxit.  Et  angelus  Domini  ostendit  ei  locum,  sicut  prius 
sibi  dicebat.  In  quo  loco  sanctus  Abbanus  vitam  mirabilem  duxit,  et 
maxima  mirabilia  in  nomine  Domini  fecit ;  et  ex  eo  cellas  et  mona- 
steria  per  circuitum  eiusdem  loci  construxit.  Magnum  siquidem 
monasterium  prope  flumen  Berbha,  quod  uocatur  Ross  meic  Treoin  *, 
in  quo  iacet  beatissimus  abbas  sanctus  Emenus,  Druim  Cain 
Ceallaidh  °,  et  Camross,  et  alia  loca  in  honore  Domini  in  eadem 
regione,  sicut  predixit  sibi  angelus  Domini,  edifficauit. 

xxix.  VoLUMUs  iam,  fratres,  dignitati  vestre  narrare  pauca  de 
miraculis,  que  in  nomine  Patris,  et  Filii,  et  Spiritus  Sancti  sanctus 
senior  Abbanus  fecit  a  tempore  quo  ciuitatem  Magh  Hirnen^-n^ 
habitauit  usque  ad  obitum  suum. 

xxx.  QuoDAM  "  die  sanctus  Abbanus  cum  turba  multa  discipulorum 
ad  flumen  Berbha  venit,  et  non  inventis  vehiculis,  steterunt  super 
ripam  fluminis.  Sanctus  autem  senior  seorsum  ad  Deum  orabat. 
Tunc  videntibus  omnibus,  flumen  diuisum  est  in  duas  partes,  et 
siccum  vadum  apparuit.  Pars  superior  altius  et  altius  surgebat,  et 
pars  inferior  quasi  sine  motu  stetit.  Hoc  videns  vir  sanctus,  iussit 
omnes  ire  ante  se ;  et  omnibus  euntibus  siccis  pe|dibus,  sanctus  f.  142 ' 
senior  posterius  transiuit.  Erat  autem  in  comitatu  eorum  quidam 
infantulus,  qui  videns  calculos  pulcerrimos  in  profundo,  post  tergum 

'  Phonetic  for  hUa  m-Barchi ;  Hua  Barchi  S.  ^  Hua  Mudi  S  :  thls  is 

again  phonetic  writing  for  hUa  m-Budi.  '   =  S  §  23.  <  Mac  Troin  S. 

'  Chin  Chellich  S.  «  corrupt  for  Mag  Arnaide  S.  '  =  S  §  24  ;  Ir. 

c  20  (where  the  river  is  the  SuirJ. 


22  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

sancti  stetit,  coUigens  eos,  et  ncmo  vidit  euni  ibi  manentem,  quia 
sanctus  iussit  omnibus,  ne  post  se  aspiccrent,  set  ire  in  viam  suam. 
Ipse  tamen  sursum  ad  celum  respicicbat ;  et  ut  pes  eius  de  uado 
perrexit,  flumen  cucurrit  iter  suum.  In  loco  uero  in  quo  infans  fuit, 
quando  flumen  descendit,  ibi  mansit  sub  aqua,  et  nec  inde  potuit  ire. 
Sanctus  vero  senior  cum  discipulis  suis  viam  suam  ambulabat.  Cum 
autem  puer  quereretur  ad  comedendum,  non  cst  inventus.  Omnes  enim 
usquc  ad  ipsam  lioram  putabant  cum  in  eorum  comitatu  fuisse  ;  set 
omnes  dixerunt,  quod  non  vidissent  eum.postquam  in  flumine  secum 
descendit.  Sanctus  senior  ait  eis  :  '  Ne  inquietetis  vos  de  ipso;  quia 
a  Deo  custoditur,  et  ego  crastina  die  de  flumine  ante  vos  eum  educam 
incolumem.'  Vir  sanctus  reuersus  mane  ad  flunien,  solus  in  aquam 
accessit,  et  inde  extraxit  puerum  incolumem.  Puer  autem  non  soluni 
viuus  erat,  sed  vestimenta  sua  sicca  fuerunt ;  aqua  enim  non  tetigit 
eum.  Ipse  uero  puer  omnibus  narrabat,  quomodo  angelus  Domini 
consolabatur  eum,  et  quomodo  ab  eo  predictum  est  sibi,  quod  per 
gratiam  sancti  Abbani  defensus  est,  et  quod  ipse  educeret  eum  de 
aqua,  et  quomodo  aqua  ad  se  in  illo  loco  non  intrauit ;  et  ipse  hinc  uel 
inde  transire  non  potuit,  donec  apprehendit  eum.  Omnes  hec 
audientes  Deo  gratias  egerunt,  et  suum  famulum  sanctum  Abbanum 
honorauerunt. 

xxxi.  Alio'  quoque  die  pastores  custodientcs  armentum  sancti 
Abbani  in  villa,  quam  habebat  in  regione  Ronani,  volentes  ludcre, 
dixerunt  ad  invicem  :  '  Ludamus  nos  ;  et  peccora  sua  et  suorum  mona- 
chorum  sanctus  Abbanus  custodiat.'  Postea  iocunde  pastores  lude- 
bant,  nil  curantes  de  peccoribus.  Ludentibus  uero  pastoribus  lupi 
irruerunt  in  armento.  Irruentibus  autem  lupis  in  eo,  sanctus  senior 
Abbanus  sedens  in  cella  inter  fratres,  alta  uoce  dixit :  '  Diinittite  et 
custodite.'  Fratrcs  audientes  hanc  uoccm,  ct  nescientes  pro  qua 
causa  hoc  dixit,  interrogabant  eum  dicentcs :  '  Pater,  quid  dixisti  ? ' 
Sanctus  ait  eis :  '  Ne  asperi  modestos  occiderent,  hoc  dixi ;  set  ab 
aliis  scietis  ad  quos  dixi.'  Nemo  tamen  eorum  adhuc,  quid  dixit, 
ausus  est  interrogare  euni.  Diuina  ucro  potcncia  lupi  uoccm  sancti 
sedentis  in  cella  sua  longe  per  aera  audientes,  non  solum  peccora 
dimiserunt,  set  eadem  usque  ad  obitum  suum  custodicbant.  Postea 
diuulgatum  est  per  totam  illam  regioncm,  quod  lupi  armentum  sancti 
Abbani  custodiebant.  De  hoc  in  eadem  regione  in  proverbium 
habetur  adhuc,  id  est  iurantes  per  nomen  istius  sancti  dicunt:  '  Per 
Abbanum,  qui  fecit  lupos  custodire  uac[c]as.'  Tunc  fratres  scientes 
quod  dixit  sanctus  iiiter  cos  :  '  Dimittite,  et  custodite,'  Deo  gratias  cge- 
runt.  Et  videntes  prophctiam  pcr  suum  scniorcm  esse  complctam, 
que  dicit  :  '  Lupus  cum  agno  habitabit  ■ ; '  quia  illi  non  solum  ad  boues 

'    =  S  §  25  ;  not  in  Ir.  (Du.);  a  short  version  in  Ir.  (Br.)  c.  15.       ■  Is.  xi.  6, 


VITA  SANCTI  ABBANI  23 

mites  facti  sunt,  set  ad  cetera  animalia.    Et  nec  unquam  necesse  fuit 
alius  pastor  csse   cum   illis    peccoribus,  nisi    tantum   lupi,   quamdiu 
vixcrunt.     Non    mihi    minus   mirandum    esse   videtur,    quod    nemo  f.  143  ' 
Christianus   inventus   est,  qui  noceret  illis  in  vita  sua,  per  gratiam 
eiusdem  viri  Dei,  quam  ipsi  luppi  suam  escam  non  tangere. 

x.x.xii.  Alio  '  tempore  sanctus  Abbanus  suos  sanctos  sodales  habi- 
tantcs  in  regione  Midhi-  visitauit.  Et  ipsi  audicntes  eum  in  suam 
patriam  venisse,  valde  gauisi  sunt ;  et  multi  corum  de  locis  suis  in 
occursum  eius  venerunt.  Et  sanctus  Abbanus  rogatus  [est]  ab  eis, 
ut  inter  eos  ad  tempus  maneret.  Duo  enim  monasteria  in  eadem 
regione  fundauit,  vnum  in  orientali  parte  Midhi,  quod  Ceall  Ailbe 
uocatur,  in  quo  sanctissima  uirgo  Segnith  sub  cura  sancti  patris 
Abbani  sanctas  uirgines  Deo  nutriuit  ;  et  alterum  in  aquilonali  parte 
eiusdem  regionis,  quod  dicitur  Ceall  Abbain,  in  quo  maxima  a  Deo 
mirabilia  per  eum  patrantur.  Deinde  beatissimum  abbatem  Finna- 
num  visitauit,  et  ab  eo  honorifice  sanctus  senior  susceptus  est. 
Quem  quidem  Finnanum  sanctus  Abbanus  baptizauit,  cum  esset 
infantulus.  Ipsi  propinantes  sibi  invicem  pocula  salutaria  diuini 
dogmatis,  sanctus  Finnanus  in  suo  monasterio  mansit ;  sanctus  autem 
Abbanus  ad  sua  reuersus  est. 

xxxiii.  Quod.^m'  tempore  Cormacus  filius  Diarmoda,  rex  Hua 
Cennselach,  Camross,  cellam  sancti  Abbani,  predauit,  volens  familiam 
cius  de  ea  expellere,  et  villam  ipsam  in  sua  potestate  habere.  Satel- 
lites  uero  eius  predantes  villam,  ipse  stetit  in  platea.  Duo  siquidem 
satellites  de  sancti  cuuula  magnum  vas  *  lactis  optimi  et  quatti 
tulerunt,  et  posuerunt  vectem  per  ansas  eius,  et  inter  se  ad  plateani 
portauerunt.  Set  cum  voluissent  illud  deponere,  nullo  modo  potue- 
runt,  quia  vectis  [vjolis  eorum  adhesit,  et  cum  rex  et  alii  omnes  hoc 
vidissent,  timuerunt  valde,  putantes  sibi  omnibus  malum  contingere, 
quia  nouerunt  se  sancto  Dei  iniuriam  fecisse.  Et  inito  consilio,  rex 
et  omnes  duces  et  principes  nuncios  miserunt  ad  sanctum  Abbanum, 
ut  veniret  ad  eos.  Sanctus  autem  vir  ex  suasione  fratrum  cum  multis 
perrexit  ad  regem.  Tunc  rex  inclinauit  se  ante  sanctum,  et  rogauit 
eum  cum  omnibus,  ut  solueret  miseros  a  ligno,  quod  cuti  eorum  pro 
sua  culpa  adhesit ;  et  promiserunt  se  facturos  quodcunque  sanctus 
postea  vellet.  Videns  ipse  quod  corda  eorum  compuncta  essent, 
signauit  lignum,  et  iussit  portantes  illud  deponere ;  et  statim  ad 
uerbum  eius  solutuni  est  uectis  cute  eorum,  et  onus  depossuerunt. 
Tunc  rex,  et  omnes  qui  ibi  erant,  videntes  tale  miraculum,  et  volentes 
satis  placere  sancto  seniori,  non  solum  suam  cellam,  set  totum  opidum 
sibi  et  Deo  vnanimiter  obtulerunt.     Illud  enim  opidum  scothice  Find 

'   =  S  §  26 ;  not  in  Ir.  '  Midie  S.         ^   =  S  §  27  ;  Ir.  c.  21.         ♦  miach 

tomais  Ir.  i.  e.  a  bushel  for  measuring. 


24  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

Mhagh  vocatur,  quod  dicitur  latine  lucidus  campus.  Et  sanctus  senior 
videns  eos  deuotissimos  esse  Deo,  ipsam  gentem  et  semen  eius  in 
eternum,  et  regem,  et  omnes  reges  futuros  de  semine  eius,  preter 
dissipatores  ecclesie  Dei,  diligenter  benedixit.  Et  rex  et  populus, 
accepta  licentia  et  benedictione  a  sancto  Dei,  et  accipientes  eum 
patronum  suum,  cum  gaudio  reuersi  sunt  ab  eo. 

{■  143"  xxxiv.  Alia' quoque  die,  sanctus  senior  Abbanus  |  ad  monasterium 
suum  cum  centum  quinquaginta  viris  reuersus  est ;  set  in  die  ad 
monasterium  peruenire  non  potuerunt,  quia  spacio  longo  ab  eo  nox 
cecidit,  et  erat  illa  nox  tenebrosa,  et  frigida,  ac  densa  nebulis.  Illi 
uero,  non  potentes  pre  tenibrositate  ambulare  viam,  sedere  ceperunt. 
luniores  siquidem  senes  suos  frigore  opprimi  timebant,  quia  nox 
pluere  minabat.  Tunc  apparuit  angelus  Domini  de  celo,  habens 
candelam  ardentem  et  lucidam  candore  auri,  et  obtulit  eani  in  manu 
sancti  Abbani.  Sanctus  uero  tenuit  eam  in  manu,  et  cum  eo  omnes 
viam  suam  ambulauerunt.  Et  illa  candela  ardens  in  manu  viri 
sancti,  non  solum  illi  viam  illuminabat,  set  magnum  spacium  in 
circuitu  eorum  satis  lucidum  fuit.  Et  ita  cum  claro  lumine  ad  ciuita- 
tem  pervenerunt.  Cum  autem  peruenisset  in  propinquo  ciuitati,  vir 
sanctus  nuncium  misit.  ut  templum  sibi  apperiretur,  volens  illam 
candelam  super  Dei  altare  ponere.  Stans  uero  sanctus  in  choro  ante 
altare,  et  orans,  iterum  angelus  candelam  de  manu  eius  accepit. 
Tunc  senior  sanctus,  et  omnes  qui  ibi  erant,  gratias  Deo  pro  suo 
dono  egerunt,  dulciter  eum  laudantes. 

xxxv.  Sakctus-  senior  Abbanus  in  silua  descrta  designata  loca 
habens  a  fratribus,  [diebus]  'constitutis  ibi  habitabat,  in  quibus  ieiuniis 
et  orationibus  vacabat,  et  Deo  placere  uolebat.  Inter  ipsum  locum  ct 
monasterium  sancti  Abbani,  silicet  Magh  Arnoide,  lere  plus  quam 
vnum  miliare  constat.  Ipse  locus  uocatur  Discrth  Cendubhain  ',  qui 
solus  de  fratribus  cum  sancto  ibi  ingredi  solebat.  Ideoque  ille  locus 
ex  nomine  eius  nominatur,  quia  ibi  vitam  suam  post  obitum  viri  Dei 
duxit,  et  in  vita  eius  curam  ipsius  loci  habuit ;  et  in  eodem  loco  fere 
diuerse  siluarum  ad  virum  sanctum  Abbanum  veniebant,  et  nullus 
earum  venientes  vel  redeuntes  alteri  noccbat'*;  et  angeli  Dei  ibi  cum 
eo  loquebantur.  Quippc  cum  sanctus  esset  in  deserto  loco,  angeli 
Dei  venerunt  ad  eum,  quia  a  die  quo  angeli  per  mare  in  iuuentute  sua 
eum  duxerunt,  angelus  Domini  in  quocunque  loco  fuisset,  cotidie 
loquebatur  cum  eo. 

xxxvi.  QuoDAM "  quoque  die  vir  sanctus  in  eodem  loco  foris  euan- 
gelium  legebat,  et  erat  liber  apertus  super  lapidem  ante  eum ;  et 

'  =  S  5  28  ;  Ir.  c.  23.  2  =  s  I  ag  .  55  xxxv  xxxvii  are  not  in  Ir.  '  from 
S  om.   M.  '  Cheducani   Desertum   S.  '•  auesque  sibi  iocundissime 

canebant  S.  '  =  S  §  29. 


VITA  SANCTI  ABBANI  25 

rediens  dic  illo  ad  monasterium  suum,  oblitus  est  libnim  apertum 
supcr  lapidem,  et  illa  noctc  nix  maxima  supcr  totam  regionem 
Hybcrnie  fluit,  set  tamen  gratia  Dei  donauit  sancto  viro,  quod  nulla 
gutta  niuis  super  librum  necque  super  lapidem  necque  in  atrio,  in  quo 
ipsi  erant,  cecidit.  Mane  autem  facto,  sanctus  senior,  recordatus 
librum,  ualde  doluit  de  eo,  et  misit  nuncios,  ut  sibi  portarent  eum. 
Nuncii  uero  invenientes  siccum  librum,et  lapidem  atriumque  intactos, 
cum  magna  velocitate  ad  virum  Dci  redierunt,  ostcndcntes  ei  librum, 
et  narrantes  que  viderant.  Tunc  sanctus  Abbanus  gauisus  est,  et 
omnes,  qui  crant  cum  eo,  gratias  Deo  egerunt. 

xxxvii.  Alio  '  tempore  quidam  homo  nobilis  et  -  latro  de  finibus 
Osraighi  venit  cum  suis  satellitibus,  et  rapuit  magnum  gregem 
porcorum,  quem  sancti  Abbani  monachi  habebant.  Ille  siquidem 
latro  I  filius  sororis  sancti  Bercani  abbatis '  erat.  Et  sanctus  senior  f.  143  ^" 
Abbanus,  rogatus  a  monachis  suis,  post  porcos  ad  fines  Osraighi 
pergebat,  visitans  beatum  Bearcanum;  [et]  ab  eo  honorifice  susceptus 
est ;  et  sanctus  Bearcanus  cum  beato  Abbano  perrexit,  ut  rogaret 
filium  sororis  sue,  ne  retineret  porcos  sanctorum  ;  et  timens  quod 
sanctus  Abbanus  eum  merito  malediceret.  Ille  uero  malificus  homo, 
ut  uidit  sanctos  ad  se  venientes,  decreuit  in  corde  suo,  ut  manu  sua 
sanctum  Abbanum  occideret ;  et  cum  essent  ambo  sancti  sibi  com- 
minus,  eleuauit  manum,  ut  sanctum  iugularet  Abbanum,  [sed]  sanctum 
Bercanum  iugulauit.  Vidensque  quod  ipsum  iugulasset,  iterum 
cepit  sanctum  Abbanum  iugulare,  set  ilico  manus  eius  arefacta  est. 
Sanctus  autem  Abbanus,  videns  famulum  Christi  sanguinem  fun- 
dentem,  et  pene  morientem,  ualde  in  corde  suo  doluit,  quod  causa  sui 
sanctus  Dei  occideretur.  Et  accessit  ad  eum  in  Deo  confidens,  et 
tenuit  vvlnus  manibus  suis,  et  statim  sanguis  stetit :  et  stringens* 
vvlnus  inter  manus  eius,  cicatrix  ilico  apparuit.  In  ipsa  silicet  hora 
sanctus  effectus  est  ualidus,  et  confortatus,  quasi  nunquam  esset 
vvlneratus.  Ille  uero  miser  homo,  videns  manum  arefactam  sibi,  et 
auunculum  suum  sanatum,  inclinauit  se  ante  pedes  sanctorum,  et  egit 
penitentiam  secundum  iussionem  sanctorum  ;  statimque  manus  eius 
sanata  est,  et  ipse  quod  rapuit  integre  restituit.  Tunc  sanctus  Ber- 
chanus  et  sanctus  Abbanus  firmissimam  fraternitatem  inter  se  et  suos 
monachos  uenturos  usque  ad  finem  mundi  fecerunt.  Eandem  etiam 
fraternitatem  alia  vice  cum  sancto  Brendano  et  sancto  Molyng,  et 
sancto  Flannano,  et  sancto  Munnu,  et  cum  aliis  multis  firmauerunt. 
Salutantes  et  osculantes  se  invicem,  ad  sua  reuersi  sunt. 

xxxviii.  Alio''  tempore  quidam  bonus  sacerdos  aliquo  casu  amisit 
loquelam,  et  effectus  est  mutus.    Hunc  amici  eius  adduxerunt  ad 

'   =S  §§  30,  3t.  2  sed  S.  5  abb.  monasterii  Cluaiii  Munuir  Chuir 

(lege :  Immurchuir)  S.  •  MS.  signatus.  '  =  S  §  32  ;  Ir.  c.  23. 


26  VITAE   SANCTORVM    IIIBERNIAE 

sanctum  Abbanuni,  ut  eum  curaret  ;  sanctusque  Abbanus  senior 
pomum  benedixit,  et  porrexit,sacerdoti,  ct  iussit  ei  commedere.  Ille 
enim  cum  pomum  comniedit,  ilico  loqutus  est,  et  gratias  agens  Deo, 
ante  omnia  psalmos  cepit  cantare  ;  et  reuersus  est  cuni  gaudio  ad 
domum  suam,  et  se  ipsum  ac  suum  locum,  atque  omnia  que  habuit, 
Deo  et  sancto  Abbano  concessit '. 

xxxix.  QuoDAM  -  tempore  leprosus  quidam,  audiens  quanta  mira- 
cula  sanctus  Abbanus  in  nomine  Domini  faciebat,  venit  ad  eum, 
dicens  :  '  Famule  Christi,  cui  tantam  gratiam  Deus  donauit,  ut  omnia 
miracula  possibilia  tibi  sint,  rogo  ut  meam  miseriam  respicias,  et  me 
pietate  diuina  ab  ea  eripias.'  Tunc  vir  sanctus  ait :  '  Pro  diuina 
pietate  mundaberis.'  Et  orans  pro  eo,  signauit  eum  signo  sancte 
crucis,  et  ille  mundatus  a  lepra,  sospes  apparuit.  Tunc  omnes, 
videntes  tale  miraculum,  gratias  Deo  egerunt ;  et  ille  qui  mundatus 
est,  glorificans  sanctum  Abbanum,  suis  viribus  gratias  Deo  peregit. 

xl.  QuoDAM '  tempore,  cum  esset  sanctus  Abbanus  in  campo,  qui 
•  scotice  dicitur  Magh  na  Taibhse,  latine  uero  fantasmatum  campus, 

adductus  est  ad  eum  homo  paraliticus,  qui  erat  cecus,  claudus, 
mancus,  surdus,  et  mutus.  Et  rogauerunt  amici  illius  sanctum  Dei, 
f-  '43  '  ut  curaret  |  eum ;  et  ille  homo  nobilis  erat.  Videns  vir  sanctus 
hanc  maximam  miseriam,  misericordia  motus,  et  a  populo  rogatus, 
ut  oraret  pro  eo,  respexit  ad  eum,  dicens  :  '  Domine  mi  lesu  Christe, 
istum  paraliticum  tua  potencia  salua,  ut  omnes,  qui  eum  nouerunt,  et 
de  eo  de  cetero  audient,  te  Deum*  omnipotentem  cum  Patre  et 
Spiritu  Sancto  tantum  sciant.'  Hec  et  hiis  similia  sancto  dicente, 
homo  ille  miser  ante  omnes  se  circumdantes  omnibus  suis  doloribus 
sanatus  est  ;  et  Deum  magnificans,  loqutus  est,  ambulauit,  audiuit, 
et  vidit,  et  binas  manus  habuit,  atque  totum  corpus  cius  in  pulcri- 
tudine  versum  est ;  quia  deponens  infirmitatem,  quasi  filius  regis 
pulcer  apparuit.  Ipse,  et  omnes  qui  ibi  erant,  multum  Deo  laudes 
dederunt,  ipsiusque  sanctum  famulum  honorificantes,  per  quem 
Deus  in  vno  honiine  talia  miracula  fecit ;  quia  scx  miracula  in  co, 
Deo  permittente,  sanctus  patrauit,  id  est,  lumen  ceco,  gressum  claudo, 
auditum  surdo,  loquelam  muto,  ambas  manus  manco,  et  qui  venit 
deformis,  formossus  recessit. 

xli.  Alio°  die  contigit,  ut  duo  duces  conuenirent  cum  suis  exer- 
citibus  in  vno  loco  prcliare;  ipsi  enini  crant  inimici.  IIIc  ucro  locus, 
in  quQ  conuenerunt,  scoticc  Achadh  Huabhair"  vocatur,  quod  in- 
terpretatur  latine  ager  superbie.  Vix  uero  illis  prode[u]ntibus,  et 
omni  orna'tu  bellico  preparato,  tam  appropinquabat  alterutrum,  ut 

'  Here  Ir.  (Br.)  inserts  a  sliort  version  of  §  xl.  which  Ir.  (Du.).  omits. 
2   =  S  §  33  ;  Ir.  c.  24.      '   =  S  §  34  ;  not  in  Ir.  (Du.).      *  MS.  wrongly  inserts 
Paircm.  ^  =  S  §  35  ;  Ir.  c.  35.  "  NuauirS. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  27 

lancce  eorum  ante  se  mixte  essent  inuicem.  Tunc  sanctus  Abbanus 
per  eundem  locum  iter  agens,  vidit  eos,  et  dixit :  '  Domine  mi  lesu 
Christe,  tua  maxima  potencia  prohibe  ilios,  ne  tanta  multitudo  in 
iocunditate  diaboii  perinaneat,  ct  ut  pacifici  recedant  tua  bonitate, 
qui  pleni  rixa  suasione  diaboli  venerunt.'  Ad  hanc  silicet  vocem 
ilii  retro  trusi  sunt  ab  invicem,  quousque  spacium  fuit  inter  eos,  et 
inde  non  potuerunt  se  mouere,  donec  sanctus  Dei  pacem  fecit  inter 
eos.  Et  ipsi  mirantes  quod  sibi  accidit,  et  vidcntes  sanctum  Ab- 
banum  ad  se  venientem,  cognouerunt  quod  ipse  miraculum  fecit  in 
eis.  Et  cum  pacifici  essent,  et  soluti,  gratulantes  Deo  et  sancto 
Abbano,  atque  gratulantes  in  cordibus  suis,  ad  sua  loca  letantes 
reuersi  sunt. 

xlii.  Quidam'  famosissimus  artifex  et  peritissimus  in  omni  arte 
lignorum  et  lapidum  erat  in  Hibernia,  nomine  Gobanus ',  cuius  artis 
fama  usque  in  finem  seculi  erit  in  ea.  Ipse  iam,  postquam  displicuit 
aliis  sanctis  in  superflua  artis  sue  mercede,  lumen  oculorum  amisit, 
et  erat  cecus.  Hic  uocatus  est  ad  sanctum  Abbanum  ;  et  dixit  ei : 
'  Volo  edifficium  in  honore  Dei  edifficare,  et  tu  age  illud.'  Ille  ait : 
'  Quomodo  possuni  agere,  cum  sim  cecus  ?'  Dixit  ei  sanctus :  '  Quam- 
diu  illud  operaberis,  lumen  oculorum  habebis,  set  tibi  postea  non 
promitto.'  Et  ita  factum  est.  Nam  ille  artifex  apud  sanctum  Dei 
illud  opus  in  lumine  suo  operatus  est ;  et  cum  esset  illud  perfec- 
tum,  iterum  lumen  oculorum  amisit. 

xliii.  Alio  '  die,  cum  sanctus  Abbanus  esset  iuxta  stagnum,  quod 
scotice  dicitur  Loch  na  Corr,  id  est  stagnum  gruum,  quidam  homo 
mutus  a  longe  ductus  est  ad  eum,  ut  curaretur  ab  eo.  Vir  autem 
sanctus  videns  illum,  ait :  '  Domine  Deus  omnipotens,  qui  bruto  asino 
humanum  eloquium  tua  pietate  dedisti,  cum  |  necesse  sibi  fuerat,  da  f.  143  "^ 
homini  huic,  quem  plasmasti,  suam  loquelam,  ut  magnificetur  nomen 
sanctum  tuum  in  eo.'  Et  conuersus  ad  hominem,  dixit  ei :  '  Dico  tibi, 
O  homo,  in  nomine  Domini  mei  lesu  Christi,  aperi  os  tuum,  et 
loquere.'  Statimque  homo  ille  aperiens  os  suum,  loqutus  est,  gratias 
agens  Deo,  et  magnificans  famulum  eius. 

xliv.  QuoDAM*  die  pastor  armenti  sancti  Abbani  loquens  cum  eo, 
dixit  ei :  '  Domine,  vac[c]a  pulcra  nimis  in  armento  tuo  est,  et  ipsa 
per  multos  annos  a  natiuitate  sua  vsque  hodie  sterilis  est.'  Virautem 
sanctus  benedixit  illam,  sedens  in  cella  sua  ;  et  dixit  pastori :  '  Hoc 
anno  duos  vitulos  parict,  qui  mites  et  domiti  hic  manebunt  usque  ad 
mortem  meam  ;  set  post  obitum  meum  non  longe  apud  uos  manebunt.' 
Et   ita  factum  est  secundum  vaticinium  viri  "  Dei.'    Set  quod  ipsis 

'   =  S  §  36  ;  Ir.  c.  26.  2  Golb-  altered  to  Gobb-  S.  '   =  S  §  37  ; 

Ir.  c.  27.  *   =  S  §  38  ;  Ir.  c.  28. 


28  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

bobus  accidit ',  sancto  migrante  ad  regnum  celorum,  posterius 
narrabimus,  quia  ita  decet.' 

xlv.  Alio  '  quoque  tempore  beatissimus  abbas  Columba  patrem 
sanctum  Abbanum  visitauit  \  volens  certificari  per  eum,  si  dignaretur 
maiestas  diuina  monachos  sibi  commissos  misericorditer  saluare, 
dicens  ei :  '  Pater  sancte,  indica  mihi  clemenciam  diuinam  erga 
fratres  nostros,  quorum  curam  gerimus,  pariter  et  ora  pro  ipsis ; 
nouimus  cnim  quod  angelus  Dei  loquitur  tecum  cotidie.'  Sanctus 
autem  Abbanus  multum  rogatus  ab  eo,  ait  ei :  '  Ego  siquidem  cum 
omni  diligencia  orabo  pro  eis,  ut  dignetur  Deus  facere  eis  misericor- 
diam.'  Postea  sanctus  Abbanus  ad  secretum  locum,  in  quo  consueuit 
Deum  orare,  et  angelus  Domini  ad  se  venire,  perrexit ;  et  ibi  cum 
labore  corporeo  et  intencione  cordis  pro  eis  ad  Deum  orauit. 
Sanctus  autem  Columba,  sciens  quod  sanctus  Abbanus  ad  orandum 
perrcxit,  ipse  post  eum  exiuit,  volens  videre  eum  orantem  ;  et  stetit, 
prospiciens  illum  occulte.  Orante  uero  sancto  Abbano,  apparuit  ei 
angclus  Domini,  dicens  :  '  Sufficit  quod  nunc  fecisti,  Abbane,  quia 
Dominus  Deus  tuus  donauit  tibi  quod  petisti  ab  eo.'  Sanctus  ait  ei  ; 
'  Nichil  aliud  peto  modo  a  Domino  Deo  meo,  nisi  requiem  animabus 
illorum  quorum  curam  gerit  ^  sanctus  Columba.'  Angelus  dixit: 
'  Requiem  habebunt,  et  ideo  missus  sum  tam  cicius  ad  te,  quia 
supra  vires  corporis  tui  pro  hiis  laborasti.'  Et  hec  dicens,  discessit  ab 
eo.  Tunc  sanctus,  Deo  gratias  agens,  inde  ad  fratres  descendit ;  set 
sanctus  Columba  ad  fratres  ante  eum  exiuit,  et  narrauit  eis,  que 
angelus  loqutus  est  ad  sanctum,  ipso  tamen  adhuc  ad  eos  non 
veniente.  Et  cum  venisset,  et  inter  fratres  sedisset,  dixit  ei  sanctus 
Colum  :  'Dic  nobis,  quid  tibi  a  Deo  indicatum  est  de  nostris  militibus.' 
Sanctus  autem  Abbanus,  nolens  indicare  quod  angclus  loqutus  fuisset 
sibi,  sic  ait :  '  Deus  miserebitur  illis.'  Sanctus  Columba  ait :  '  Cur 
nobis  celas,  quod  angelus  Domini  loqutus  est  tibi  ?  Nam  sic  et  sic 
loqutus  est  tecum.  Ne  mihi,  '  queso,'  pater,  irasceris,  quia  ego 
audiui  et  vidi  hec'  Tunc  omnium  fratrum  clamor  factus  est  magnus, 
laudantes    Dcum   in    sancto   suo   Abbano ;   et   gratias  Deo  agentes, 

'  MS.  accipit.  '  Here  S  inserts  a  section  (39),  telling  how  Abban  foretold 
to  a  hiindred  and  fifty  clerics  their  luture  course  of  life  and  place  of  death. 
This  =  Ir.  c.  £9,  with  whicii  thc  Irish  life  ends,  probably  imperfectl^'. 
^   =    S   §   40.  *  qui .  .  .   di.xit :    '  Ideo    ad    te .  .  .  uenimus,    ut    ores    pro 

animabus  illorum  qui  occisi  fuerunt  in  bello  commisso  nuper  nobis  suaden- 
tibus  causa  ecclesie  .  .  .  '  Sanctus  senior  .  .  .  respondit  :  '  Propicius  sit  eis 
Deus,  et  ego  libenter  pro  eis  orabo'  S.  This  is  certainly  more  original. 
In  M  the  story  has  been  altered  so  as  to  oblitcrate  CoIumba's  confession 
of  blood-guiltincss.  ''  requiem    illis    animabus    quarum  curam    habct    S. 

The  alteration  of  'quarum  curam  habet '  [i.  c.  thc  souls  of  the  slain]  into 
'quorum  curam  gerit '  [i.  e.  CoIumba's  monks]  is  in  conformity  with  the  change 
made  carlier  in  the  section  ;  but  the  word  rcqiiieiii,  twice  repcated,  betr.aj's  thc 
original  vcrsion. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  29 

sanctus  Columba  cum  suis,  congratulantibus  fratribus,  ad  sua  loca 
reuersi  sunt. 

xlvi.  Alio'  tempore  sanctus  Abbanus,  postquam  reuersus  est 
sanctus  Brendanus  de  nauigio  suo  querendo  terram  repromissionis', 
volens  eum  interrogare  de  mirandis  rebus,  que  vidit  in  occeano,  |  f.  144 ' 
adiuit  eum.  Sanctus  autem  Brendanus,  iubente  sibi  angelo  Dei,  in 
occursum  beati  Abbani  cum  magno  gaudio  uenit.  Sanctusque 
Abbanus  interrogauit  eum  omnia  que  voluit ,  et  sanctus  Brendanus 
cuncta  mirabilia,  que  inventa  sunt  in  occeano,  diligenter  ei  narrauit. 
Et  per  aliquot  dies  vna  in  diuinis  colloquiis  et  in  angelicis  visitacioni- 
bus  permanserunt,  et  fraternitatem,  quam  superius  diximus,  inter  se 
et  alios  sanctos,  et  inter  posteros  suos  semper  firmiter  firmauerunt. 
Benedicentes  autem  Deum,  et  orantes  pro  se  ipsis,  et  osculantes  se 
invicem,  vnusquisque  eorum  in  osculo  pacis  ad  sua  remeauit. 

xlvii.  Quidam'  homo  nomine  Conallus  in  regione  Hua  Cennselach 
in  propinquo  monasterii  sancti  Abbani  habitabat.  Hic  uero  bonus  et 
studiosus  bonis  operibus  et  elymosinis  erat,  et  amicus  sancti  Abbani. 
Nomen  quidem  eius  loci  Seanboith  Ard  vocatur,  quod  latine  interpre- 
tatur  vetusta  cassa  aita.  Iste  homo  quodam  die  incidit  in  suos 
inimicos,  et  ligantes  iugulauerunt  eum,  et  occiderunt.  Filii  uero 
eius  et  pueri  corpus  mactatum  et  laniatum  in  domum  suam  tule- 
runt.  Vxor  vero  eius  et  filii  nuncios  miserunt  ad  sanctum  senem 
Abbanum,ut  discipuli  sui  corpus  illius  ad  se  perducercnt  ad  sepelien- 
dum  in  suo  monasterio,  quia  sic  voluit  Conallus  viuens.  Vir  autem 
sanctus,  audiens  quod  Conallus  occissus  esset,  nimis  doluit  in  corde 
suo.  Et  ipse  senex  et  decrepitus  cum  magna  turba  ad  afferendum 
corpus  sepeliri  in  suo  monasterio  perrexit ;  atque  cum  ad  villam 
pervenissent,  vxor  illius  et  soboles,  et  omnis  familia  magnum 
vlulatum  ante  virum  Dei  fecerunt ;  et  ipse  sanctus,  videns  miseriam 
illorum,  motus  misericordia,  cum  eis  fleuit,  dicens  :  '  Cur  factum  est, 
mi  Domine,  ut  vir  bonus  et  clemens,  et  factor  piorum  operum  et 
elymosinarum,  subitaneam  mortem,  effusso  sanguine  suo,  patere- 
tur  ?  ■  Tunc  iussit  omnes  tacere,  et  adiuit  locum,  vbi  corpus  fuit, 
atque  orauit  ad  Deum  ex  toto  corde  suo,  et  post  orationem  conuersus 
ad  corpus,  ait:  'Tibi  dico,  Conalle,  surge,  et  loquere  nobiscum,  quia 
Deus  animam  tuam  mihi  donauit.'  Ad  hanc  vocem  corpus  illius 
motum  est,  et  postea  surrexit,  benedicens  omnibus.  Et  vir  sanctus 
assignauit  eum  viuum  et  sanatum  ante  omnes  a  volneribus  suis. 
Tunc  Conallus  omnibus  narrauit,  quomodo  demones  contendentes 
atrociter  animam  suam,  et  angeli  '  Dei '  defendentes  cam  fortiter, 
summus  angelus  desuper  uenit  ad  eos,  dicens  :  '  Istam  animam  iubet 

'   =  S  §  41.  -  post  vii  annos  peregrinationis  sue  de  mari  S.  ^   =  S 

§43- 


30  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

Deus  iterum  in  suo  corpore  aflerri ;  quia  suus  famulus,  sanctus  senex 
Abbanus,  eam  sibi  donari  a  Deo  petiit;  et  omnis  familia  celi  eius 
orationem  intendit.'  '  Et  postea  animam  meam,'  inquit,  '  angeli  Dei 
adduxerunt  ad  corpus  meum  ;  et  ecce  ego  viuens  sum  per  orationem 
sancti  patris  Abbani.'  Et  tunc  Conallus  omnia,  que  habuit,  id  est 
filios  et  filias,  seruos  atque  ancillas,  cum  sua  regione  Deo  et  sancto 
Abbano  obtulit ;  cuius  senien  et  regio  usque  in  hodiernum  diem  in 
seruicio  monasterii  sancti  Abbani  constat.  Et  omnes  qui  ibi  stabant 
in  Dei  laudem  clamauerunt,  talibus  dictis  et  factis  gaudentes. 

xlviii.  In'  hoc  loco,  fratres,  terminum  ponimus  miraculis,  que 
f.  t44  '  sanctus  pater  Abbanus  in  sua  vita  perfecit.  |  Quamvis  enim,  quamdiu 
vixerimus,  scriberemus  et  scrutaremus  eius  miracula,  non  tamen 
possibile  nobis  esset  in  nostra  vita  perficere  ;  quia  ipse  in  longissima 
sua  etate  in  nulio  die  fuit,  quo  non  fecit  aliquod  dignum  ad  scri- 
bendum.  Set  tamen  adhuc  volumus  aliquid  breiiiter  scribere  de  eius 
obitu,  et  quomodo  corpus  eius  beatissimum  terre  est  collocatum. 

xlix.  Ipse''  igitur  quodam  die,  cum  appropinquaret  sibi  tempus 
migrandi  ad  regnum  diuinum,  conuocatis  ad  se  aliquibus  fratribus, 
diem  obitus  sui  indicauit  eis.  Prepositus  uero  sui  monasterii,  ct 
procurator  omnium  rerum  eius  intus  et  foris,  de  ciuitate  Ceall 
Abbain  ortus  fuit,  que  est  in  regione  aquilonalium  Laginensium, 
quam  primuni  locum  in  terra  Laginensium  sanctus  Abbanus  fun- 
dauit,  cui  soli  preposito  ipsam  horam  sue  solucionis  patefecit.  Tunc 
ipse  prepositus' corpus  sanctissimum  beati  viri  furari,  et  perducere 
ad  suam  ciuitatem,  si  potuisset,  decreuit,  et  nuncios  ad  suam  ciui- 
tatem,  ut  populus  eius  colligeret  sccuni  aquilonales  Laginenses,  et 
venircnt  in  occursum  eius  in  die  et  per  viam,  quam  nuncius  eis* 
indicauit.  Et  ipsi  inde  gaudentes,  ita  fecerunt.  Set  ipse  prepositus 
boues,  quorum  superius  mencionem  fecimus,  sub  cura  sua  habuit, 
quia  ipsi  in  vssu  monasterii,  sicut  prophetauit  vir  sanctus  de  eis, 
antequam  nati  essent,  quasi  monachi  fucrunt;  et  nec  erat  necesse 
ut  illi  ad  opera  cogerentur,  sct  ipsi  libcntcr  ct  mitissime  veniebant; 
et  sanctus  pater  et  fratres  cos  diligcbant.  Et  in  nocte  qua  sanctus 
pater  se  migraturum  ad  celum  predicauit,  prcpositus  illos  duos  boues 
iuxta  plaustrum  in  signato  loco  collocauit ;  et  angeli  Dei  illa  nocte 
visibiliter  virum  Dei  visitabant.  Scicns  uero  prepositus  ex  ore  viri 
'sancti'"  ipsam  horam  suc  migracionis,  iussit  omnes  fratres  ad  sua 
lcctuia  ire,  ct  rcquiescere  interim,  preteramicos  suos.  quibus  eandeni 
rem  ostendit.  Et  egredientibus  sanctis  fratribus  paululum  requic- 
scere,  ilico  anima  sancta  pii  patris  inter  choros  angelorum  ad  regna 
celestia  ascendit ;  et  statim  prepositus  cum  suis  amicis  corpus  eius 

'  =  S  §  43.  "  =  S  §  43.  '  dccicuit  piiim  furlum  faccre  S.  •  MS.  eiiis. 
'  sancti  m,  sec. 


VITA  SANCTI   ABBANI  31 

sanctum  dc  nionasterio  abstulerunt,  ct  posuerunt  illud  in  plaustro, 
iilis  bobus  in  eo  subiugatis.  Et  ipsi  boues,  scientes  suum  onus, 
congruo  cursu  viam  carpere  cum  suis  commitibus  ceperunt.  Tunc 
angelorum  exercitus  de  celo  descendit,  canentes  dulciter  circa  corpus, 
et  radii  lucis  ab  eis  lucentes  viam  omnem  illuminabant,  quasi  radii 
solis  orientis,  uel  occidentis  cum  sercnitate ;  et  ita  fuerunt  toto 
tempore,  quousque  corpus  vcncrabilitcr  est  iiumo  collocatum.  Duc- 
tores  autem  corporis  cum  illa  luce  angelica  velociter  ambulaucrunt. 

1.  CuM '  autem  fratres  post  interuallum  temporis  surrexerunt, 
perrexerunt  ad  locum  in  quo  patronum  suum  dimiserunt  ;  et  non 
videntes  eum  "  ibi,  omnia  claustra  monasterii  scrutati  sunt  et  non '  - 
invenerunt.  Tunc  cognouerunt  quod  prepossitus  eum  ad  suam  ciui- 
tatem  perducens  euasit.  Et  ipsis  flentibus  et  lacrimantibus,  et  cam- 
panis  pulsatis,  omnis  populus  ciuitatis  ad  se  collcctus  est ;  et  cum 
hoc  esset  narratum,  conuersa  cst  tota  ciuitas  in  merorem.  Itaque 
plus  clerus  et  populus  contristati  sunt  quod  corpus  eius  a  se  ablatum  f.  144 ' 
est,  quam  quod  ipse  de  hac  vita  migraret ;  quia  se  liberandos  ab 
omni  malo,  et  se  augendos  in  omni  bono  non  dubitabant,  petita 
gratia^iuxta  reliquias  tanti  viri,  sicut  liberati  sunt  ab  ipso  inter  eos 
viuente.  Et  inito  consilio,  plures  nuncios  in  circuitu  per  regionem 
ad  australes  Laginenses  miserunt,  ut  venirent  sequi  patronum  suum, 
et  pro  eius  recuperatione  contenderent.  Statimque  populus  armatus 
cum  fratribus  contendere  sanctum  suum  perrexerunt,  et  unusquis- 
que  in  regionibus,  ut  audiebat  tale  factum,  ilico  sine  mora  post 
populum  pergebat.  Et  cum  convenirent  hinc  et  inde  turbe  multe,  erant 
multus  exercitus ;  et  postea  ad  corpus  cum  impetu  magno  per- 
uenerunt.  Et  tunc  populus  alterius  ciuitatis  cum  exercitu  aquilona- 
lium  Laginensium  ibi  conuenit ;  et  ipsi  multo  plures  erant,  et  para- 
ciores  australibus.  Sancti  uero  monachi,  clerici,  et  boni  homines, 
et  sapientes,  qui  erant  ex  utraque  parte,  videntes  maximum  esse 
periculum,  iusserunt  ambos  populos  in  suo  statu  expectare,  et  corpus 
in  medio  iteneris  eos  collocare,  ut  considerarent,  si  eos  pacificare 
potuissent.  Et  ipsi  longe  altercantes,  nullo  modo  potuerunt  perficere 
pacem  ;  quia  exercitus  aquilonalis  dicebat :  '  Iste  sanctus  nostram 
ciuitatem  de  agro  signauit,  et  nos  primum  populum  in  hiis  regionibus 
accepit ;  et  nos  eum  nostrum  sanctum  et  patronum  in  eternum 
accepimus.  Nosque  atque  nostre  vxores,  et  filii  cum  filiabus,  et 
serui  cum  ancillis,  usque  ad  infantes  in  eum  speramus  in  omni 
necessitate  ;  et  prius  nos  omnes  moriamur,  antequam  dimittamus 
eum.' 

'   =  S  55  44,  45.  '  The   words    '  ibi  .  .  .  et   non'   are  inserted    by 

the  rubricator,  vvho  has  deleted  the  word  nec  after  eum.  ^  MS.  petitam 

gratiam. 


32  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

li.  PopULus '  autem  ciuitatis  Magh  Arnoide  cum  australibus  Lagi- 
nensibus  ita  dicebat :  '  Iste  itaque  sanctus  a  Deo  ad  nos  missus  est, 
et  per  multos  annos  apud  nos  vixit :  et  monasteria  multa  et  cellas 
in  nostra  regione  edificauit,  et  ipse  est  noster  sanctus  et  venerabilis 
pater,  qui  nostram  ciuitatem  similiter  construxit ;  qui  post  multa 
miracula  apud  nos  ad  Dominum  migrauit,  et  per  eum  semper  adiu- 
uari  a  Deo  speramus ;  et  scitote  quod  nos  morti  prius  omnes  tra- 
demus,  antequam  reuertamur,  eo  a  nobis  absente.'  Ad  hanc  uocem 
ira  principum  et  militum  vtrorumquc  arsit,  surgentes  in  furorem 
magnuni  contendere,  et  rixare  conantes.  Tunc  autem  monachi  et 
clerici,  quibus  non  licebat  bellare,  seorsum  exierunt,  vlulantcs  et 
flentes,  et  fusis  lacrimis  dicentes :  '  Heu,  heu,  Domine  Deus,  cur 
concedis  maximam  cedem  tantorum  nobilium  virorum  circa  corpus 
famuli  tui,  qui  in  sua  vita  multa  bella  prohibuit  ? '  Armati  autcm 
exercitus  iracunde  in  magna  inimicicia  ad  invicem  appropinquabant, 
festinantes  contendere  acriter  circa  corpus. 

lii.  O  MAGNUM  -  et  maximum  miraculum  tunc  a  Deo  per  merita 
sancti  sui  patratum  est !  Ecce  enim  velociter  duo  boues  cum 
plaustro  et  corpore  ad  populum  aquilonalem  perrexerunt,  et  duo 
boues  ciusdem  coloris  et  magnitudinis  cum  simili  plaustro  et  corpore 
ad  populum  australem  venerunt.  Tunc  sancti,  qui  erant  ex  vtraque 
parte,  et  omnes  alii,  sedati  quam  cicius,  videntes  mirabile  factum, 
et  letantes  dixerunt:  '  Ecce  modo  apparet,  qualia  et  quanta  merita 
habes  apud  Deum,  sancte  pater  Abbane.'  Populi  quidem  multum 
f.  144  "^  gaudentes,  |  et  glorificantes  Patrem,  et  Filium,  et  Spiritum  Sanctum, 
sibi  gratias  agentes,  et  sanctum  suuni  magnificantes,  in  maxima 
leticia  cum  magno  honore  in  suas  ciuitates  uenerunt.  Et  omnes 
male  habentes  variis  languoribus  in  ciuitatibus  adducti  sunt  ad 
reliquias,  et  sanabantur  omnes.  Ipse  siquidem  reliquie  cum  honore 
debito  in  hymnis  et  laudibus  post  missarum  sollempnia  scpulta  sunt 
honorifice.  Ipsi  uero  boucs,  qui  reliquias  portabant  ad  sepulcra 
sancti  domini  sui,  per  homines  exierunt,  et  rectc  '  tribus  vicibus  illa 
circuierunt,  et  postea  mugientes  per  ciuitatem  ad  riuos  propinquos 
cucurrerunt,  et  multi  de  ciuitatibus  secuti  sunt  eos,  volentes  videre 
quid  illi  acturi  essent.  Boues  vero  ante  omnes  in  vada  riuorum 
intrauerunt,  set  inde  postea  nunquam  hominibus  apparuerunt ;  et 
dicuntur  illa  vada  scotice  singularitcr  Ath  Daimh  dha  Cheilt  *,  id  est 
vadum  boum  se  abscondencium.  Tunc  notuin  cst  quod  sanctus  de  eis 
viuens  dixit :  '  Non  longe  post  obitum  meum  apud  vos  mancbunt.' 
Apud  rcliquias  sancti  Abbani  magna  ct  innumerabilia  miracula  co- 
tidie  perficiuntur,  sicut  ipse  fecit  in  vita  sua. 

•   =  S  §  45.  -   =  S  §  45.  '  This  probably  means  '  riglit-hand-wise  '. 

Irish  dciscl.  *  Alh  Deib  Dichlit  S  ;  read  :  Alh  Dam  Dichlethi. 


VITA  SANCTI  ABBANI  33 

liii.  SANCTfs '  autem  pater  Abbanus  iustus  cum  mundicia  mcntis 
ct  corporis,  mansuetus,  ympnidicus,  sapicns,  vas  electionis,  plenus 
Spiritu  Sancto  ;  leo  in  diuina  virtute  et  potencia,  columba  in  man- 
suetudine  et  lenitate,  serpens  in  prudencia  et  astucia  contra  demones 
cum  suis  insidiis;  et  mitis  humilis  scruus,  laborans  in  seruitutc  Dei. 
Post  longissimam  etatcm,  ut  sua  scribitur  [in  vita],  in  senectute 
venerabili,  post  diuina  mandata  a  natiuitate  usque  ad  obitum  com- 
pleta,  post  ydola  et  simulacra  destructa,  post  multos  conuersos  de 
gentilitate  ad  fidem,  et  baptizatos  in  nomine  Patris,  et  Filii,  et  Spiritus 
Sancti,  post  ecclesias  fundatas,  post  leprosos  mundatos,  post  cecos 
illuminatos,  post  surdos  et  claudos  sanatos,  post  mortuos  suscitatos, 
post  omnes  morbos  adiutos,  felicissime  se.xto  kalendas  Nouembris 
inter  clioros  angelorum  ad  regna  celestia  migrauit,  vbi  premia  cterna 
sibi  cum  omnibus  sanctis  prestantur.  Et  te,  Domine  Deus,  Pater  om- 
nipotens,  per  merita  sancti  confessoris  tui,  sancti  Abbani,  deprecor, 
ut  me  et  omnes  tuos  fideles  hic  et  in  futuro  tua  potencia  ab  hoste 
maligno  eripias;  adiuuanie  dilecto  Filio  tuo,  lesu  Christo  Domino 
nostro.  Qui  tecum  uiuit,  et  regnat,  in  vnitate  Spiritus  Sancti,  Deus 
per  omnia  secula  seculorum.    Amen. 

EXPLICIT   VITA    SANXTI   AbBAXI. 


1  =  S  §  46. 
D 


Vita.  sancti  ^ctJi  cpiscopi  ftlii  Bricc. 

f.  134  *■  InCIPIT   VITA   SANXTI    EdI  '    EPISCOPI  '    ET   CONFESSORIS. 

i.  Beatissimus  Edus  ^  episcopus  filius  Bricht  *  de  nobiliori 
Hybernie  genere,  id  est  de  semine  Cuind  Cetcathaidh '',  qui  in 
summa  pace  et  maxima  fertilitate "  Hyberniam  in  Temoria  viginti 
annis  regnauit,  oriundus  fuit.  Mater  vero  Edi  episcopi  de  Mumenia', 
id  est  de  regione  Muscray  Tire,  orta  est,  que  iam  erat  satis  nobilis. 
Cumque  illa  esset  vicina  partui  super  sanctum  Edum,  quidam ' 
propheta'  venit  secus  domum  illius,  et  dixit  ille  suis:  '  Est  mulier 
istius  domus  pregnans,  cuius  tempus  ut  pariat  uenit.  Si  igitur  infans, 
quem  in  vtero  habet,  cras  nasceretur  hora  matutina,  magnus  esset 
coram  Deo  et  hominibus,  in  celo  et  in  terra ;  cuius  nomen  et 
memoria  per  totam  Hyberniam  maneret  per  seculum.'  Hoc  audiens 
quedam  puella,  ilico  uenit,  et  retulit  domine  sue,  incipienti  tunc 
parturire.'"  Illa  ait :  '  Vere,  nisi  per  latera  mea  venerit ",  non 
egredietur  ex  utero  meo,  donec  illa  hora  veniet.'  Et  sedit'^  super 
petram,  mansitque  in  ea  sedens  usque  ad  horam  matutinam  contra 
dolores  parturicionum.  Hoc  magnum  mirabile  fecit  Deus  in  natiui- 
tate  sancti  Edi  infantis.  Nam  cum  mater  eius  hora  matutina  fatigata 
esset,  capud  infantis  super  petram  cecidit,  et  fecit  concauuiji  in  ea 
secundum  similitudinem  capitis :  et  usquc  hodie  ille  lapis  ita  cauatus 
manet,  et  aqua  que  sit"  in  eo  concauo,  languoresomnium  credencium 
sanat.  Et  accepto  baptismi  lauacro,  sanctus  Edus  in  Mumenia,  in 
regione  matris  sue,  ab  infancia  sua  usque  ad  etatcm  iuuenilem  in 
seculari  habitu  alitus  est.  Parentes  enim  sui  volebant  ut  ipse  secularis 
esset  in  vita  sua;  set  beatus  puer  Edus,  spirante  in  co  diuina  gratia, 
conseruauit  se  integrum  anima  et  corpore  ab  illicitis  actibus " 
secularibus.  ^ 

ii.  Quodam'^  die  ambulans  bcatus  pucr  Edus  solus  in  hcrcmo '", 

'  On  lower  itiargin  of  M  is  a  short  pedigrce  of  Aed  agreeing  exactly  witli 
that  in  LL.  347  ''.  '  S.  Aidi  cp.  qui  dicitur  JEdh  mac  Bric  R.  ^   =  S 

§§  I,   a;    R'  f.  97",   R=   f.  149'*.  *  Bricc  T ;    Brichii  R',  Bricii  Ra. 

5  Chedcliathi  T  ;  de  nepotibus  Neill,  S  R.  '  caritate  T.  '  Memonia 

T,  and  so  always.         '  quia  T.  '  astrorum  peritus  R.  "  proilure  1". 

"  nisi  anima  mea  de  corpore  exierit  R'  ;  exigerit  R'^.      '^  iUa  T  aM.      "  fit  S. 
'*  om.  T.  '^   =  S  §  2  ;  R'  f.  97  '',  R'  f.  150".  '^  grcgem  porcorum  in 

siluis  querens  [cum  quereret  R]  S  R. 


VITA  SANCTI   AEDI  35 

inven  in  quadam  ccllula  [in]  secrcta  et  remota  insula  duos  sanctos 
seniores' abbates,  silicet  Brendanum  Byrra  et  Kainnicum-  legentes 
euangciium  sub  umbra  arborum  ;  ct  loquentes  sibi  invicem  sancti, 
viderunt  sibi  proximantem  puerum.  Quem  vt  vidit  sanctus  • 
Brendanus,  surrcxit  in  obuiam  cius  ;  ct  cum  gaudio  susccpit  eum. 
Sanctus  autem  Cainnichus  increpauit  bcatum  Brendanum,  eo  quod  in 
adventu  ignoti  pueri  surrexit.  Cui  sanctus  Brendanus  ait :  '  Nonne  tu, 
Cainnice,  vides  cum  eo  quod  ego  video .' '  Sanctus  Cainnicus  dixit : 
'  Vcre  nichil  cgo  video  cum  eo.'  Brendanus  ait :  '  Ecce  ipse  est 
plenus  gratia  Spiritus  Sancti,  et  exercitus  angelorum  comitatur  eum 
vndique  ;  |  quamuis  est  hodie  puer  secularis,  tamen  episcopus  sanctus  f.  134 ' 
ct  magna  columpna  ecclesie  erit.'  Postea  sancti  et  beatus  puer  Edus 
benedixerunt  se  invicem,  et  cum  gaudio  ipse  reuersus  est  ab  eis. 

iii.  Beatus^  puer  Edus  a  nullo  magistro  est  doctus  in  puericia  sua 
in  liberali  arte,  nec  in  literis  eruditus,  nccque  in  regulis  ecclesiasticis 
limatus  est,  usque  ad  tempus  adole'sce'ncie  sue  ;  set,  sicut  superius 
diximus,  inter  plebeos  homines  'integer'  corpore  et  anima  Dei  gratia 
nutritus  est  in  Mumenia.  Cum  igitur  esset  adolesccns,  perrexit  ad 
patriam  suam,  regionem  Midhi,  ut  partem  de  paterna  hereditate 
qucrcret.  Sct  fratres  sui  nullam  partem  dederunt  ei,  nani  inter  se 
statim  post  obituni  patris  eorum,  ipso  puero  in  aliena  patria  manente, 
diuiserunt ;  set  hoc  cognatis  suis  dispHcuit.  Hoc  videns  beatus 
iuuenis  Edus,  quandam  puellam,  filiam  cuiusdam  hominis  potentis, 
rapuit  secum  ad  Momoniam,  ut  per  hanc  iniuriam  fratres  sui  aftlicti, 
hereditatem  suam  sibi  darent  pro  illa  puella.  Rapta  puella,  venit  Edus 
cum  suis  commitibus  secus  monasterium*  sancti  episcopi  Ilundi°, 
qui  relinquens  seculum  monachos  regebat.  Vidensque  sanctus  senior 
Ilundus  episcopus  foris  Edum  interuallo  a  turba  remotum,  et  angelos 
Dei  cum  eo,  ait  vni  de  discipulis  suis  :  '  Vade,  et  dic  illi  adolescenti, 
qui  est  separatim  in  itenere,  ut  ad  me  paulisper  declinet.'  Audiens 
beatus  Edus  nuncium  sancti  Dei,  humiliter  venit  ad  episcopum.  Qui 
dixit  ei":  'Quare  queris,  fili,  per  vim  hereditatem  'paternam' ' 
terrenam?  Ecce  enim  habes  patrem,  cuius  hereditas  est  celum  et 
terra,  omnesque  creature ;  qui  dabit  tibi  hereditatem  multo  maiorem 
ct  meliorem  in  celo.  Noli  ergo  per  iniuriam  querere  mortalium 
terram,  set  hanc  dimitte  puellam  ad  parentes  suos  liberam,  et  pone 
collum  tuum  sub  iugo  Christi.'  Respondit  ei  beatus  Edus  dicens  : 
'  Quodcumque  dixeris  mihi,  pater,  ego  sum  paratus  facere.'  Et  tunc 
remissa  est  puella  ad  domum  suam ;  et  omnia,  que  beatus  Edus  in 
seculo  habuit,  voluntario  animo  reliquid,  et  mansit  ipse  cum  sancto 
Ilundo  in  monasterio  suo,  omnibus  iussionibus  eius  obediens,  et  literas 
et  scripturas  apud  eum  assidue  addiscens. 

'  et  T  add.  •  Kannicum  T,  and  so  iii/ra  ;  Kennechura  S.  '   =  S  §  3  ; 

R'  R'  u.s.  *  cellam  S  R.         '  lllandi  R.  «  0:11.  T.  '  pat.  her.  T. 

D2 


k 


36  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

iv.  Alio  '  die  sanctus  suus  magister  beato  Edo  dixit :  '  Fili,  quia 
fratres  sunt  occupati  in  aliis  rebus,  perge  ad  arandum  nobis  hiis 
diebus.'  Respondit  beatus  puer  Edus :  '  Onini  tuo  imperio  ero 
obediens  -.'  Quadam  die  venit  ad  eum  quidam  nuncians  ei  vnum 
bouem  defuisse  sibi  in  aratro  suo.  Tunc  beatus  Edus,  misertus 
indigenti,  dixit  precedenti  aratrum  puero  :  '  Resiste  interim,  frater.' 
llle  expectans,  pius  Edus  soluit  bouem  de  suo  aratro,  deditque  illum 
indigenti.  Ipse  iani  postea  in  tribus  bouibus  arabat ;  et  bos  ex  vna 
parte  iugum  portabat,  et  altera  parte  potestas  diuina  iugum  mirabiliter 
sustinebat,  et  trahebat.  Simili  modo  cultrum  suum  sanctus  Edus  alii 
indigenti  homini  dedit ;  et  ipse  postea  sine  cultro  cepit  arare,  set 
diuina  potencia  terrani  ante  eum  scindebat.  Tanta  miracula  videns 
sanctus  episcopus  Ilundus  per  beatum  Edum  alumpnum  suum  facta, 
dixit  ei :  '  O  fili,  magna  miracula  facis ;  ideo  debes  magister  esse,  et 
non  discipulus.  Vade  igitur  ad  regionem  matris  tue,  et  construe 
ibi  in  Christi  honore  cellam.'  Respondit  sanctus  Edus,  dicens : 
f-  134  '  Oportet  I  me,  pater,  facere  siquid  iusseris.'  Tunc  beatus  Edus  cum 
quibusdam  discipulis  sibi '  assignatis  perrexit,  et  fundauit  mona- 
sterium,  quod  uocatur  Enach  Midbreuin  * ;  ibiquc  mansit  multo 
tempore,  et  magnas  virtutes  fecit. 

v.  CoNGREGAUiT  °  aliquando  rex  Mumenie  magnum  exercitum, 
volens  ut  nepotes  Neill  redigeret  ad  regnum  suum.  Hoc  audiens  rex 
nepotum  Neill,  perterritus  est ;  et  colligens  ipse  exercitum,  misit 
sanctum  Edum,  ut  illius  anni  pacem  rogaret  inter  maternam  et  pater- 
nam  gentem.  Set  sanctus  Edus  pergens  ad  castra  Muminensium ', 
rota  currus  sui  in  via  plana  fracta  est ;  et  currus  altera  rota  sine 
impedimento  currebat  sub  sancto  Dei,  sufiultus  nutu  diuino.  Turbe 
hoc  ualde  admirantcs,  sanctum  Dei  cum  gloria  ct  honore  receperunt; 
set  tamen  pacem  a  rege  non  potuit '  impetrare.  Et  rcdiens  sanctus 
Edus  a  rege  ingratus,  ilico  carus  regis  consiliarius  mortuus  est,  et 
terra  deglutiuit  duos  equos  suos.  Tunc  rex,  timore  perlerritus, 
reuocauit  sanctum  Edum,  et  exiens  in  obviam  sancti,  tribus  vicibus 
prostrauit  se'  ad  terram  coram  viro  Dei.  Et  ait  vir  sanctus  regi : 
'Tres°  reges  de  semine  tuo  erunt.'  Ait  ei  rex  :  '  Habes,  pater,  pacem 
huius  anni.'  '  Semper',  ait  sanctus, '  habebo  pacem  a  te,  quia  potestas 
tua^^non  maius  crescat.'  Et  rogatus  sanctus  Edus  a  rege  et  populo 
eius,  suscitauit  virum  illum  et  vnum  equum  ;  alterum  vero  equum 
dimisit  in  terra ;  et  repleuit  stagnum  aque  illum  locum,  quod  scotice 

'   =  S  §1  4-7  ;  R'  f.  98  ",  R-  u.s.  ^  et  pcr  meritum  sancte  obediencic 

factus   cst   peritus   ac   pcrfcctus   in    arte   arandi   R  add.  '  sibi   disc.   T. 

*  -bren  S.  <*   =  g  §5  8,  9  ;  R'  (.  98  '',  R^  f.  150  '.  "  Memon-  T. 

'  non  pot.  a  regc  T.  *  sc  ante  cquorum  pedcs,  et  curnis  cum  cquis  exiit 

trans  regem  S.  '  '  Quia  tribus  uicibus  .  .  .  te  prostrasti,  trcs  rcges  erunt 

de  genere  tuo  ;   et  quot  uices  hoc  fecisses,  tot  reges  essent  de  genere  tuo  S. 
'"  uestra  supcr  gentem  meam  [dc  cetcro  R]  non  erit  S  R. 


VITA  SANCTI   AEDI  37 

iiocatur  Loch  Gabre,  latine  vero  stagnum  equi.'  Tunc  a  multis  nomen 
Christi  per  sanctum  Edum  magnificatum  est. 

VI.  PosT  HEc'  sanctissimus  Edus  uocatus  cst  ad  regionem  Midhi, 
patriam  suam,  et  ordinatus  est  episcopus  ;  et  aliquando  in  Mumenia 
adhuc  conuersabatur,  et  celias  ct  monasteria  in  vtraque  regione 
edificauit.  Habens'  quodam  die  sanctus  cpiscopus  plures  messores, 
pluuia  magna  descendit  super  terram* ;  set  nulla  gutta  pluuie  cecidit 
in  segete  sancti  Edi,  et  videbantur  gutte  huc  atque  illuc  sparse 
euitare'  segetem,  quasi  aliquid  timoris  haberent.  Et  videntes  hoc 
miraculum,  gratiam  Christi  cum  Edo  magnificabant. 

vii.  Quidam''  diues  in  Mumenia  carus  amicus  erat  sancto  episcopo, 
qui  multas  oblaciones  et  terram  ei  obtulit.  Cui  promisit  sanctus 
pontifex  Edus,  dicto  rogante,  sacrificium  dare,  termino  vite  eius 
adveniente.'  Set  ille  diues  mortuus  est,  sancto  Edo  longe  ab  eo 
absente.  Hoc  videns  sanctus'  Edus  spiritu,  cepit  velociter  venire 
ad  eum ',  et  misit  ministrum  suum  ante  se,  dicens  ei :  '  Vade  cicius 
ad  mortuum,  et  dic  in  aure  eius,  vadam  ego  illuc,  an  ipse  ad  me 
veniet  ? '  Et  ilico  mortuus  ad  uoceni  nuncii  pontificis  sanus  surrexit, 
signansque  se,  venit  ad  sanctum  Edum  episcopum,  et  dixit  ei 
sanctus  :  *  Vis  adhuc  in  hac  vita  manere,  an  nunc  ire  in  celum?' 
Illeeligens  tuncmigraread  celum,  accepit  communionem"  dominicam 
de  manu  sancti  Edi  episcopi,  et  ibi  dormiuit  in  pace. 

viii.  Perueniens"  sanctus  Edus  episcopus  ad  cellam  sanctarum 
uirginum,  ille  susceperunt  eum  cum  gaudio  magno.  Ille  uirgines 
parantes  cenam  sancto  episcopo,  nullo  modo  tunc  potuerunt  invenire 
ei  alium  potum  nisi  aquam.  |  Et  dixit  eis  pontifex:  '  Afferte  nobis  f.  135 ',1)» 
aquam  de  puro  fonte.'  Et  benedicens  sanctus  Edus  antistes  aquam, 
inde  vinum  dulce  et  forte  factum  est.  Et  gratias  agens  sanctus 
pontifex,  de  illo  vino  cum  suo  populo  saciatus  est,  et  sancte  uirgines 
cum  suis.  Et  tribus  vicibus  gratia  Dei  per  sanctum  Edum  episcopum 
vinuni  de  aqua  commutauit. 

ix.  HoMo'^  quidam"  habens  multa  animalia  ante  se  in  via,  aliquo 
euentu  fugerunt  ab  eo  turbata  ;  et  nec  potuit  ea  colligere.  Cum  ille 
miser  fleret,  venit  pius  episcopus   Edus  per  viam ;   cui  ille  homo 

1  edi  M  ;  Egni  T.  -  Post  hec  .  .  .  edificauit  om.  S  R.  ^   =  S 

§  10  ;   R'  f.  98'',  R-  f.  150''.  *  quod  cum  uidisset  Aidus,  signauit  aerem,  et 

SR.  add.  5  de- S  T.  «   =S  §  ii  ;  R' R=  u.s.  '  veniente  T. 

*  episcopus  T.  adii.  '  According  to  S  R  the  saint  came  to  an  impassable 

wood,  whereupon  his  chariot  rose  upwards  and  traversed  a  long  distance 
in  the  air.  '<>  sacrificium   S;  uiaticum    salutare    R.  "   =S    §    12; 

R'  99",  R2  f.  151  «.  12   ^  s  §  13  ;  Ri  f.  99«,  R2  f.  151  «.  is  quidam, 

cui  ars  erat  fodere  terram  et  muros  ciuitatibus  circumdare,  [quidam  fossator 
agrorum  R]  .  .  .  fecit  triplicem  murum  circa  arcem  .  .  .  ,  que  uocatur  Raith 
Bailb  [hoc  est,  arx  balbutientis  uel  muti,  add.  R].  Quo  .  .  .  peracto,  merces 
reddita  est  ei,  plenitudo  scilicet  huius  arcis  de  peccoribus  etc.  S  R. 


38  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

flebiliter  dixit :  '  Domine  episcope,perdidi'  animalia  mea  sine  causa.' 
Tunc  beatus  Edus  episcopus  misertus  illi,  descendit  in  terram,  et 
orauit''  Deum  ;  vnde  peccora  illius  hominis  de  diuersis  locis  reuersa 
sunt  ad  eum,  et  nec  vnum  siquidem  de  illis  defuit.  Postea  illc 
iiomo  benedicens  sanctum  episcopum  cum  peccoribus  suis  mansuetis 
exiuit. 

X.  Iter'  aliquando  agens  sanctus  opiscopus  Edus*  invenit  duos 
leprosos  in  via,  et  dedit  elymosinam  petentibus  duos  equos  currus 
sui.  Et  discipulis  suis  episcopum  propter  hoc  increpantibus,  dixit : 
'  Hic  expectemus  quosdam  viros  qui  veniunt  longe  post  me,  ducentes 
mihi  duos  bonos  equos  °.  Et  offerentes  illi  homines  equos  sancto 
episcopo,  caritatem  et  prophetiam  admirabantur  sui,  gratias  Christo 
agentes. 

xi.  Veniens"  sanctus  episcopus  ad  monasterium  sanctarum  uir- 
ginum,  quod  dicitur  Druim''  Ard,  cum  gaudio  magno  susceptus  est 
ab  eis.  Intuens*  eas  vir  Dei  cognouit  vnam  earum  tunc  cecidisse 
in  peccatum.  Tunc  illa  sciens  quod  nouerat  peccatum  eius  sanctus 
episcopus,  confessa  est  culpam  suam  coram  omnibus,  et  egit  peni- 
tentiam. 

xii.  Ouidam'  latrones  decollauerunt  tres  viros^"  in  via,  per  quain 
illo  die  sanctus  episcopus  Edus  ibat ;  set  illi  latrones  diuino  nutu 
retenti  sunt,  et  nec  se  inde  potuerunt  mouere,  donec  peruenit  ad 
eos  sanctus  episcopus.  Et  increpans  eos  sanctus  pontifex,  illi  corde 
penitentiam  egerunt ;  et  vir  Dei  suo  uerbo  soluit  illos.  Volensque 
vir  sanctus  capita  lauare  occisorum  .suo  cruore,  aquani  non  inuenit 
prope.  Tunc  benedicens  frontem  terre,  fons  lucidus  crupit,  qui  usque 
hodic  ibi  manet".  Copulans  sanctissimus  Edus  episcopus  capita 
illorum  occisorum  ad  corpora  sua,  dixit  alta  uoce  eis  coram  omnibus : 
'  In  nomine  Domini  mei  lesu  Christi  modo  surgite  ad  nos.'  Vnde 
ad  verbum  episcopi  illi  surrexerunt  leti  et  sani,  bcnedicentes 
Christum  et  suum  pontificem. 

xiii.  HoMO '-  quidam,  qui  paciebatur  magnum  dolorem  capitis  venit 
ad  sanctum  Edum  dicens :  '  O  sancte  Dei,  affligor  ualde  dolore 
capitis ;  ora  pro  me.'    Cui  ait  pontifex :   '  NuIIo   modo  poterit  a  te 

'  ecce  niercedem  magni  laboris  una  hora  perdidi  S.  fpcrfidi  R'  R^. ) 
2  orans    M    T.  s    =3  §  ,4  .  ri  f.  gg6^  RSu.s.  <  per  siluam  Elo  S. 

o  adliuc  indomitos,  et  slatini  mites  .  .  .  facli  sunt  S  R  add.  «   "  S  5  15  ; 

R'  u.  s.  R-  f.  151  f'.  '  Drum  T.  *  intuens  antem  .  .  .  uirginem,  .  .  . 

nidit  quod  uterus  illius  partum  gestans  intumcsccbat.  Et  cito  surrcxit  illc  sine 
clbo,  ut  ab  isto  loco  fugeret.  Tunc  illa  .  .  .  pcnitentiam  egit.  Sanctus  autem 
.  .  .  benedixit  uteruni  eius;  ct  statim  infans  in  utcro  cius  euanuit  S  R. 
"   =S   §   16;  R'  f.  99  ■',  R-  u.s.  '"  In   S   R  it  is  three  virgins  from  the 

monastery  of  Dnmiard  who  are  murdered.  "  manens,  Fons  puellarum 

uocatur  S.  '=  =-S  §  17  ;  R'  u.s.  R'  f.  151 '. 


VITA  SANCTI  AEDI  39 

dolor  iste  exire,  nisi  in  me '  superveniet ;  set  premium  magnum 
liabebis  si  pacienter  sustinueris.'  IUe  respondit :  '  Domine,  dolor 
supra  vires  est.'  Sanctus  Edus'  ait:  '  Dolor  capitis  tui,  o  homo, 
veniat  in  capud  mcum.'  Et  ilico  dolor  desccndit  in  capud  sancti 
pontificis,  et  homo  ille  sanus  exiuit,  gratias  agens.  Suscepit  igitur^ 
Christi  famulus  dolorem  alterius  in  se  ipsum,  ut  proximum  adiuuaret, 
et  'vt'  pro  Christo  martirium  tolcraret.  Et  multi  postea'',  inuocato 
nomine  sancti  Edi  ^,  a  dolore  capitis  sanantur,  sicut  in  hac  re  pro- 
batum  est'.  1  Quedam  sancta  virgo'  habens  nimium  dolorem  capitis,  f.  135(1)' 
inuocauit  nomen  sancti  Edi,posita  longe  ab  eo  ;  et  ilico  sana  facta 
est  a  dolore  capitis  usque  ad  mortem  suam. 

xiv.  Regina  ^  regis  Themorie,  id  est  Diarmada  filii '  Cearbaill, 
Mugain  nomine,  que  de  Mumonia  est  orta '",  sterilis  erat,  et  non 
habebat  prolem  ;  rogauitque  "  illa  sanctum  Edum  ut  haberet  filium. 
Dixitquc  ei  sanctus :  '  Habebis,  domina  regina,  filium,  qui  erit  rex 
gloriosus.'  Et  illa  peperit "  filium,  id  est  Aedh  Slane,  qui  fuit  rex 
magnus  Temorie,  natus  per  orationem  sancti  Edi  episcopi". 

XV.  Venit"  beatus  Edus  episcopus  ad  quasdam  sanctas  uirgines, 
que  erant  sub  cura  sancti  Kyarani'^  abbatis'".  Ille  uirgines  habebant 
cenam  paratam  beato  Kyarano,  patrono  suo  '",  quam  dederunt  sancto 
Edo  episcopo.  Sciens  autem  episcopus  uirgines  esse  in  angustia, 
cum  esset  sanctus  Kj-aranus  prope,  dixit  eis'*:  '  Ponite  vassa  cibi 
vestri  etpotus,  sicut  fuerunt"  antea,  et  erunt  plena  simili  modo.'  Et 
sic  inuenta  sunt.  Et  cena  reparata  a  Deo  per  gratiam  sancti  Edi, 
iterum  tradita  est  sancto  Kyarano  a  beatis  uirginibus  ■". 

xvi.  Aliquando  "  venit  sanctus  senior  Edus  ad  cellam  aliarum 
uirginum,  et  sedit  super  petram  ante  ostium  celle.  Et  raptus  est 
sanctus  episcopus  in  celum  ante  omnes,  et  post  duas  horas  dimissus 
est  supereandem  petram  ;  et  ualde  vniuersi  illi  mirabantur.  Casula''- 
uero  '^,  quam  tunc  beatus  pontifex  dimisit  in  illam  cellam,  petentibus 
uirginibus,  usque  hodie  ibi  manet  cum  magno  honore-*. 

'  in  me  om.  T.  -  tunc  T.  aM.  '  om.  T.  *  liis  m.  pr.  ^  Both 

in  M  and  T  is  a  marginal  note  calling  attention  to  this.  ^  probatur  T. 

'  Nam  sancta  Brigida  S  ;  cf.  Lismore  Lives,  p.  324.  «   =S  §  18  ;  not  in  R. 

''  61ia  T.  '0  orta  est  T.  "  et  rog.  T.  12  genuit  agnum,  quasi  ad 

consecrandnm  uterum  sterihs  ;  et  iterum  piscem  argenti  ...  Et  iterum  genuit 
filium  etc.  S.  "  Here  S  §  19  ;  R'  f.  99'',  R-  u.s.  inserta  story  of  Aed'sjourney 
through  the  air,  an  evident  doublet  of  S  §  11;  cf  notes  to  §  vn  sicfira.  '*  =  S 
§  20  ;  R'  R2  u.s.  16  Ker-  T,  and  so  m/ra.  '«  artificis  fil.  S  ;  Kerano 

Cluaynensi  R.  "  scilicet  ouem  coctam  cum  paucis  panibus  et  uasculum  non 

grande  boni  hcoris  [ceruisie  R]  S  and  practically  R.  "  colhg  it  e  hec  omnia 

ossa  ouis  consumpta  [?  -te]  etc.  S  R.  '■'  fuerant  T.  ">  Here  S  §§  21,  22  ; 

R'  {.  100",  R-  t.  151  '',  insert  two  stories  (a)  hovv  a  gospel  book  was  sent 
from  heaven  to  Brigit  for  Aed  ;  (6)  how  a  building  was  permanently  roofed 
with  snow.  ^i   ^  g   5  23  ;  R'  R2  u.s.  2a  .Ja,n  m.  T.  ^^  o,n.  T. 

"  permanet  in  testimonium  uirtutis  S  R. 


40  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

svii.  QuiDAM '  crudelis  miles  virginem  quandam  rapuit,  volens 
eam  habere  uxorem  ;  set  cum  illa  peruenit  ad  domum  illius  viri, 
ilico  mortua  est  uirgo.  Hoc  audiens  sanctus  Edus,  perrexit  ad 
illum,  increpans  eum  de  sua  audacia  ;  ipse  enim  egit  penitentiam,  et 
obtulit  se  episcopo  in  habitum  monachalem  ;  et  postea  fidelis 
monachus  fuit  sub  cura  episcopi.  Et  ait  sanctus  Edus  episcopus 
uirgini  mortue :  '  Surge,  filia,  et  ueni  nobiscum  ad  cellam  tuam.' 
I!Ia  ilico  a  morte  surrexit ;  et  congratulabantur  omnes  in  Christo 
cum  illa. 

xviii.  FoDiENTES^  aliquando  fratres'  circa  monasterium  sancti  Edi, 
invenerunt  saxum  quod  nulla  vi  de  suo  loco  potuit  deponi.  Videns 
hoc  sanctus  Edus,  imperavit  saxo  ■■  coram  fratribus,  ut  descenderet  in 
alium  locum ;  et  ilico  ad  uerbum  sancti  episcopi  saxum  in  alium 
locum  descendit.  Quod  sanctus  Edus  benedixit,  et  sanitas  quibusdam 
apud  ipsum  a  Deo  per  benedictionem  sancti  episcopi  datur. 

xix.  Erant''  pessimi  latrones  in  insula  in  medio  stagni,  qui 
niultum  regioni  per  circuitum  nocebant.  Et  uolebat  sanctus  episco- 
pus  Edus  eos  inde  expellere,  et  non  potuit.  Quibus  dixit :  '  stagnum 
istud  erit  mihi  obediens.'  Et  sequenti  nocte  illud  stagnum  de  suo 
loco  in  regionem  Connacthorum  *  exiuit,  et  stetit  ibi  in  quodam  campo ; 
et  vocatur  Loch  na  h-Aidche'  scotice,  id  est  stagnum  noctis,  eo  quod 
in  nocte  peruenit  illuc.  Sic  enim  quidam  propheta  nomine  Becc  * 
dixit :  '  Stagnum  aque  huc  veniet  nocte  propter  imperium  sancti^  Edi 
episcopi.' 

XX.  HoMo '"  quidam  cogebatur  a  domino  suo,  quodam  mago,  reddere 
debitum  suum,  id  est  gregem  porcorum.  Et"  venitad  sanctum  Edum, 
f- 135(1)°  |ut  ipse  sibi  inducias  a  domino  suo  peteret.  Magus  autem  hoc" 
noluit  dare.  Cui  ait  sanctus  episcopus  :  '  Ego  reddam  tibi  debitum 
pro  eo.'  Accipiensque  ille  magus  porcos  a  sancto  pontifice,  exiuit 
gaudens  ad  domum,  et  clausit  suile  super  porcos.  Mane  autem  suile 
clausum  invenit,  set  mininie  porcos.  Tunc  sentit'''  quod  nil  valet 
magica  ars  contra  Christianitatem. 

xxi.  Venit  '^  aliquando  dux  Tedbe  "  deuastare  quandam  "  plebem  in 
regione  Midhi ;  et  rogatus  [est]  sanctus  Edus  ab  incolis  illius  plebis 
occurrereei,etpaceinab  eo  querere.  Hocaudiensduxait  exercituisuo: 

'  =  S  §  24 ;  Ri  f.  100  6,  R=  u.s.  2  =  S  §  25  ;  R'  u.s.  R"  f.  152  ".  s  Quidam 
uiri  fecerunt  fossam  circa  etc.  S  ;  quidam  fossatores  R.  ^  saxa  T.         ''   =  S 

§§   26,   27;  R'   f.    100'',    R-  u.s.  «^  Connact-   T.  '  L.   na  h-Iche  T. 

*  Bec  fihus  Deieth  S.  »  ont.  T.  i»  =  S  §  28  ;  Ri  u.s.  R^  S.  152  ^.  "  o>n.  T. 
"  sensit  T.  "    =  S  §  29  ;   R'  i.  100  <^,  R-  u.s.     From  this  point  to  the  end, 

and  also  in  the  first  section  of  the  next  hfe  (Ailbe),  the  illuminated  initials  at 
ihe  beginning  of  the  sections  are  omitted  in  M.  Evidently  the  illuminator 
here  turned  over  two  leaves,  and  so  did  the  foliator.  "  rex  Thethbe  S  ; 
princeps  .  .  .  Tedph[e]  R.  '*  quendam  T. 


VITA  SANCTI   AEDI  41 

'  Eamus  uelociter,  priusquam  sanctus  Edus  episcopus  ad  nos  ueniet.' 
Hoc  sciens  vir  Dei  signauit  contra  illos.  Illi  auteni  ingredientes  iri 
quendam  fluuium  in  confinio  illius  plebis  et  regionis  Tedbe,  equi 
eorum  stcterunt  immobiles  in  uado,  donec  peruenit  ad  eos  sanctus 
episcopus.  Quibus  ipse  ait :  '  Reuertimini,  boni  homines,  ne  deterius 
uobis  fiet ;  quia  nec  vos  nec  equi  vestri  hinc  longius  ire  poteritis.' 
Tunc  ilH  agentes  penitentiam,  soluti  sunt,  et  uacui  redierunt  ad  sua, 
glorificantes  sanctitatem  beatissimi  Edi  episcopi. 

xxii.  Ambulans  >  in  via  sanctus  senior  Edus,  occurrit  ei  quidam 
homo  tristis  dicens:  '  Domine,  decem  uac[c]as  habeo ;  et  ecce  modo 
omnes  vituli  earum  a  luppis  deuorati  sunt,  excepto  vno.'  Cui  sanctus 
episcopus  ait :  '  CoUige  hmum  quod  meo  baculo  adheret,  et  mixtum 
cum  aqua  asperge  inde  vac[c]as  et  vitulum  viuum.  Hoc  faciens, 
dihgent  eum  uacce  ualde,  et  dabunt  lac  suum.'  Et  sic  factum  est. 
De  quo  homo  ille  cum  suis  multum  gaudebant  ;  quia  non  de  vitulis 
dolebant,  set  de  matribus  et  lacte  earum. 

xxiii.  Parentes^  vnici  filii'  venerunt  ad  sanctum  Edum,  rogantes 
eum  "ut'  ipse  quereret  illum  vnicum  filium,  quem  rex  Midhi  ■"  in 
vinculis  tenebat  ad  perdendum  eum.  Et  perrexit  cum  illis  sanctus 
senior  ad  insulam  stagni  Lebayn  °,  vbi  erat  rex  ;  set  non  permissus 
est  sanctus  episcopus  in  insulam.  Erat  enim  edictum  a  rege,  ne  vir 
Dei  introduceretur  in  insulam.  Hoc  sciens  sanctus  Edus,  calcauit 
aquam  quasi  aridam  terram,  et'  ambulauit  siccis  pedibus  in  insulam 
ad  regem.  Videns  rex  maximum  ante  [se]  factum  miraculum,  dedit 
vinctum  sancto  pontifici.  Dei  seruus  benedicens  regi,  donauit  illum 
liberum  Deo  gratias  agentibus. 

xxiv.  Crudelis'  homo  et  infelix  aliquando  iugulauit  alium  iuxta 
sanctum  Edum.  Cui  auriga  sancti  episcopi  dixit :  '  Pereat  manus 
tua,  et  cadat  a  te ;  quia  non  dedisti  honorem  sancto  Dei.'  Et  ait 
sanctus  episcopus  Edus  :  '  Bene  dixisti  hoc*  misero  homini;  nam  in 
hac  hora  mortuus  esset,  nisi  hunc  sermonem  dixisses.  Quando  enim 
homo  vult  vindicare,  Deus  non  vult ;  ideo  iam  quia  hoc  dixisti,  Deus 
dedit  ei  inducias  huius  anni  ad  penitendum  ;  set  completo  hoc  anno' 
in  hac  die  morietur.'      Et  sic  factum  est '". 

XXV.  Beatus  "  senex  Edus  episcopus  perrexit  ad  ducem  Bai- 
thenum'^,  ut  liberaret  quandam  feminam  liberam,  quam  dux  cogebat 
ut  esset  ancilla.    Cui  dux  superbus  dixit:   'NuIIo  modo  dimittam 

I  =  S  §  30 ;  Ri  f.  loi  ",  R=  f.  152  ".  2  =  S  §  31  ;  R>  R2  u.s.  ^  He  was 
a  '  unicus  filius  '  because  he  had  murdered  his  brother  S  R.  *  Neill  S. 

6  Lebuin  T;  Lemdin  S.  «  om.  T.  '   =  S  §  32  ;  R'  R=  u.s.  *  fecisti 

huic  S.  "  anno  hoc  T.         >«  Here  S  §  33  ;    R'  f.  loi '',  R=  f.  152  <*  tell  how 

Aed  recovered  a  brooch  which  had  been  thrown  into  the  sea.         "     S  §  34 ; 
R'  R-  u.s.         '2  regem  Baiethene  S. 


42  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

eatn.'  Cui  vir  sanctus  ait :  'Si  videres  suadentem  tibi  hoc,  statim 
dimitteres  eam.'  Dux  ait :  '  Vere  dimittam  eam,  si  videro  eum.' 
f- 135  (")  ^  Sanctus  ait :  |  '  Non  poteris  sustinere  terribilitatem  vultus  eius.'  Dux 
autem  grauiter  postulans,  sanctusque  signauit  illum  cum  suis;  ap- 
paruit  ilico  demon  ante  eos ',  et  exterriti  sunt,  et  facti  sunt  uelut 
mortui ;  et  vix  orationibus  sancti  episcopi  ad  uitam  reuocati  sunt. 
Et  sic  mulierem  illam  a  seruitute  liberauit. 

xxvi.  Intrans''  sanctus  Edus  episcopus  domum  cuiusdam  militis, 
in  qua  erat  furtum';  dominus  autem  domus  gauisus  est  in  aduentu 
sancti  senis.  Colloquentes  invicem,  ille  miles  vidit  sanctum  Edum 
semper  intendentem  in  angulum  vbi  erat  furtum ;  et  interrogans 
virum  Dei  cur  inspiceret  semper  illum  locum,  dixit  ei :  '  Noli  in- 
quirere,  fili.'  Ille  miles  magna  prece  postulans,  ait  ei  sanctus : 
'  Furtum  ibi  est,  et  demones  supra  lambentes  illud,  et  ludentes  in 
eo.'  Ille  ait :  'Ostende  mihi  illos,  domine  episcope.'  Sanctusait: 
'  Noli  videre  tetros  *  demones.'  Postulans  autem  ille  moleste,  ostendit 
ei  vir  Dei  demones;  et  cum  vidit  ipse  species  demonum,  morti 
appropinquauit ;  et  vix  oracione  sancti  consequtus  est  vitam.^ 

x.xvii.  QuiDAM  °  dux  de  Mumenia  resistens  in  aliqua  re  sancto 
seni  Edo  ',  dimisit  repente  lumen  oculorum,  et  effectus  est  cecus. 
Postea  ille  agens  penitentiam",  magnas  oblaciones  et  agros  obtulit 
sancto  Edo ;  et  ilico,  orans  vir  ~Dei'°  pro  eo,  aperti  sunt  oculi  eius, 
et  lumen  suum  recepit. 

xxviii.  Cura"  sancti  senis  Edi  erat  multum  ad  liberandos  homines 
de  carceribus,  et  de  seruitute  iniqua.  Quesiuit  a  quodam  rege  iuuen- 
culam  quam  invide  dampnabat ;  set  rex  renuit  dimittere  eam.  Reges 
enim  immites  et  asperi  sancto  Edo  erant ;  set  diuino  nutu  coge- 
bantur  facere  uoluntatem  eius.  Et  ait  sanctus  illi  iuuencule  tunc 
presenti":  '  Sequere  nos,  filia.'  Illa  iam  ad  hanc  uocem  secuta  est 
sanctum  Dei.  Set  nullus  de  exercitu  regis  vidit  illam  sequentem 
sanctum  Dei  per  medias  turbas.  Et  veniens  vir  sanctus  de  castris, 
misit  illam  ad  sua  liberam.  De  hoc  rex  cum  aliis  multum  admiratus 
est.i- 

xxix.  HoMiNES^'  maliciapleni  occurrentes  sancto  Edo  in  via  regali, 
que  dicitur  Slighe  "  Assail,  occiderunt  vnum  de  familia  eius  '^  ante 

'  illos  T.  '^   =  S  §  35  ;  R',  R^  u.s.  '  According  to  S  R  the  women  of 

the  house  vvere  malcing  'pulmentum',  and  hid  it  on  the  approach  of  Aed. 
'  thetros  T.  ^  Here  S  §  36  ;  R'  f.  loi  "^,  R'  f.  153  "  iusert  a  third  version  of 

the  story  of  Aed*s  chariot  flying  through  the  air.  "^   =  S  §  37  ;  R'  R^  u.s. 

'  qui  ancillam  sancto  Dei  liberare  nolebat  S.  ^  dimisit  ancillam,  et  S  ndd. 

'  o;n.  T.  '»   =  S  §  38  ;  R'  R=  u.s.  "  -te  T ;  M  m.  pr.  '^  Here 

S  §  39,  R'  f.  loi'',  R''  u.s.  insert  a  story  of  a  Druid  seeming  to  pass  through 
a  tree  ;  cf.  Cain.  §  xi.  "  =  S  §  40 ;  R'  R''  u.s.  nouem  uiri  S.  "  Slige  T  ; 
Sligi  Assil  S.  '^  aurigam  sancti  S  R. 


VITA  SANCTI   AEDI  43 

eum  transeuntcm,  quem  ipsc  diligebat.  Et  relinquens  vir  sanctus 
viam  iliam,  vcnit  inde  tristis  in  magno  mcrore,  et  stetit  in  alia  parte 
campi';  et  ccce-  angelus  Domini  apparuit  ibi,  dicens  ei :  '  Nisi  de 
loco  illo  ita  huc  venisses,  terra  ante  te  omnes  illos^  deglutisset ; 
et  ignis»  ibidcm  esset  accensus,  qui  'in'extinguibilis  permaneret 
usque  in°  diem  iudicii'  in  signum  vindicte ;  tamen  morte  pessima 
illi  cicius' peribunt.'     Et  sic  contigit '  illis  omnibus. 

XXX.  VoLENTEs'  qucdam  mulieres"  capita  sua  lauare  in  dominica 
nocte,  dixit  eis  sanctus  Edus :  '  Quid  wltis  facere?'  Dicunt  ei : 
'  Nostra  lauare  capita  volumus.'  Quibus  sanctus  ait :  '  Nolite  facere, 
quia  dominica  nox  est.'  Ille  iam  non  obedientes  sancto''  episcopo, 
lauerunt  capita  sua.  Mane  autem  surgentes,  tota  coma  de  capitibus 
earum  cecidit.  Hoc  videntes  fleuerunt,  et  venerunt  tristes  ad  sanctum 
Edum,  et  penitentiam  egerunt  coram  eo.  Benedixit  eas  sanctus 
pontifex,  dicens :  '  Vestram  portate  ignomeniam '-  hodie  ;  et  crastino 
die  lauantes,  nouis  et  mirabilibus  comis  tecta  erunt  capita  vestra.' 
Et  sic  factum  est.'^ 

xxxi.  I  Venit"  sanctus  Edus  episcopus"  ad  insulam  Bo  Finde,  id  f.  135  (a)« 
est  vac[c]e  albe,  que  est  in  Stagno  Righ  '^ ;  suscepit  eum  sanctus 
Ryoch  "  abbas  illius  loci'*  honorifice.  Monasterium  enim  clarum  in 
illa  insula  est,  quod  e.x  nomine  insule  nominatur  ".  Et  posuit  ille 
abbas  cenam  magnam  de  carnibus  ante  sanctum  episcopum.  Beatus 
uero  episcopus  Edus  nolebat  cames  comedere,  et  benedixit  illas 
carnes,  et  panes  et  pisces'"  et  mel  e'x'inde  facti  sunt.  Et  videntes 
hoc  miraculum  comederunt  illa  cum  episcopo,  gracias  Christo 
agentes. 

xxxii.  Visitauit"  sanctus  episcopus  Edus  sanctum  Henanum''- 
heremitam,  qui  habitabat  in-^  loco  ubi  nunc  est  clarum  monasterium 
in  honore  eius,  quod  uocatur  Druim  -''  Rath  ;  et  rogauit  beatissimus 
Henanus  sanctum  Edum,  ut  sumeret  caritatem  apud  eum  ;  set  tamen 
nichil  habuit  nisi  holera  et  aquam.     Hoc  videns  sanctus  pontifex, 

'  Midi  S  add.  ;  qui  Midensium  dicitur  campus  R.  -  et  ecce  bis  m.  pr. 

^  illos  omnes  T.  *  turris  igneus  S  ;  t.  ignea  R.  ^  ad  T.  ^  iudiciicii  M. 
■  nona  die  S  R.  »  -tingit  T  ;  M  m.  pr.  '■>    =  S  §  41  ;  R'  u.s.  R^  f.  153  \ 

'"  mul.  qued.  T.  "  beato  T.  '-  -min-  T;  ignorantiam  R'  R^.  "  Here 
S  §§  42-4.  R'  f.  102  ",  R-  u.s.  insert  tliree  stories  :  (n)  a  fourth  version  of 
Aed's  chariot  flying  through  the  air  (the  occasion  here  is  an  attack  on  Aed's 
monastery  of  Enach  Midbren)  ;  (A)  after  his  death  shavings  from  his  cross 
cause  wort  to  ferment  properly  ;  (c)  an  attempt  to  move  his  rehcs  from  Enach 
Midbren  is  miraculously  frustrated.  '*   =  S  §  45  ;  Ri  f.  102  ^  R-  f.  153". 

'j  episcopus  Edus  T.  '«  Ri  T.  "  Rioc  T.  is  qui  fuit  sancti  Patncii 

nepos,  erat  enim  fiUus  sororis  eius,  R  add.  ;  cf.  LL.  354  "  22  ;  373  "  27.  '"  erat 
autem  .  .  .  in  tempore  quadragessimali,  S  add.  ■"  pisses  T.  ='    =  S  §  46  ; 

R'  R- u.s.  -'-    En- T  ;  sanctum  Dei  Enoc  [Dynocum  R',  Dynotum  R-] 

Drommo  Rathe  S  R.         -^  om.  T.         -*  Drum  T. 


44  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

subridensque,  ait  ministro  sancti  Henani :  'Vade,  frater,  ministra 
nobis  cibos  sufficienter.'  Et  reuertens  ille  frater'  ad  quoddam  holus 
offerendum,  invenit  coquinam  suam  omni  genere  ciborum  plenam. 
Omnes  hoc  °  videntes  et  audientes,  dabant  gloriam  Deo,  dicentes : 
'  Mirabilis  Deus  in  sanctis  suis^.' 

xxxiii.  Abht^  sanctus  senex  Edus  episcopus  visitare  bcatissimum 
Lasreanum  ",  qui  regebat  plures  monachos  in  insula  posita  in  stagno 
Erne,  quam  Scoti  nominant  Daimh  Hynis  ^,  id  est  insulam  boum '. 
Et  inuenit  sanctus  Edus  beatum  patrem  Lasreanum  et  fratres  suos 
foris  laborantes ',  dixitque  eis :  '  Quid  ego  operis  agam  uobis .' '  Sanctus 
Lasreanus'  ait  ei :  'Opus  tuum  est,  ut  moueas  hoc  hgnum  de  loco 
suo.'  Lignum  illud  erat  maximum  et  uetustum  in  terra.  Tunc 
sanctus  Edus  "  in  Christi  nomine  imperauit  ligno,  ut  discederet  de 
loco  suo.  Lignum  illud  ingens  "  ilico  eleuatum  est  in  simihtudinem 
auis,  et  transiliens  proiecit  se  in  mare.  Et  videntes  hoc  miraculum, 
laudes  Deo  dederunt. 

xxxiv.  Incipiens  "  sanctus  Edus  monasterium  in  quodam  loco  edi- 
ficare '3,  angelus  Domini  dixit  ei  :  '  Non  debes  hic  cellam  edificare.' 
Sanctus  Edus  ait :  '  Vbi  igitur  debeo  ? '  Angelus  respondit :  '  Castel- 
lum  illius  hominis  tibi  a  Domino  datum  est ;  ibi  iam  per  te  anime 
multe  in  celum  ibunt.'  Hoc  audiens  ille  diues  homo",  id  est  dominus 
illius  castelli,  displicuit  sibi  multum  ;  et  iurauit  quod  nunquam  sancto 
Edo  daret  suum  castellum.  Quodam  die,  intrans  sanctus  episcopus 
illud  castellum,  fugit  homo  ille  de  castello  suo,  ne  videret  sanctum 
pontificem.  Et  statim  graui  infirmitate  percussus  est  usque  ad 
mortem.  Sanctus  Edus  dixit  suis:  '  Adducite  eum  ad  me.'  Et  cum 
adductus  fuisset,  ait  ei  sanctus:  '  Confide  in  Doinino,  et  age  peniten- 
tiam.'  Tunc  ille  diues  obtulit  Deo  et  sancto  Edo  illud  castellum  cum 
suis.  Vnde  ait  sanctus  Edus :  '  Elige  modo  hic  esse  viuus  et  sanus 
ab  infirmitate  ista  ad  tempus,  an  nunc  ad  celum  migrare.'  Ille  eligens 
ilico  ad  celum  ire,  accepit  "*  sanctum  sacrificium  a  pontifice,  et  ibi  obiit 
feliciter.  Et  in  illo  castello  sanctus  episcopus  instituit  monasterium, 
quod  ex  nomine  sancti  Edi'"  uocatur". 

'  minister  T.  2  j,o(.  o,„_  -f.  '  Ps.  Ixvii.  36.  *    =  S  5  47  ; 

R'  f.  102'',  R-  u.s.  =  Molasi  Dam  Insy  S;  Molassium  [Malachium  R'] 

abbatem  de  Dam  Ynis  R.  '  Bohinnis  .i.  bouinam  insulam  T.  '  bouium 

M  m.  pr.  8  Euccidentes   siluas,   ut   terram    insule   exercerent   S  ;    and 

practically  R.  »  Molasy  S  ;  Molasius  R.  ">  Edus  sanctus  T.  "  illud 

lign.  ing.  T.  '^   ^  g  ^  ^g  ;  R'  u.s.  R^  f.  153''.  "  priusquam  maiorem 

ecclesiam,  que  nunc  est,  edificaret  S  add.  "  ille  homo  .  ,  .  audiuit  a  quodam 
mago,  quod  domum  suam  .  .  .  clerico  aduenienti  derelinqueret,  et  ideo  .  .  , 
hostia  concludi  iussit,  ne  .  .  .  introiret.  Alio  autem  die,  nullo  uidenti  .  .  .  , 
sanctus  Aidus  venit  in  casteJlum  S  ;  and  practicaljy  R.  '^  cepit  T.  "^  i.  e. 
Rath  Aedha.  "  Here  S  §  49  :  R'  f.  102'',  R"  f.  154  ",  relate  how  Aed  freed 
Finan  ('de  genere  Amolngith '  S)  from  'quidam  de  Gallis'  [pirate  de  terra 
Francorum  R], 


VITA  SANCTI   AEDI  45 

XXXV.  Cisterna'  venenata  per  hiatum  terre^  apparuit  in  illa 
regione  ^  et  fumus  de  ea  egrediebatur,  qui  mortiferam  pestem  homi- 
nibus  et  iumentis  faciebat.  Tunc  habitatores  illius  regionis  rogaue- 
runt  I  sanctum  Edum  episcopum,  ut  eos  adiuuaret  de  illa  pestilencia.  f.  135  (a)' 
Et  pcrrcxit  vir  Dei  cum  eis  ad  ilkun  locum,  et  benedixit  in  Dei  nomine 
illam  cysternam  ;  ct  ab  illa  hora  fumus  ab  ea  euanuit,  et  nichil  postea 
nocuit.  De  hoc  in  illa  plebe  gaudium  magnum  factum  est,  gratulantes 
in  Deo  per  sanctum  suum  *. 

xxxvi.  Promisit  '^  aliquando  beatissimus  episcopus  Edus  vni  fratri 
se  roganti  secum  simul  ire  in  celum,  ut  ueniret  secum  ad  regnum 
Christi.  Et  cum  veniret  dies  exitus  sanctissimi  episcopi  Edi  de  hoc 
seculo,  dixjt  fratri :  '  Prepara  te,  frater,  ut  migres  mecum  ad  celum.' 
llle  autem  tunc  noluit  de  hoc  seculo  migrare.  Adueniens  quidam 
rusticus  ipsa  hora  ad  visitandum  sanctum  senem  Edum  episcopum, 
dixit  ei :  'Vtinam  mihi  diceres,  sancte  episcope:  "Veni  mecum  in 
paradissum ".'  Cui  ait"  ecclesie  pastor,  sanctus  Edus  episcopus : 
'  Prepara  te',  bone  homo,  et  iace  mecum  in  hoc  lecto.'  Ita  agens 
homo,  leta  mente  cum  beatissimo  Edo  episcopo  feliciter  illa  hora  obiit ". 
Hoc  sanctus  Columba  Cylle '  in  insula  Hya '"  videns  spiritualiter, 
dixit  fratribus  suis :  '  Opus  magnum  et  firmum  modo  fecit  frater 
noster,  sanctus  senex  Edus  episcopus.  Ecce  eniin  peccatorem  et  non 
merentem  ducit  secum  in  celum,  nulla  demonum  vis  valens  sibi 
resistere.'  Et  beatissimus  pontifex  Edus  cum  suo  rustico  post  Cristum 
cum  suo  latrone  inter  choros  angelorum  suauia  carmina  canencium, 
quarto  Idus  Nouembris"  migrauit  ad  celum '^  Regnante  Domino 
nostro  lesu  Christo,  cui  est  magnificencia  ab  omni  creatura  cum 
eo'dem'  Deo  Patre  et  Spiritu  Sancto,  qui  sine  fine  viuit  et  regnat,  per 
omnia  secula  seculorum.    Amen. 

EXPLICIT    UITA    SANCTI     EdI 
EPISCOPI  ET  CONFESSORIS 


'   =  S  §  50 ;  R'  R-  u.s.  -  pariatum  terra  M  T.  '  in  Munster  S  R. 

*  Here  S  §  51 ;  R'  R-  u.s.  insert  a  section  on  Aed's  virtues.     It  is  mere  common 
form.  *   =  S  §  52 ;  R'  f.  103",  R-  u.s.  *  ait  sanclus  T.  '  si  uis, 

laua  te  S  R.  »  ob.  hora  T.  '  chille  T.  i»  Hia  T ;  Ye  S  ;  I  R. 

*'  hodie  S  R.  '-  ubi  sine  merore  regnabit  in  eternura.     Cuius  meritis 

deleatur  dolor  capitis  scriptoris  huius  vite  R-. 


Ib^fta  saticti  ^liiei  ardjirpiscopi  trc  Jmlcct 

•  '3^  Incipit  Vita  beatissimi  patris 

SANCTI   AlBEI  *   ARCHIEPISCOPI    ET   CONFESSORIS 

ir  i.  Albeus'  episcopus  virorum  Momenencium'  pater  beatissimus, 
et  totius  Hibernie  insule  post  Patricium  secundus  patronus^  ex 
orientali  parte  regionis  Cliach  ^,  que  est  in  Memonia ',  ortus  est. 
Pater  autem  illius  vocabatur  Olcnais',  qui  apud  regem  Cronanum  " 
in  regione  Artrigi '  habitauit ;  ibique  regis  ipsius  ancillam  nomine 
Sanclit '°  occulte  affidauit,  et  cum  ea  dormiuit.  Sciens  vero  Olcnais, 
pater  sancti  Albei,  ancillam  a  se  concepisse,  timensque  regem,  ne 
occideretur,  fugitiuus  eftectus  est.  Postea  autem  illa  ancilla  genuit 
filium  suum  sanctum  Albeuni.  Videns  quoque  rex  Cronanus  filium 
ancille  sue,  ait :  '  Iste  puer  iam  genitus,  natus  de  ancilla,  sub  mee 
culmine  domus  nequaquam  habitabit,  nec  inter  meos  filios  erit 
nutritus.'  Et  precepit  rex  seruis  suis,  vt  occideretur  puer.  In- 
spirante  autem  Spiritu  Sancto  in  seruis  illis,  non  occiderunt  puerum  ; 
set  sub  quadam  petra  posuerunt  eum,  ibique  reliquerunt ;  vbi 
nomen  eius  usque  hodie  adoratur.  Sub  petra  autem  eadem  fera 
lupa  habitabat,  que  sanctum  puerum  valde  adamauit,  [et]quasi  mater 
tenera  inter  suos  catulos  leniter  eum  nutriuit. 

Quadam  autem  die  cum  illa  fera  bestia  ad  querendum  victum  in 
siluis  vagasset,  quidam  vir,  nomine  Loch'h'anus  filius  Lugir  ",  naturali 
bono  perfectus'^,  videns  sub  petra  illa  puerum  inter  catulos,  extraxit 
eum,  et  secum  ad  domum  suam  portauit ;  statimque  fera  reuertens, 
et  puerum  absentem  cernens,  cum  magno  anelitu  velociter  secuta  est 
eum.  Cumque  Lochanus  domui  sue  appropinquasset,  fera  tenuit 
pallium  eius,  et  non  dimisit  eum  donec  vidit  puerum.  Tunc  Loch- 
anus  ad  feram  dixit :  'Vade  in  pace;  iste  puer"  nunquam  amplius 
erit  inter  lupos,  set  apud  me  manebit.'  Tunc  fera  illa,  lacrimans  et 
rugiens,  ad  speluncam  suam  tristis  reuersa  est.     Lochanus  hic  filius 

^  On  the  margin  of  M  is  an  Irisb  pedigree  of  Ailbe,  nearly  identical  witii  tbat 
in  LL.  349'^.  1  he  name  in  R  is  always  written  Helueus.  ^  =S  §§  i,  a  ;  R^ 
f.  130  '  ;  Ir.  p.  97.  ^  Mu-  M.  *  alter  Patricius  S.  =>  Elyach  M  ; 

Any  Cliacb  R.  "  Mumenia  M.  '  Olcneus  R  ;  Ocbu  mac  Diila  Ir. 

«   ciiief  of  Ara   Cliacb    Ir.  »  -gbi    M.  i»  Sandith   M  ;    Sant   S. 

"  Lugbyr  M.  '-  pro-  M.  "  pucr  iste  M. 


VITA  SANCTI   ALBEI  47 

Lugir  quibusdam  Britonibus',  qui  apud  eum  in  oriente  Cliach  - 
fuerunt,  dedit  sanctum  puerum',  et  ipsi  diligenter  nutrierunt  eum  ; 
nomenque  ei  dederunt  Albeus,  eo  quod  viuus  sub  rupc*  repertus 
est.     Et  gratia  Dei  erat  cum  illo. 

ir  ii.  Post°  hec  venit  quidam  Cliristianus  sacerdos'  missus  a  sede 
apostolica  ad  Iliberniam  insulam  multis  annis  ante  Patricium,  ut 
fidem  Christi  ibi  seminaret'.  Hibernienses  autem  tunc  fucrunt 
gentiles  ;  et  non  receperunt  eum,  nec  crediderunt  sibi  nisi  pauci. 
Cum  ergo  venisset  ille  ad  Memonenses',  inuenit  sanctum  puerum 
Albeum  foris  orantem,  aspicientem  in  celum,  rogantemque  assidue 
ut  ostenderetur  |  ei '  vera  credulitas,  dicens  :  '  Oro  ut  sciam  creatorem  f.  132 « 
omnium,  et  credam  ei,  qui  fecit  celum  et  terram  et  omnes  creaturas  ; 
scio  enini  quod  omnia  elementa  sine  artifice  facta  sunt,  nec  humanus 
artifex  potuit  facere  illa'".'  Cum  ergo  hanc  orationem  sanctus  puer 
Albeus  orasset,  sacerdos  ijle"  de  propinquo  audiens,  salutauit  eum, 
et,  secundum  sui  cordis  desiderium,  docuit  eum  de  hiis  omnibus,  et 
baptizauit  eum,  ponens  illi  '^  idem  ^  nomen,  Albeus. 

ir  iii.  Postea  "  autem  Britones  illi,  nutritores  sancti  Albei,  volentes 
ad  patriam  suam  exire'*,  beatus  Albeus  cum  illis  vsque  'ad  mare' 
ambulauit,  volens  transnauigare  cum  eis ;  illi  autem  precio  dato 
nauem  ascenderant,  et  Albeum  ire  secum  nolentes,  in  portu  solum 
reliquerunt.  Illi  autem  toto  die  vento  et  fluctibus  maris  iactati, 
rursum  "*  ad  eundem  locum  retrusi  sunt,  vbi  dimiserunt  eum. 
Videntes  autem  illi  sanctum  puerum  in  portu,  et  scientes  causa 
ipsius  circumiactatos  esse  periculose  inter  fluctus,  assumpserunt  eum 
in  nauem,  et  simul  prospera  nauigacione  vsque  ad  Britanniam 
nauigauerunt. 

ir  iv.  Deinde"  voluit  beatus  Albeus  Romam  pergere,  vbi  diuinam 
scripturam  disceret.  Cumque  ad  mare  Icth  '*  peruenisset,  quod  est 
inter  Britanniam  et  Galliam,  invenit  viros  volentes  nauigare  ;  et  non 
diniiserunt  eum  secum.  Tunc  vnus  ex  illis  dixit  ei,  irridens  eum : 
'  Vade  "  in  illam  nauem,  que  ™  est  ante  te.'    Nauis  autem  illa  erat 

•  Christianis  R  arfrf. ;  qui  in   famulatu  fuerunt  S  add.  -  Elyach   JI.   . 

'  Ir.   p.  98.  *  i.  e.    Ir.   ail  a  rock  ;  and  beo,   living.  ^    =S  §3  ; 

R-  f.  130''.  *  uenit  Palladius  S  (which  omits  ihe  mission  from  Rome)  ; 

sanctus  Pallidus  (sic)  a  papa  Celestino  ante  Patricium  missus  R.  '  Here 

S  inserts  the  story  of  the  eflfect  of  the  narrative  of  the  Crucifixion  on 
Conchobar  mac  Nessa.  the  fanious  king  of  Uister,  wliom  it  raakes  contem- 
porary  with  Palladius  ij'i  ;  cf.  LL.  124"  46  ff.  *  Mumo-  M.  '  sibi  M. 

^^  et  ideo  adrairari  cepit  in  hiis,  sicut  fecerunt  quondam  summi  sacerdotes 
Hephi  in  Egypto  R  adj.  "  Palladius  S  ;  s.  Pallidus  R.  '^  ei   M. 

's  idem   illud    M.  '*    =    S    §  4  ;    R=   f.    131".  '5  a  suo  famulatu 

fugientes  S.  '"  sursum  T.  "   =S  §  4  ;  R-  u.s.         '»  mare  n-Icht  M  ; 

mare  n-Ict  S  ;  mare  quod  inter  Angliam  et  Galliam  est  R.  '^  Ir.  p.  99. 

20  que  circa  se  pellem  non  habet  S. 


48  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

vetusta  et  fracta  multis  diebus.  Sanctus  Albeus  statim  ad  vocem 
eius'  nauem  illam  ascendit ;  et''  mira  nauigacione  et  recta  Dei 
gubernacione  cepit  transmaritare.  Tunc  vir  ille  post  eum  clamauit, 
dicens  :  '  Noli  in  naui  mea  nauigare.'  Nolens  Albeus  in  naui  esse  sine 
licentia  nauigatoris,  expandit  cucullum  suum  super  mare,  seditque 
super  illud,  confidens  in  Domino ;  et"  benedixit  nauem,  et  sola 
reuersa  est  ad  dominum  suum.  Albeus  autem  super  cucullum  suum 
sedens,  oransque  sanctam  Trinitatem,  mirabiliter  trans  mare  peruenit  ■*. 

ir  V.  Post  ^  hec  sanctus  Albeus  peruenit  ad  quandam  stacionem 
vbi  fuerunt  exercitus  Romani ;  et  fama  illius  ante  eum  ad  illos  venit. 
Tunc  illi  temptantes  eum,  duxerunt  tres  viros  ad  eum  ",  ut  curaret 
eos  ;  vnus  cecus,  alter  surdus,  tercius  mutus.  Sanctus  Albeus  videns 
miseriam  illorum,  diuinam  clemenciam  rogauit  pro  eis,  et  sanauit  eos 
ante  omnes. 

ir  vi.  Videns''  autem  Deus  quod  indigne  sanctum  suum  temptantes 
fecerunt  malum,  misit  niuem  magnam  super  omnia  castra  eorum. 
Tunc  omnes  clamauerunt  ad  sanctum  Albeum,  coartati  nimio  frigore, 
ut  auferret'  illam  plagam  niuis  ab  eis.  Albeus  vero  misertus,  eleuata 
manu  benedixit  celum  ;  statimque  sol  lucidus  apparuit,  et  calificauit 
castra ;  et  omnes  cum  gaudio  benedixerunt  Dominum  et  sanctum 
Albeum. 

[TJ  vii.  Tunc^  venerunt  tres  fortissimi  leones  de  siluis,  et  irruentes 
in  castra,  vnus  ex  eis  occidit  virum  vnum  ;  et"  duo  occiderunt  duos 
equos  regis.  Volentes  quoque  deuorare  eos,  acceperunt  eos  inter 
dentes.  Tunc  fugerunt  omnes  timore  leonum.  Videns  autem 
sanctus  Albeus  hanc  miseriam,  dixit  leonibus :  'Quamuis  istos 
occidistis,  nobis  non  videntibus,  cadauera  tamen  coram  oculis 
nostris  nolite  comedere.'  Statim  vero  leones  obedientes  illa 
corpora  de  ore  suo  proiecerunt  ;  et  [ad]  "^  sanctum  Albeum 
velociter  leones  adcurrunt  mites,  et,  quasi  veniam  postulantes 
f.  isa^^de  illis  occisis,  sancti  Albei  pedes  |  humiliter  lingebant.  Orante 
autem  sancto  Albeo,  vir  ille  mortuus  surrexit  viuus.  Tunc  dixit  rex 
ad  sanctum  Albeum  :  '  O  sancte  Dei,  scio  quia  nichil  tibi  impossibile 
est  per  Deuni  tuum  ;  rogo  ergo  te,  ut  in  nomine  omnipotentis  binos 
equos  meos,  quos  valde  diligo,  resuscites.'  Audiens  sanctus  Albeus 
illum  rogantem  in  nomine  Dei  omnipotentis,  signo  sancte  crucis  sig- 
nauit  equos,  et  ilico  surrexerunt.  Bened[ix]itque  leones,  qui  linge- 
bant  pedes  eius,  et  suis  comis  quasi  linteo  peregrini  sancti  Albei  pedes 
leniter  tergebant.     Rex  dixit  sancto  Dei :  '  Fac  "  leones  istos,  ne  huc 

1  illius  M.  '  et  sola  nauis  nauigabat  in  mari,   et  mare  non  intrauit  in 

illam  S.  '  om.  M.  ■■  ad  terram  Francorum  R  ac/<i.  ^   =  S  §  5  ; 

R2  {.  131K  6  eos  M.  '   =S  §  6  ;  R2  u.s.  «  afl--  M  T.  »   =  S 

§5  7,  8,  R-u.s.,  which  divide  this  into  two  separate  miracles.  '"  Ir.  p.  100. 

"  01«.  T  ;  in  M  added  above  line.  '-  Eice  S  R.  . 


VITA  SANCTI   ALBEI  49 

itcrum  veniant.'  Tunc  beatus  Albeus  ait  ei :  '  Noli  eos  a  tuo  con- 
spectu  vacuos  dimittere  ad  loca  sua.  Ecce  equi  tui  de  ore  eoriim 
erepti  sunt,  volentes  eos  comcdere,  Dco  pcrmittentc.  Tribue  ergo 
illis  modo  prandium^  ut  scmpcr  recedant  a  finibus  tuis.'  Tunc  rex 
ait :  '  Non  habeo  modo  in  promptu,  quod  vellem  sibi  dare.'  Tunc  "^ 
assumpsit  sanctus  Albeus  prcfcctum  regis  secum  in  montcm  sibi 
propinquum ;  cumque  ibi  Dominum  orasset,  ecce  nubes  magna  a 
culmine  celi  descendit  vsque  ad  terram,  et  ipsa  nubes  attulit  aptum 
prandium  '  leonibus.  Tunc  di.xit  sanctus  Dei  leonibus :  '  Ferte  hoc 
vobiscum  in  hcremum,  et  ibi  comedite.'  Et  ita  fecerunt  leones,  sicut 
dictum  est  illis.  Tunc  clamor  populi  in  altum  eleuatus  est  in  hoc 
maximo  miraculo,  vna  voce  Dominum  et  sanctum  Albeum  benedi- 
centes.  Sanctus  autem  Albeus  benedixit  illis  omnibus  cum  rege,  et 
recessit  ab  eis. 

ir  viii.  Post*  hec  sanctus  Albeus  perrexit  Romam ;  ibique  apud 
Hilarium  episcopum  diuinam  didiscit  scripturam.  Ibique  ^,  fratres 
carissimi,  maxima  et  miranda  miracula  virtus  diuina  pro  sancti 
Albei  arciepiscopi  commendacione  ^  amore,  atque  honore,  et  pro 
edifficatione  fidelium  suorum  hoc  modo  aperuit.  Cum  autem  apud 
predictum  Hylarium  episcopum  in  vrbe  Romana  in  virtutum  pro- 
uectibus  commorabat',  hoc  primum  obedientie  preceptum  a  magistro 
accepit,  ut  sues  in  propinqua  sihia  pasceret'.  Silua  uero  illa  cunctis 
omnino  animalibus"  incommoda  sine  fructu  vel  aliqua  gratia  erat. 
Deus'"  autem  omnipotens  suo  seruo,  sancto  Albeo,  hanc  gratiam 
dedit ;  nam  sues  illius  omnibus  annis  sine  fructu  lignorum  valde 
pingues  fiebant.  Cum  autem  sanctus  Albeus  cotidie  veniebat  ciui- 
tatem,  ut  ibi  apud  Hilarium  legeret,  baculo  suo  depingebat  terram 
circa  sues ;  et  vestigium  baculi  sues  transire  non  audebant,  nec  fures 
nec  bestie  eis  nocere  poterant.  Et  factum  est  ita  quanto  tempore 
fuit  ipse  pastor  suum. 

ir  ix.  Quodam"  anno  sanctus  Hilarius  segetem  maximam"  habuit, 
in  qua''  seminati  sunt  centum  modii.  Et  cum  tempus  messis  ad- 
venisset,  et  seges  valde  maturasset,  messores  non  inveniebantur,  ut 
metterent  segetem.  Tunc  sanctus"  Hilarius  Albeo  dixit :  'Quere, 
fili,  messores,  ut  non  perdamus  segetem  fratrum.'  Ad  uocem  autem 
magistri  statim  sanctus  discipulus  surrexit,  et  venit,  ut  videret  segetem. 
Tunc  iam  pene  nox  apparuit'^;  tota  mens  sancti  Albei  semper  erat 
ad  orationem ;    et  ibi  ipse  orauit  |  longe.     In'^  prima  autem  vigilia  f.  133 " 

'  centum  equos  S  R.  ^  i^.  p    joi  3  e^  ipsa  nube  centum  equi 

eruperunt   S;  and  practically  R.  *   =S  §  g;  R  f.  131  ".  *  Et  ibi  M. 

'  recora-   M.         '  -raret  M.  *  tribus  annis  S  R  add.  '  anim.  omn.  M. 

">  T   vvrongly   makes   a    new   chapter    here.  "   ==  S   §  10  :    R-  f.   131 ''. 

'«  ?  -mum  T.  '3  quo  T  ;  que  M.         "  ?  -to  T.  '=  -rauit  T.  "  Ir. 

p.  102. 

PLUMMER.  £ 


50  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

noctis  angeli  Dei  ad  sanctum  Albeum  venerunt  loquentes  cum  eo  ; 
et  in  illa  nocte  ante  eum  messuerunt  segetem  totam ',  et  in  vnum 
locum  ordinate  congregauerunt.  Cumque  vidisset  sanctus  Hilarius 
hoc  miraculum  factum  per  suum  seruum  et  discipulum,  magnificauit 
nomen  'Domini',  et  sanctum  dis[ci]pulum  Albeum  benedixit. 

11  X.  Alio"  quoque  tempore  messores  multi  apud  sanctum  Hilarium 
congregati  sunt,  et  in  diuersis  segetibus  separati.  Cum  vna  turba 
eorum  seorsum  fuit  sanctus  Albeus.  In  illo  autem  die  pluuia'  magna 
erat  post  horam  terciam  diei;  et  omnes  sunt*  a  messe  sua  impediti. 
In  segete  vero,  vbi  erat  Albeus,  nulla  gutta  pluuie  cecidit,  set  sol 
lucidus  eis  fulgebat  tota  die  ;  et  omnes  qui  viderunt  hoc,  magnifi- 
cabant  Dominum,  benedicentes  sanctum  Albeum. 

1f  xi.  Quodam'  autem  die  sanctus  Hilarius  ad  beatum  Albeum 
dixit :  '  Ecce  ligna  nostra  non  sunt  fructuosa  in  hoc  anno,  et  ponia 
non  habemus.'  Tunc  sanctus  Albeus  dixit :  '  Orare  contra  voluntatcm 
Dei  non  est  mee  miserie,  set  bonorum  hominum  ;  et  qui  fecit  omnia 
ex  nichilo,  potest  dare  nobis  poma  sine  fructu  lignorum  nostrorum.' 
Audiens  Deus  Pater  omnipotens  humilitatem  sententie  sancti  Albei, 
iuxta  verbum  propheticum  eius  pluit  super  monasterium "  habun- 
danciam  pomorum,  in  tantum  ut  totum  monasterium  inter  rauros 
pomis  mire  magnitudinis  repleretur;  saporque  mellis  erat  in  eis. 
Et  omnes  qui  viderunt  hanc  rem  mirabilem,  Deo  gratias  egerunt, 
admirantes  sanctitatem  beati  Albei. 

ir  xii.  Vir'  quidam  de  familia  sancli  Hilarii  causa  odii  et  invidie 
pateram  vini  cum  veneno  porrexit  sancto  Albeo.  Tunc  beatus  Albeus 
repletus  gratia  Sancti  Spiritus'  et  prophetie,  labium  patere  deorsum 
inclinans,  vinum  in  patera  fixum  stetit,  et  venenum  in  terram  cecidit; 
statimque  illud  venenum  in  serpentem  versum  est ;  et  serpens  ille 
videns  virum  qui  sancto  Albeo  venenum  dedit,  currensque  ad  eum, 
intrauit  in'  illum  ;  et  statim  mortuus  est.  Videns  sanctus  Albeus 
illum  mortuum  esse,  recordatus  est  dominici  precepti  quo  dicitur'": 
'  Redde  bonum  pro  malo ; '  orauit  pro  eo,  et  suscitauit  eum  ante 
omnes.  Ille  homo  magna  testimonia  locutus  est  de  sancto  Albeo; 
et  serpens  ille  reuersus  in  venenum  est",  ne  plus  noceret  homi- 
nibus. 

ir  xiii.  Videns'"  sanctus  Hilarius  magnam  sanctitatem  sancti  Albei, 
et  maxima  mirabiliaque  fiebant  per  illum  a  Deo,  et  ipsum  ''probatum 
esse  in  omni  sapientia,  misit  illum"  ad  dominum'^  papam,  ut  ab  eo 

'  -tum   M  T.                 2   =  S  §  II  ;  R2  u.s.                 '  fluuia  T.  <  stini 

after  sua  M.              '^   =S  5  '2  ;  R'-'  "-s.              ^  ciuitatcm  S  R.  '   =S  §  13  ; 

R^  u.s.            *  Sp.  Sancti  M.            '■*  per  S.              '"  Ir.  p.  103.  "  cs^  before 

1«  M.  "  =S  §5  14,  15;  R2  f.  132".  '3  oin.  T.  "  eum  M.  '=  Clemen- 
tem  S  R. 


VITA   SANCTI   ALBEt  51 

ordinaretnr  episcopus.  Et  sanctus'  papa  gauisus  est  in  aduentu 
eius;  mansitquc  apud  eum  vno  anno  et  quinquaginta  diebus.  Tunc 
autem  viri  sancti  quinquaginta  de  Hibernia  post  sanctum  Albeum 
Romam  perrexerunt.  Cum  ergo'  venissent,  vbi  erant  sanctus'  papa 
et  Albeus,  deditque  eis  papa  cellam  seorsum,  et  misit  sanctuni 
Albeum  cum  eis.  Multi  erant*  ex  ipsis  vnius  nominis,  id  est  duo- 
dccim  Colmani,  ct  duodecim  Comangeni',  et  sancti"  duodecini  Fintani, 
et  bcatissimus  Declanus  cum  ccteris'.  Misit  ergopapa*  eis  sanctis 
hospitibus  pulcerrimos  palnes,  vinum,  oleum,  ct  cetera  bona  cibaria.  '■  133' 
Tunc  sanctus  Albeus  ad  sanctum  Declanum  et  Colmanum'  dixit: 
'Quis  ex  vobis  erit  noster  cellarius"  in  hoc  prandio  ?'  At  illi  dixe- 
runt :  '  Nos  omnes  sumus  lassi,  et  non  possumus  ministrare.' 
Statim  autem  sanctus  Albeus  surrexit,  et  ministrauit  eis,  gaudens 
in  corde  suo,  quia  voluit  ipse  ut  niinistraret.  Tantam  gratiam  Dominus 
lesus  Christus  sancto  Albeo  dedit,  ut  talem  cibum  invenirent  fratres 
cotidie  apud  eum,  qualem  quem"  misit  eis  sanctus'-  papa.  Sanctus 
quoque  Albeus  etiam  fratribus  suis  cibaria  omnibus  noctibus  diui- 
debat,  et  postea  pauperibus,  ita  ut  dimitteret  omnia  vasa  vacua  ;  ct 
in  "  crastino  die  inueniebantur  plena  ;  ita  et  de  '*  potu  permultos  dies. 
Audiens  sanctus  papa  tale  opus,  Deo  gratias^''  egit ;  sanctum  '"  auteni 
Albeum  et  fratres  suos  honorificauit. 

ir  xiv.  Alio"  tempore  rogauerunt  multi  sancti  summum  pontificem, 
ut  sanctum  Albeum  ordinaret  episcopum,  ct  niitteret  eum  ad  Hiber- 
niences"  predicare  ibi,  quia  illi  fuerunt  adhuc  gentiles.  Sanctus  " 
papa  ait :  '  Vellem  ego  ordinare  eum  ;  set  ^"  piget  me  ponere  manum 
meam  super  capud  eius  pre  magnitudine  gratie  spiritalis  quam  sibi 
Dominus  omnipotens  largiter  donauit. '  Valde  displicuerunt  hec 
verba  sancto  Albeo,  et  noluit  accipere  gradus,  quia  mitis  et  humilis 
corde  fuit.  Iterum  sanctus  ■'  papa  ait  *- :  '  Fiat  quod  vultis  ;  set  non 
possum  hoc  agere  usque  ad  natalem  -'  diem  apostolorum  Petri  et 
Pauli ;  quia  ita  constituerunt  mihi  angeli  Dei,  mecum  loquentes ; 
et  nos  videbimus  angelos  Dei  benedicentes  eum  in  die  illa  post 
ordinacionem  suam.'  Hec  vero  prophetia  sancti  pape  completa 
est.     Nam  in  die  natalis  apostolorum  Petri  et  Pauli  angeli    Dei  in 

>  om.   M.  '  aiitem   M.  '  om.    M.  <  eraiit  aftcr  ipsis    JI. 

5  Coemgeni  M  ;  Domongenii  S  m.  pr. ;  Comgeni  Sm.  sec. ;  Modomnog,  Ir.  ;  otii.  R. 
«  oiii.  M  S    R.  '  et  beat.  .  .  .  ceteiis  oni.   S.  «  Clemens  S  R. 

'  filium   Derane   S  njd.  ;  Colm.    et   Decl.  M.  '"  cocus  S  ;  dispensator  R. 

"  o»!.  M.  12  o,„    ivi_  13  o»i.  M.  "o;«.  T.  '^  gratias  Dco  M. 

J«  Ir.  p.  104.  "    =S  §  16;  R=  f.  132«.  18  -ses  M.  i^  Clemens  S. 

-"  manus  mea  inter  te  et  celum  introire  non  potest ;  et  si  manum  meam  supra 
caput  tuum  posuero,  ipsa  manus  .  .  .  precissa  cadet  in  terram  pre  magnitudine 
etc.  .S  followed  closely  by  R.  2'  autcm  M  ;  Clemens  S.  "  ait  :  '  De  manu 
angelorum  episcopalem  gradum  accipies  ;  angelus  enim  Victor  .  .  .  ordinabit  te' 
S  R.  "3  sacrum  M. 

E  2 


52  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

conspectu  beati  pape  et  omnis  populi  sedis  apostolice  benedixerunt ' 
Albeum  ;  consummata  benedictione  ipsius,  omnes  qui  viderant 
hoc,  dederunt  gloriam  Deo,  benedicentes  cum  angelis  sanctum 
Albeum. 

ir  XV.  Post'  hiec  dixit  sanctus  Albeus'  apostolico^:  'Vbi  comedet 
hodie  iste  populus  ?'  Sciens  vero  papa  quod  habebat  beatus  Albeus 
cibum  et  potum  sine  defectu  in  cella  sua,  dixit  ei :  '  In  die  ordina- 
cionis  tue  oportet  te  nos  omncs  reficere.'  Albeus  dixit :  '  Non  est 
hoc  difficile  Domino  meo  lesu  Christo ;  et  ipso  adiuuante  ego  vos 
reficiam.'  Tunc  omnis  populus  secutus  est  sanctum  '^  apostolicum 
ad  hospicium.  Deus  autem  omnipotens  pluit  quinque  ymbres  sancto 
Albeo  in  cellaria  sua;  id  est,  ymbrem  mellis,  olei,  piscium,  panum 
candidissimorum,  vinique  mirabilis.  Et"  de  hiis  affluenter  populus 
Romanus  cum  sancto  papa  gratia  Dei  saciatus  est  tribus  diebus  et 
tribus  noctibus,  laudantes  et  benedicentes  Dominum,et  honorificantes 
seruum  eius,  sanctum  Albeum.  Hec  est  cena  ordinacionis  sancti 
Albei.  Per  multa  quidem  tempora  apud  Romanos  sanctus  Albeus 
habitauit,  et  illi  valde  eum  diligebant. 

ir  xvi.  Post'  hec  sanctus  Albeus  a  sede  apostolica  missus  est  ad 
gentes,  ut  apostolico  more  euangelium  Christi  illis  predicaret ;  et 
magna  plebs  de  gentibus  per  illum  Domino  credidit,  et  baptizati 
sunt.  In  illa  autem  plebe  aqua  defuit.  Tunc  beatus  Albeus  plebi 
misertus  quod  essent  sine  aqua,  quia  illi  inde'  miseriam  paciebantur 
magnam,  perrexit  ad'  montem  sibi  propinquum,  ibique  inveniens 
saxum  magnum,  baculo  suo"  percussit  quatuor  vicibus  illum.  Statim 
autem  quatuor  flumina  de  saxo  illo"  exierunt,  et  illam  provinciam" 
per  quatuor  partes  terre  repleuerunt.  Tunc  illi  videntes  hoc  magnum 
f.  133''  miraculum  per  hominem  factum,  |  per  quem  crediderunt  Deo,  gratias 
egerunt  Deo,  et  firmati  sunt  in  fide  catholica.  In  illa  autem  regione 
sanctus  Albeus  monasterium  construxit,  in  quo  reliquid  sanctos 
filios  Guill".  Benedixit  autem  totam  illam  regionem,  et  recessit 
ab  eis. 

ir  xvii.  Deinde''  sanctus  Albeus  venit  ad  ciuitatem  que  vocatur" 
Dolo  moir",  in  extremis  finibus  Lethe" ;  ibique  sanctus  Albeus  cum 

'  sanctum  add.  M.  ^  =S   5   17  ;  R^  f.  132^     Here  M   and  T  have  an 

identical    marginal    note,  calling    attention    to    this  incident.  ^  dompno 

M  add.  ^  Clementi  S.  ^  dominum  M,  which  consistently  omits  the 

epithet  sanciiis  before  papa.  "  Ir.  p.  105.  '   =  S  §   18  ;   R'  u.s. 

*  om.  M.  »  o>K.  T.  1»  OJH.  M.  "  illo  saxo  M.  "  .(-hiam  M. 

"  Guyll  M.  1*    =  S  §  19  ;  R2  f.  132^  i»  que  uoc.   oiit.   S  ;  lecte, 

Dolo  moir  is  gen.  '*  mhoir  M.  "  ad  quandam  ciuitatem  R  (omitting 

all  the  place-names). 


VITA  SANCTI   ALBEI  53 

populo  suo  in  hospicio  fuit.  Cumque  episcopus  illius  ciuitatis, 
Samson  nomine ',  corpus  Christi  offcrre  coram  populo  cepisset, 
accidit  ut  caiix  eius  et  ampul[l]a  simul  frangerentur.  Tunc  episcopus 
contristatus  est  valde,  et"  tocius  populi  clamor  in  ccclesia  ortus 
est.  Tunc  sanctus  Albeus  intrauit  ecclesiam,  causamque  murmuris 
istius  interrogauit.  Cumque  cognouisset  causam  murmuris  eorum, 
accepit  ipse  fragmenta  calicis  et  ampul[l]e,  et  benedixit  illa ;  et 
reintegrata  sunt,  ita  ut  nullum  fracture  vestigium  remaneret  in  eis. 
Et  omnes  qui  viderunt  hoc,  glorificaverunt  Dominum  per  seruum 
suum  sanctum  Albeum. 

U  xviii.  In'  illis  quoque  regionibus  vir  et  mulier  pessimi  peccaue- 
runt  in  sanctum  Albeum,  detrahentes  ei  coram  omnibus  sine  causa*. 
Pro  hac  causa  ad  penam  ducti  sunt,  et  occisi.  Audiens  autem  Albeus 
quod  illi  occisi  essent,  valde  contristatus  est.  Accessit  vero  ad  eos,  et 
orauit  pro  eis  ad  Deum,  et  suscitauit  illos  a  morte  ante  omnes  ;  quia- 
pro  honore  eius  traditi  sunt  morti.  Tunc  onines  dederunt  gloriam 
Dco,  videntes  magnum  miraculum. 

ir  xix.  Eodem^  tempore  sanctus  Albeus  invenit  in  quadam  ecclesia 
sacerdotem  stantem  ante  altare,  et  volentem  offerre  sacrificium ;  set 
non  potuit,  quia  tenebatur  lingua  eius.  Tunc  Albeus  circumspiciens 
populum  qui  erat  in  ecclesia,  vidit  inter  eos  quandam  mulierem 
pregnantem.  Tunc  spiritus  prophetie  repleuit  sanctum  Albeum  ;  et 
dixit  sacerdoti :  '  Ideo"^  non  possis  loqui,  quia  voluit  Deus  vt  audiretur 
prius  fama  de  illo  infante,  quem  habet  illa  mulier  in  \tero  suo.  Ipse 
enim  electus  Dei  erit,  clarusque  episcopus,  et  vocabitur  Dauid. 
Modo'  signum  habebis  in  hoc,  quia  cum  audierit  populus  presens 
hec  verba,  cantabis  clara  voce.'  Cum  ergo  audisset  populus  hanc 
prophetiam,  sacerdos*  cantauit  missam  ;  et  omnis  populus  vna  voce 
benedixit  beatum  Albeum,  qui  hanc  obscuram  questionem  per  Dei 
gratiam  reuelauit.  Postea  autem  ille  filius  natus"  est.  Pater^^eius 
dedit  eum  sancto  Albeo,  ut  nutriret  eum  Deo.  Ipse  est  Dauid, 
sanctus  episcopus",  cuius  reliquie  requiescunt  in  ciuitate  Chell  '^  Muni, 
que  est  in  Britania. 

1  XX.  Post"  hec  sanctus  Albeus,  quasi  apis  prudentissima,  cum 
mellis  onere  ad  suam  patriam,  Hiberniam,  Deo  comite  reuersus  est. 

'  Samson  nom.  om.  R.  -  valde  et  bis  T  m.  pr.  '   =  S  §  20  ;  R-  u.s. 

*  The  words  'detrahentes  .  .  .  causa '  are  not  in  S  R,  and  are  clearly  a 
later  addition.     They  are  in  Ir.  ^  =  S  §  21  ;  R-  u.s.  cf.  C.  B.  S.  p.  120. 

'  Ir.  p.  107.  '  modo  enim  M  ;  '  Sacerdos  enim  coram  episcopo  non   debet, 

nisi  illo  iubente,  celebrare.'  Cumque  mulier  illa  extra  ecclesiam  esset,  statim 
saccrdos  ciara  uoce  obtulit  etc.  S  ;  and  practically  R.  ^  sac,  on  margin 

after  nihsaiit  M.  *  bis  M  m.  pr.  ">  Et  pater  M.  "  est  enim  s.  D.  ep.  M. 
'»  Ceall  M.         '3   =  S  §  22 ;  R2  f.  la^-J. 


54  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

Cumque  venisset  ad  mare,  benedixit  illud  ;  et  cum  serenitate  magna 
sine  ulla  offencione  in  naui  vilissima  ipse  et  omnis  populus  suus 
trans  mare  nauigauerimti ;  et  in  aquilonali  parte  Hibernie  portum 
tenuerunt.  Ibi  autem,  iubente  sancto  Albeo,  vnus  de  familia  ipsius, 
Colmanus-  nomine,  cellam  edificauit,  que  dicitur  Chell  Ruaid'. 
Cumque  locus  non  haberet  aquam,  sanctus  Albeus  quendam  ibi 
lapidem  benedixit  in  nomine  omnipotentis  Dei,  et  ex  eo  aque  riuulus 
statim  prorupit.  Tunc  sanctus  Colmanus  ad  Albeum  dixit :  '  Modica 
est  aqua  ista.'  Cui  Albeus  ait :  '  Ouamuis  modica'  est,  semper  non 
deficiet,  et  riuulus  eternus  erit  usque  ad  finem  mundi  huius'.'  Vn- 
f.  IJ3''  de  I  nomen  fluuii "  dicitur  Buanann  Chille  Ruaid',  id  est  indeficiens 
riuulus  Chelle  Ruaid". 

T  xxi.  Postea'  rex  illius  regionis,  que  dicitur  Dal  Aride'",  et  de 
illa  gente  origo  sancti  Albei  erat,  bellans  contra  Connachtos"  illis 
diebus,  ipse  versus'^  [est]  in  fugam  magnam,  et  tres  filii  eius"  occisi 
sunt.  Habensque  corpora  illorum,  venit  ad"  Albeum  dicens  :  '  Ecce 
ego,  miser  homo,  veni  ad  te,  sancte  Dei,  vt  mihi  auxilium  prestes  ;  quia 
audiui  quod  facis  magna  mirabilia.'  Ille  autem  rex  vocabatur 
Fintanus,  et  gentilis  erat.  Cui  Albeus  ait :  '  Si  tu  cred[id]eris,  et 
baptizatus  fueris,  diuinum  auxilium  rogabo  pro  te  et  filiis  tuis.' 
Tunc  rex  credidit,  et  baptizatus  est'^  Sanctus  vero  Albeus  accessit 
vbi  erant  filii,  et  orauit  pro  eis  ad  Dominum  lesum  Christum. 
At  illi  viui "  surrexerunt  ad  patrem  suum  ;  et  illi  omnes  firmati 
sunt  in  fide  Christi  ''''.  Tunc  Albeus  illos  benedixit,  et  ait  eis  : 
'  Quia  vos  credidistis  in  Christum,  superabitis  inimicos  vestros.' 
Illico  autem  ille  rex  secundum  verbum  sancti  Albei  perrexit  ad 
bellum  contra  Connactos,  et  vindicauit  in  eis  iniuriam  suam ;  accipi- 
ensque  obsides,  cum  triumpho  magno  ad  domum  suam  gaudens 
reuersus  esf . 

ir  xxii.  Sanctus''  vero  Albeus  circuibat  totam  Hiberniam,  predicans 
baptismum  ;  et  multos  ibi  ™  conuertit  ad  fidem,  set  non  omnes ;  quia 

'  According  to  S  R  they  crossed  on  foot.  '  Collanus  S.  ^  Ceall 

Ruaidh  M  ;  Cell  Roid  S.         '  madica  T.  ^  huius  raundi  IVI.  ^  fluuius  T. 

'  M  re|ieats  the  name  :  Bvanan  Cille  Ruaidh  on  the  margin  in  red  ;  Buanan, 
id  est  perpetuus  R.  »  Celle  Ruaidh  M.  =   =  S  §  25  ;  R^  u.s.         '»  Dal  n- 

Araidhi  M  ;  Fintan  Find  S  rttyf/.  ;  nomine  Furudranus  Albus  R  a(/</.  "  gentem 

Connactorum  S  ni.  pr.  ;  Kyanactorum  S  m.  sec.  ;  que  Kyannachta  dicitur  R. 
'^  Ir.    p.    108 ;    versus   est    ipse    M.  '^  et    regina  S    add.  ;    et   uxor   R. 

"  sanctum  M  add.  '^  S  R  say  nothing  of  the  kings  heathenism  and  conver- 
sion.  '^  om.   M.  '^  et  crastina   die   reginam   resuscitauit   S;    and 

practically  R.  "  Here  S  §5  26,  28  ;  R-  f.  133"  tell  how  Ailbe  raised  (a)  the 

Dalradian  chiefs  fatlier,  who  had  been  decapitated  ;  [b)  tvvo  horses  of  Aengus 
mac  Nadfraich,  king  of  Munster  [at  Pisalbe  S;  ?  Lis  Albe  or  Inis  Albe]. 
"   =  S  §  29  ;  R'^  u.s.  '^"  Here  there  is  a  lacuna  in  M,  caused  by  the  loss  of 

a  leaf. 


VITA   SANCTI   ALBEI  55 

voluit  Dominus  omnipotens  ut  beatus  Patricius  episcopus,  qui  •  post 
Albeumin  Hiberniam  venit,  conuerteret  omnesad  fidem  Hibernences. 
Et  ita  factum  est.  Nam  Patricius  episcopus  totam  Hiberniam  a  gen- 
tiiitatead  fidem  et  baptismum  conuertit.  Cum  beatus  Albeus  audisset 
quod  Patricius  regem  Memonensium,  Engussum  filium  Nefrich,  con- 
uerteret  ad  Christum,  ac  esset  cum  eo  in  ciuitate  regali  Casel,  venit 
ut  eos  salutaret.  Rex  autem  et  Patricius  gauisi  sunt  in  aduentu 
Aibei  ;  et  ille  est  gauisus  eos  videns.  Ibi  vero  accepit  Patricium 
magistrum  suum  '  sanctus  Albeus  ;  quia  valde  erat  humilis.  Tu[n]c' 
re.K  Engus  et  Patricius  ordinauerunt  ut  in  ciuitate  et  cathedra  sancti 
.\lbei  esset  arciepiscopatus  omnium  Memonensium  semper. 

ir  xxiil.  Quadam  die  quedam  mulier  que  *  oculte '  peperit  per 
adulterium,  ducta  est  ad  beatum  Patricium,  ut  indicaret  quis  esset 
pater  filii  sui ;  et  illa  noluit  indicare.  Tunc  beatus  Patricius  ait  ad 
sanctum  Albeum :  '  Angelus  dixit  mihi,  quod  per  te  ista  questio 
soluatur.'  Dixit  sanctus  Albeus  :  '  Per  verbum  angeli  tibi  obediens 
ero.'  Et  ait :  '  Ducantur  ad  me  omnes  viri  qui  habitant  in  una  villa 
cum  ea.'  Et  uenerunt  omnes  nisi  vnus.  Dixitque  sanctus  Albeus  eis : 
'  Est  in  agro  vnus,  qui  non  venit  vobiscum.'  Ille  vero  auriga  erat ;  et 
mirati  sunt  omnes  de  tali  prophetia.  Veniens*  ille,  adductus  est 
infans  ad  sanctum  Albeum,  et  baptizauit  eum.  Dixitque  ei :  'Vade 
modo  ad  patrem  tuum,  et  ostende  illumnobis.*  Statimautem  surrexit 
infantulus,  et  perrexit  '  [a]d '  aurigam,  et  dixit  ad  populum  :  '  Hic 
est  pater  meus.'  At  ille  homo  confessus  est,  quia  verum  testimonium 
dixit  infans  sibi.  Tunc  omnes  dederunt  gloriam  Deo  in  reuelacione^ 
questionis  huius. 

ir  xxiv.  Quodam'  die  cum  Albeus  |  et  Ybarus'  episcopus  am- f.  134'' 
bularent  per  campum  Femin,  venientes  ad  ciuitatem  Casel,  ut 
alloquerentur  ibi  Patricium  episcopum,  et  Engusum  regem,  dixit 
sanctus  Albeus  ad  Ybarum  :  '  Tu*  prior  precede,  pater,  ante  nos  ;  et 
saluta  homines  more  dominorum.'  Cui  Ybarus'  ait :  '  Si  melius 
fuerit,  fiat.'  Tunc  angelus  ad  sanctum  Ybarum  dixit :  '  Non  tuum  est 
precedere,  set  Albei.'  Precedens  sanctus  Ybarus  quasi  vnum  gressum 
lumen  oculorum  amisit.  Tunc  ipse  dixit  Albeo  :  '  Benedic  oculos 
meos,  et  videbo  lumen.'  Di.\itque  sanctus  Albeus  benedicens  oculos 
eius  :  'Deus  vnus,  Deus  trinus,  sanet  te,  et  reddet  tibi  lumen  oculorum 
tuorum.'  Statim  autem  aperti  sunt  oculi  eius,  et  lumen  vidit.  Postea 
vcro,  precedente  sancto  Albeo,  venerunt  ad  Casel. 

'   Ir.  p.  109.  ^  'na  anmcharaid  do  Ir.,  i.  e.  as  his  confessor.  '  Tunc 

Patricius  obtulit  Albeo  omnss  uiros  Muminensium,  ut  esset  eorum  patcr,  et 
regera  Engussum  in  manum  Albei  S  ;  .  .  .  tradidit  potestatem  suam  Helueo 
super  Momonenses.  sicut  ipse  recepit  a  papa  super  omnes  Hibernenses  etc.  R. 
«  Ir.  p.  no.  6  reual.  T.  «  =  S  5  31  ;  R^  f.  133^  '  Ymar  s! 

'  qui  senior  es  R  add.  '  Ymarus,  .  .  .  qui  erat  senior  S. 


56  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

IT  XXV.  Cumque'  sanctus  Albeus  reuerteretur  de  Casel,  occurrit  ei  . 
Enna  ^  abbas  dicens :  '  Reuertere  mecum  ad  regem,  et  quere  mihi 
ab  eo  illam  insulam,  id  est  Aru ',  ut  in  nomine  Domini  faciam  ibi 
monasterium.'  Tunc  reuersus  sanctus  Albeus  ad  regem,  salutauit 
eum,  dicens  :  '  Illam  insulam  positam  in  occiano  maris  da  nobis,  ut 
edilicamus  ibi  monasterium.'  Rex  ait :  '  Non  vidi,  nec  audiui,  qualis 
et  quanta  sit  illa  insula ;  et  ideo  *  nemini  eam  dabo,  ut  prius  sciam 
quomodo  sit.'  Tunc  virtus  diuina  fecit  regem  videre  totam  illam 
insulam  per  longa  spacia  terrarum  ^ ;  et  sciuit  qualis  et  quanta  fuit. 
Tradidit  autem  rex  sanctis  insulam  Aru  ;  et  sub  sancto  Albeo  sanctus 
Enna  construxit  ibi  egregium  monasterium ;  et  sub  vno  nomine 
nominatur  et  insula,  id  est,  Aru.  Et  magna  est  illa  insula,  et  est  terra 
sanctorum ;  quia  nemo  scit  numerum  sanctorum  qui  sepulti  sunt  ibi, 
nisi  solus  Deus. 

TT  xxvi.  Sanctus  "  Albeus  ad  visitandam  sanctam  Brigidam,  que  fuit 
in  Campo'  Liphi,  perrexit ;  et  mansit  apud  eam  aliquibus  diebus, 
vacantes  misteriis  Dei,  et  loquentes  diuina  verba  inter  "  se '  cotidie. 
Cum  autem  in  oracione  essent  in  vno  loco  aliquo  die  sanctus  Albeus 
et  sancta  Brigida,  vas  vitreum  de  celo  plenum  vino  iactatum  est  inter 
'  eos ' ;  set  propinquius  fuit  sancto  Albeo.  Accepit  autem  Albeus 
illud,  et  dedit  sancte  Brigide.  Tunc  gratias  egerunt  Deo.  Et  venit 
inde  beatus  Albeus  ad  fines  Memonensium,  accepta  licentia  a  sancta 
Brigida. 

T  xxvii.  Cum  '  ergo  venisset  sanctus  Albeus  in  propinquo  fluminis 
nomine  Berua,  quod  est  in  terra  Laginensium,  vir  bonus,  id  est  filius 
Dara',  vlulans  et  lacrimans  venit  ad  eum,  dicens :  '  Vir  Dei,  miserere 
mee  miserie ;  ecce  vnicus  filius  meus  modo  in  flumine  isto  mersus 
est ;  et  ideo  cor  meum  valde  torquetur.  Rogo  ergo,  ut  in  nomine  lesu 
Christi,  cui  credimus,  ores  pro  eo  ;  et  spero  quia  Deus  suscitabit  illum 
pro  te.'  Audiens  sanctus  Dei  hec  verba,  et  videns  miseriam  eius, 
commota  sunt  viscera  eius  misericordia,  et  dixit  illi :  '  In  fide  tua 
rogabo  pro  eo  ;  et  Deus  faciat,  quod  sibi  bonum  esse  videtur.'  Tunc 
sanctus  Albeus  flexit  genua,  et  precatus  est  Deum  diligenter;  et, 
iuuante  Deo,  ille  viuus  et  sanus  ante  omnes  surrexit.  Vnde  dicitur 
ille  locus  vsque  hodie  Ath  Dara ',  id  est  vadum'"  Dara',  vbi  ille 
mersus  est. 

f.  134''      1F  xxviii.  Quodam"  tempore  cum  |  esset  sanctus  Albeus  in  loco  qui 

1   =  S  §  32;  R'  u.s.  '  Endeus  Arne  S.  ^  insulam  Arne  S.  *  Ir. 

p.  iu.  5  distabat  enim  a  Caselo  plus  quam  quinquaginta  railiaria  R  adcl. 

(about  84  English  or  67  Irish  miles).  *    =  S  §  24  ;  R^  f.  132''  ;  not  in  Ir. 

In  S  and  R  this  section  is  preceded  by  the  story  (S  §  23 ■)  how  Ailbe  supplied 
Brigit  with  shecp.  •>  Currech  S.  s   =  S  §  27  ;  R^  f.  i^s".  »  In  T 

this   word   might   be   read   Clara ;    in    S   it  is   clearly   Dara;    and   so   in    Ir. 
10  vadus  T.  "  =  S  §  33;  R*  f.  133^ 


VITA  SANCTI  ALBEI  57 

dicitur  Cliiain  Damdaim',  venit  ad  eum  sanctus  SinchelP,  ut  sibi 
locum  qucrcret  sanctus  Albeus"  ad  habitandum.  Tunc  sanctus 
Albeus  ad  cgrcgium  discipulum  suum  Quennan*  dixit :  '  Deus  misit 
ad  nos  sanctum  Sinchell ;  et  demus  illi  locum  nostrum  cum  omnibus 
que  habemus  ibi ;  et  Deus  prebeat  nobis  alium  locum  pro  eo.'  Tunc 
assignauit  Quennan  sancto  Sinchell  totam  ccllam  cum  omnibus  que 
ibi  erant.  Postea  venit  inde  sanctus  Albeus  ;  et  precepit  suis  disci- 
pulis  ut  nichil  secum  tollerent  de  illa  cella.  Vnus  autem  puer'  occulte 
rapuit  inde  vnum  vasculum  eneum,  non  curans  de  precepto  sancti 
Albei.  Cum  ergo  venissent  ad  quendam  locum,  dixit  sanctus  Albeus 
illi  puero:  '  Cur  fecisti  furtum  nobiscum  ? '  Tacente  illo,  dixit  ei 
bcatus  Albeus :  '  Da  mihi  vas  quod  furatus  es  de  uasculis  sancti 
Sinchel.'  Tunc  ille  inclinans  se  ad  pedes  sancti,  posuit  vas  ante  eum. 
Accepit  autem  sanctus  Albeus  vas  in  manibus  suis,  et  '^  iterum  posuit 
super  terram.  Valde  enim  doluit  inde  sanctus  Albeus,  quia  longa  via 
fuit  inter  se  et  illum  locum  de  quo  vas  sublatum  est.  Videns  quoque 
Deus  omnipotens  anxietatem  mentis  sancti  Albei  fuisse  in  feruore 
caritatis,  fecit  illud  vas  volare  per  multa  spacia  terrarum,  vsque  ad 
locum  suum.  Omnes  qui  viderant  hoc  miraculum  Deo  gratias 
egerunt  ;  sanctum  vero  Albeum  timuerunt,  et  Christum  amauerunt. 

ir  xxix.  Post'  hec  venit  angelus  Domini  ad  sanctum  Albeum 
dicens:  'Veni,  et  sequere  me,  ut  ostendam  tibi  locum  resurreccionis 
tue.'  Cumque  venissent  ad  locum  vbi  nunc  est  sepulchrum  sanctis- 
simi  Albei ',  dixit  angelus  Domini  ad  eum  :  '  Hic  sepelieris  ;  et  in  hoc 
loco  maxima  ciuitas  in  honore  tuo  erit ;  et  hic  per  te  multa  miracula 
Deus  faciat  post  obitum  tuum,  et  in  vita  tua.'  Et  hoc  dicens,  euanuit 
ex  oculis  eius.  Ibi  sanctus  Albeus  triduanum  ieiunium  egit^;  et 
expleto  ieiunio  dixit  sancto  Cehennan'":  '  Vade  ad  dextram  tuam, 
et  quodcumque  inveneris  ibi",  affer  tecum.'  Exiens  vero  ille, 
invenit  prandium  a  Domino  missum  ;  id  est  panem  candidissimum, 
et  partem  piscis  assati ;  et  sumentes,  gratias  Deo  egerunt.  Deinde 
venit  angelus  ad  sanctum  Albeum,  et  duxit  eum  secum  ad  locum  vbi 
nunc  est  crux  egregia,  que  vocatur  crux  angelorum,  eo  quod  fre- 
quenter  locuti  fuissent  angeli  ibi  cum  sancto  Albeo ;  et  dixit  ei  : 
'  Sede  hic,  et  edifica  ecclesiam  Deo,  quia  in  hoc  loco  magna  ciuitas 
erit  in  nomine  tuo,  sicut  predixi  tibi,  que  vocabitur  Ymlech  Ybuir.' 
Et  factum  est  ita  sicut  dixit  angelus. 

'  Cluoin  Daymh  qui  est  in  Ethar  Liki  S;  Cluain  Daymh  prope  (luuium  .  .  . 
Liphy  R  ;  Cluain  Daim  Ir.  Tlie  reading  in  Ihe  text  is  probably  due  to  ditto- 
graphy.  -  Sinkell  Camni  S  (read  :  Camm).  ^  Ir.  p.  iia.  *  uni 

ex  suis  .  .  .  episcopo  Kyenan  S  ;  Kennano  discipulo  suo  R.  *  ep_  Kyenan  S  ; 
ep.    Kyennani   R  ;  pueriliter  agens    R  aUd.  *  possuit  illud  ante  ianuam 

ccclesie  S  R.  '    =  S  §  34  ;  R-  u.s.  «  Fert  n-Ailbei,  ad  orientalem 

partem    Imlachi    S;    Fert   n-Eaylbi  R.  »  Ir.   p.    113.  '»  Kyenan  S. 

"  iuxta  ripam  fluminis  S  R. 


58  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

1[  XXX.  Quodam'  die  filia  illius  hominis,  cuius  regio  fuit  ille  locus 
quem  signauit  angelus  sancto  Albeo,  seminauit  iacintinum^  ibi  contra 
voluntatem  beati  Albei.  Sanctus  autem  Albeus  ^  nolens  ut  venirent 
mulieres  ad  opera  sua  tam  propinquius  ad  se  et  discipulos  suos, 
orauit  ad  Deum  ;  et  illud  iacintinum  versum  est  in  linum  *.  De  cetero 
vero  nec  illa  nec  alius  contendit  agrum  illum  contra  voluntatem 
sancti  Albei. 

1[  xxxi.  Quodam  ^  tempore  ambulans  sanctus  Albeus  in  °  terra  Hua 
Carpre  et  Hua  Conu[i]ll,  venit  ad  quasdam  virgines,  que  eum  hilariter 
receperunt,  et  obtulerunt  ei  suum  locum,  id  est  Acah  Cumrech '.  Ille 
vero  sanctimoniales  nutrierunt  quendam  puerum,  nomine  Cum- 
menus ',  filium  Echdach  ;  cuius'  vita  fuit  contra  Deum  et  contra 
sanctas  virgines.  Nam  quando  virilis  fuit,  recessit  a  virginibus,  et 
effectus  est  latro  nimis,  et  arrogans  in  sua  milicia.  Rogauerunt  ergo 
f.  134  ■"  sancte  |  moniales  sanctum  Albeum  ut  predicaret  verbum  Dei  illi,  si  ^" 
potuisset  conuertere  eum  de  errore  suo.  Predicans  Albeus  illi  diuina 
verba,  ille  dixit  :  '  Dimitte  me  ire  hodie  quocunque  voluero  ;  et  cras 
ego  faciam  quod  mihi  dixeris.'  Habens  licentiam,  ille  exiuit  illa  die 
cum  sociis  suis ;  et  visum  est  illi  quod  invenirct  suos  inimicos  in 
agro,  et  decollauit,  ut  putabant,  "capita' eorum,  [et]  detulerunt  secum. 
Set  cum  reuersi  essent,  viderunt  ligna  in  manibus  suis,  que  visa  sunt 
prius  capita  occisorum  esse  ;  et  similiter  ipsa  corpora  ligna  apparue- 
runt.  Ille  homo  ait " :  '  Scio  quod  Deus  fecit  per  sanctum  Albeum, 
ut  ambularent  contra  nos  ligna  in  forma  hominum  ;  et  ideo  que  dicat 
mihi  Albeus,  faciam.'  Et  inclinauit  se  ad  pedes  Albei,  et  obtulit  ei 
agrum  suum,  et  dignus  effectus  est  postea. 

ir  xxxii.  Alio  '^  tempore  venit  sanctus  Albeus  ad  quendam  heri- 
mitam  qui  vocabatur  Mac  Chire  " ;  et  ille  dixit  Albeo  :  '  In  hoc  loco 
prope  non  habemus  aquam.'  Tunc  Albeus  et  herimita  foras  exierunt, 
et,  orantibus  illis,  fons  clarus  a  terra  erupit,  qui  ibi  pluit  vsque  'hodie'. 
Gratias  agentes  Deo,  recesserunt  inde  sancti  '*. 

ir  xxxiii.  Sanctissima^^  virgo  Scletha"  filia  Mec  Chier"  misit  nun- 

'    =  S  §  35  ;  not  in  R.  ^  holus  iacintinum  S  ;  roslin  Ir.,  i.  e.  flax  seed 

(vide  Cormacs  Glossary  s.v.  ross).  ^  iacintina  uestimenta  odiens,  et  seculi 

ornamenta  respucns  S.  *  j  doroighncdur  croinn  gin  torad  don  lionsin  Ir., 

i.  e.  and  that  flax  was  turned  into  barren  trees.  ''    =  S  §  36 ;  R  f.  133''  ;  not 

iu  Ir.  «  in  regionibus  Fithgente  S.  '^  Aiketh  Kerech  S  ;  de  Achad 

Cayrach  .i.  de  colle  ouium  R.  '  Cummine  S.  ^  qui  uotum  pessimum 

uouit,  scilicet  dibherc  S  ;  qui  factus  est  princeps  latronum  R.  ^"  ut  diabolicum 
illud  uotum  relinqueret  S  ;  ut  malam  suam  uitam  emendarct  R.  "  sanctus 

Helueus   fecit  hec,  et  delusit   sensus  nostros   R.  ''^   =  S  §  37  ;  not  in  R. 

'^  ad  ciuitatem  Ultani,  ut  ibi  uisitaret  alumpnum  suum,  scilicet  Mac  Creky  S  ; 
above  read  Mac  Criche.  "  Here  S  §  38  ;  R-  f.  iss"*  add  how  Ailbe  sent  two 
stags  to  plough  Ibr  S.  Squieth  filia  Mechair  [Squilha  R],  at  Firt  Squethe  S. 
15   =  s   §  39,   R-  U.S.,  Ir.  p.   114.  '^  Squiatha   S  ;   above  read  Scietha. 

"  ingen  do  Mac  lair  Ir. 


VITA  SANCTI   ALBEI  59 

cium  ad  sanctum  Albeuiii,  ut  ipse  mitteret  scriptorem  ad  eam  ad 
scribendos  libros  quatuor  euangeliorum.  Misit  enim ;  et  scriptor 
scripsit  duos  libros ;  et  postea  infirmitate  correptus  mortuus  est. 
Audiens  bcatus  pontifex  Albeus  quod  ipse  egrotaret,  statim  perrexit 
ad  illum,  et  invenit  cum  mortuum.  Orans  sanctus  Albeus  et  sancta 
Scletiia  pro  eo,  dixit  ei  sanctus  Albeus  :  'Surge  modo,  frater  ;  quia 
Dcus  donauit  animam  tuam  nobis,  ut  scribas  alios  duos  libros  evange- 
liorum,  quos  non  scripsisti.  Set  '  scito '  quod  statim  postea  morieris  ' '. 
Ad  hanc  vocem  surrexit  ille ;  et  postquam  scripsit  illa  duo  evangelia, 
ilico-  mortuus  est.  Corpus  autem  eius  duxerunt  discipuli  Albei,  et 
sepelierunt  in  monasterio  Albei,  quod  est  in  ciuitate  ipsius  Ymleac. 

•T  xxxiv.  Sanctus'  vir,  Mundanus  nomine,  in  cuius  honore  est  illud 
monasterium,  id  est  Tuam  Dindach  *,  duos  boues  ad  arandum  a  sancto 
Albeo  postulauit.  Misit  autem  Albeus  ei  duos  boues  pulcherrimos 
albos,  auribus  rubris.  Boues  autem  recto  itinere,  nemine  ducente, 
perrexerunt  ad  Mundanum°.  Sicque  omnibus  annis  ad  sanctum 
Mundanum  °  boues,  nemine  ducente,  tempore  arandi  veniebant ;  et 
post  araturam  similiter  reuertebantur  ad  Albeuni.  Contigit  vero 
quodam  die,  vt  quidam  homo  illos  boues  vellet  iugulare".  Cum  autem 
cleuasset  ille  manum,  fracta  est  lancea  in  manu  eias  ;  et  quedam 
particula  exiliens  de  lancea  fregit  oculum  eius.  Tunc  ille  egit  peni- 
tentiam,  et  obtulit  agrum  suum  sancto  Albeo '  ;  exieruntque  boues 
incolumes  ab  eo*. 

U  XXXV.  Alio'  tempore  cum  sanctus  Albeus  in  regionibus  Con- 
nactorum  ambularet,  tunc  rex  illius  regionis '"  voluit  occidere  quen- 
dam  vinctum,  qui  apud  eum  erat  ligatus.  Tunc  misit  Albeus  vnum 
de  discipulis  suis  "  ad  regem,  ut  vir  vinctus  sibi  a  rege  dimitteretur. 
Rex  vero  spreuit  nuncium  sancti  Albei,  et  iussit  illum  vinctum  cruci- 
figi"'.  Ille  autem  nullo  modo  crucifigi  potuit ;  et  eodem  momento 
filius  regis  mortuus  est.  Tunc  vocatus  Albeus  ad  regem,  dedit  ei  rex 
hominem  illum  et  agrum,  ut  edificarentur  ibi  ecclesie  Dei ;  et  rogauit, 
ut  suscitaretur  filius  suus.  Orans  sanctus  pro  filio  eius,  statim  sur- 
rexit  viuus  ;  et  ibi  multi  crediderunt  in  Christum  per  sanctum  Albeum, 
et  baptizati  sunt. 

ir  xxxvi.  Erat "   in   eadem  regione  Connactorum    fluuius   sterilis, 

*  set  .  .  .  morieris  om.  S  R.  ^  S  and  R  do  not  make  him  die  at  once. 

'    =  S  §  40  :  not  in  R.  *  Modan,  qui  habitabat  in  Thoira  Dindach  S  ;  a 

tTuaim  iochtair  Ir.,  i.  e.  at  Lower  Tuam.  ^  Modanum  S.  ^  because 

they  trespassed  on  his  land  '  iuxta  insulam   Ybdan  '  S.  '  et  uocatur  Inis 

inTn^a  n-Dam  S,  i.  e.  the  isle  of  the  oxen.  ^  HereS^^r:  R^  f.  131**  tell  hovv 
Ailbe  with  his  staff  produced  vvater  from  a  rock  at  Enach  Daulrigi  [Dalrigi  R]. 
'   =  S  5  42  ;  R^  u.s.  "  Ir.  p.  115.  "  do  chuir  easbudh  dia  muinntir 

Ir.,  i.  e.  sent  a  bishop  of  his  retinue  ;  cum  baculo  suo  S  R  aiid.  "  Tunc 

baculus  Albei  circa  uirum  uinctum  datus  est,  et  .  .  .  nuUo  modo  etc.  S  ;  and 
practically  R.  *'   =  S  §  43 ;  R-  u.s. 


6o  VITAK   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

f.  134  ^  pisces  non  habens.  Gens  autem  |  illa  rogauit  nctum  Alb  um  ut  bene- 
diceret  in  nomine  Dei  viui  illum  fluuium.  Benedicens  sanctus  Albeus 
aquam  in  nomine  Patris  omnipotentis,  ostendit^  eis  quinque  loca  in 
flumine,  ut  in  ipsis  facerent  capi  pisces.  Ex  illa  autem  die  nimia 
piscium  copia  est  fluuius  repletus.  Et  illa  gens  firmata  est  a  sancto 
Albeo  in  fide  catholica,  et  construxit  quinque  cellas  in  honore  sancti 
Albei''. 

ir  xxxvii.  Quodam '  tempore  misit  sanctus  Albeus  duos  sanctos 
viros,  id  est  Lugith  et  Sailchin ',  pro  aliqua  causa  ad  Romam  ^  et  cum 
eis  bonum  ministrum,  Gobbanum  nomine,  in  cuius  honore  est  mona- 
sterium  quod  vocatur  Cenn  Sali '.  At  illi  dixerunt  sancto  Albeo  : 
'  Nobis  fiat  a  te  peticio  nostra;  id  est,  uf  a  Roma  salui  et  leti  ad 
Hiberniam  reuertamur.'  Tunc  promisit  illis '  sanctus  Albeus  in 
nomine  Christi,  ut  ita  venirent.  Factum  est  autem  nauigantibus  illis, 
minister  eorum  Gcbbanus'  mortuus  est  in  naui.  Tunc  sanctus 
Lugith '''  dixit :  '  Nos  cibum  non  gustabimus,  donec  fiat  nobis,  quod 
promisit  Albeus  in  nomine  Christi.'  Cum  autem  tribus  diebus  et 
tribus  noctibus  ieiunassent,  minister  Gobbanus  reuixit,  et  dixit  illis" 
multa  testimonia  de  sancto  Albeo,  et  ait  '^ :  '  Animam  meam  propter 
promissionem  sancti  Albei  iterum  in  corpus  meum  Deus  misit.' 
Postea ''  autem  salui  et  leti  de  Roma  ad  Hiberniam  reuersi  sunt. 

ir  xxxviii.  Alio"  tempore  sanctus  Albeus  exiuit  in  finibus  Osargi", 
et  requieuit  ibi  solus  tribus  diebus  et  tribus  noctibus.  Rex  autem 
illius  regionis  "■'  in  quarta  die  venit  ad  eum ;  et  salutans,  optimus  odor 
de  ore  sancti  Albei  egrediens"  inebriauit  regem;  et  opressus  sompno 
dormiuit  tribus  diebus.  Postquam  autem  "  surrexit  rex,  dixit  ei 
sanctus  Albeus  :  '  Adhuc  non  fecisti  triduanum  ieiunium  ;  et  ideo 
hoc  contigit  tibi.'  Rex  vero  se  religiosum  esse  promisit.et  ita  fuit"; 
illum  autem  locum,  id  est  Ymlech  -",  Scanlan  °'  obtulit  sancto  Albeo. 

ir  xxxix.  Ambulans'''  sanctus  Albeus  in  eadem  regione  ambulabant 
cum  eo  quedam  sanctimoniales,  id  est  Bige'^  et  Betach -''.  Contigit 
autem  vt  infirmaretur  quedam  sancta  monialis  ^^  apud  illos  in  via  ; 

^  -dens  T.  '^  Here  S  §  44  tells  how  Ailbe  marked  out  the  foundations  of  a 
house  (not  in  R).  '    =  S  §  45  ;  R'  u.s.  *  L.  et  Keilchenne,  qui  sunt 

hi  [  =  in]  Formuig  S.  ^  ut  nouum  ordinem  celebrandi  a  Roma  deducerent 

S  ;  and  practically  R.  ^  cum  eis  cocum  .  .  .  scilicet  Mogopoc,  qui  est  hi 

[=  in]  Kin  Sali  S.  "^  '  ut  .  .  .  Hibernia  sine  dolore  et  morte  fiat,  donec 

.  .  .  reuertamur  '  S.  *  Here   M  resumes  aftcr  the  lacuna.  '  cocus 

eorum  Gopbanus  S.  "  Lughaidh  M  ;  Lugidius  S  R.  "   Ir.  p.  116. 

12  om.  T.  "  post  T.  »    =  S  §  46  ;  R»  f.  134''.  ">  Osraighi  M  ; 

ad  Durn  Arann  S  aM.  ;  Dayri  Arand  R.  '»  Scanlanus  [Scaln-  R]  Magnus 

S  R  add.  "  spiritualiter  R  add.  "  01«.  T.  "  7  do  imthig  a  n-ord 

iarsin  Ir.,  i.  e.  and  went  into  orders  afterwards.  ^**  Ymleach  M  ;   Imbliug  S. 

"  Scannlain  M.  =2   =  S  §  47  ;  R"  u.s.  «s  ?  Brige  M.         "  Bethach  M  ; 

Bithech  et  Barrach  S  ;  Brighe  7  I3erach  Ir.  ^»  sanctimon-  M. 


VITA   SANCTI   ALBEI  6r 

que  importune  qucsiuit  lac,  ut  gustaret.  Non'  invento  ibi  lacte, 
viderunt  ceruam  euntem  de  silua,  et  vocauit  eam  Bige^:  et  cerua 
cxpectauit  initissime.  Aitque  Bige '  ad  quandam  sanctimonialem  : 
'  Vade,  et  niulge  ceruam,  et  de  lacte  eius  sanabitur  soror  nostra."  Et 
statitn  ut  gustauit  uirgo  lac,  valida  surre.xit.  Tunc  murmurauerunt 
discipuli  sancti  Albei  contra  virgines  in  hoc  miraculo*;  et  venit 
angelus  Domini  ad  Albeum,  dicens  ei :  '  Ne "  sis  invidus  contra  virgines  * 
Domini,  sicut  sunt  discipuli  tui.  Nam  si  volueris,  ut  mons  iste  de 
loco  ad  locum  exeat,  statim  obediet  tibi ;  et  nichil  impos[s]ibile  est 
sub  celo  in  miraculis  tibi.'  Et  ait :  '  Christus,  filius  Dei,  ita  promisit 
seruis  eius;  et  tu  es  seruus  Dei  probatus.'  Et  hec  dicens,  recessit. 
Virgines,  et  ceteri  qui  erant  ibi  cum  sancto  Albeo,  gratias  Deo 
egerunt. 

ir  xl.  Quodam'  die  venerunt  hospites  ad  sanctum  Albeum,  et  valde 
erat  frigus.  Sanctus  autem  Albeus  audiens  eos  |  frigidos  esse,  f.  135° 
misericorditer  dixit  ministro,  qui  fuit  ante  eum  :  '  ToIIe  cito  prunas 
ignitas  ad  hospites,  et  misericordiam  in  nomine  Christi  faciamus 
illis.'  Pius  discipulus  ad  verbum  sancti  magistri,  non  habens  va- 
sculum  in  promtu,  accepit  prunas  cum  manibus,  et  posuit  in  sinu  suo. 
Prestauit  vero  gratia  Diuina  illi,  quod  non  solum  manus  et  vesti- 
menta  non  sunt  combusta,  set  nec  quidem  extremos  vestis  pilos 
ignis  attigit. 

ir  xli.  Sanctus'  iam  Albeus  volens  fugere  homines,  et  videns  se 
honorificatum  esse  apud  homines  omnes,  et  cum  essent  plurima 
loca  sub  eo,  ad  insulam  Tile'  in  occiano  positam  nauigare  decreuit, 
ut  ibi  viueret  Deo  secrete  solus.  Set  nutu  Dei  Engus '",  rex  Casseil ", 
hoc  prohibuit ;  nam  ipse  rex  ordinauit  custodes  custodire  omnes 
marinos  portUs'-,  ne  sanctus  Albeus  fugeret  ab  hiis  quos  per  bapti- 
smum  et  per  predicacionem  Dei  filios  fecit  ^'. 

1  xlii.  Quodam  "  tempore  venit  egregius  et  sanctissimus  diaconus 
Nessanus  ad  sanctum  Albeum,  ut  interrogaret  eum  de^quibusdam 
questionibus.  Mos  erat  sancto  Albeo  ut  ab  hora  nona  vsque  ad 
terciam  diei  sequentis  remaneret  solus,  vacans  diuinis  orationibus, 
et   nullus   audebat  ire  ad  eum,  excepto  ministro  hospitum ".    Cum 

'  et  non  M.  2  Brige  M.  s  ^^  M.  *  hoc  audiens  Ailbe,  .  .  .  ipse 

similiter  .  .  .  mulsit  ceruam  S  add.  ;  and  practically  R.  5  Minima  miracula 

feminis  relinque,  et  illa  aspicere  noli  ;  feminarum  enim  propria  sunt.  Nam  si 
etc.  S  ;  and  practically  R.  Mr.  p.  117.  '   =  S  §  48  ;  R=  u  s.  not 

in  Ir.  «   =  S  §  49;  R-  f.  134«:.  3  romine  Tele  S  ;  nomine  Inis  Cele  R; 

an  oilen  Tile  Ir.  1«  Aen-  M.  "  Cassel  M.  «  nam  omnes  p.  mar. 

ipse  r.  ordinauit  custodire  M.  "  Tunc  Albeus  xx"  duos  uiros  in  e.^iiliura  supra 
mare   misit   [sine  rate  Rl    S  R  add.  »    =  S  §  50;  not  in  R.  15  utrum 

oblationes  hominum  acciperet.  an  repelleret  S.  '«  ^^i^^  teachtaire  Pe  Ir., 

i.  e.  except  a  mcssenger  of  God. 


62  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

aiidisset  beatus  Albeus  a  ministro  quod  veniret  Nessanus,  dixit  ei : 
'  Vade  ad  Nessanum  et  liunc  versum  Scotica  lingua  canta  ei ;  et  cras 
ego  loquar  cum  eo.     Et  ille  uenit  et  cantauit : 

'  Danae  Dee  nis  frithchoirthi, 
Selba  forru  niscorthi ; 
Attoberthar  na  gabae, 
Sech  ni[t]  muide  nu[d]  chele.'' 

Crastina  autem  die  sanctus  Albeus  et  sanctus  Nessanus  locuti  sunt 
de  misteriis  Dei,  et  questionibus  quas  Nessanus  querebat  sibi  solui. 
Accepta  ergo  licentia  post  aliquos  dies  sanctus  Nessanus  perrexit 
viam  suam. 

^  xliii.  Alio'  tempore  grues  multe  in  vnum  agmen  collecte  sunt, 
et  valde  nocebant  hominibus,  commedentes  multum  fenum  et  grana. 
Tunc  plebes  de  plaga  illa  magna  clamauerunt  ad  Albeum,  dicentes : 
'  Adiuua  nos,  quia  grues  deuastauerunt  regionem,  et  in  nullo  eas 
compescere  possumus.  Tunc  Albeus  audiens  rem  inusitatam,  misit 
ministrum  suum,  nomine  Buiairnen',  ut  grues  in  custodiam  deduceret. 
Exiens  ille  grues  velut  oues  ante  se  abigens,  in  custodiam  reclusit. 
Sequenti  autem  die  exiit  sanctus  Albeus,  ut  salutaret  grues,  dicens: 
'  Recedite  a  finibus  istis,  et  dispergite  turbam  vestram  in  diuersis 
locis.'  Statim  vero  obedientes,  huc  illucque  in  gronnas  diuiserunt 
se,  sicut  dixit  eis  sanctus  Albeus. 

H  xliv.  Quodam*  tempore  homines  illius  regionis,  id  est  Arath  % 
cum  suo  duce  venacionem  fecerunt,  ut  lupos  a  finibus  suis  repellerent. 
Vna  autem  lupa  direxit  cursum  suum  ad  locum  in  quo  erat  Albeus ; 
et",  sequentibus  eam  equitibus,  posuit  capud  suum  in  sinu  sancti 
Albei.  Albeus  vero  dixit  ei :  '  Ne  timeas ;  quia  non  sojum  tu  libera- 
f.  135'  beris,  set  catuli  tui  venient  ad  te  |  incolumes.'  Et  ita  factum  est.  Et 
ait  Albeus' ;  '  Ego  apud  vos  nutritus  sum  in  infancia ;  et  bene  fecisti, 
quia  in   senectute   mea   venisti   ad   me.     Nam   ante   me   cotidie   ad 

'  I  give  this  verse  from  S  in  wliich  it  is  less  corrupt  than  in  the  other  two 
MSS.  It  may  perhaps  be  translated  thus  :  '  The  gifts  of  God,  do  not  reject 
them ;  possession  of  them,  do  not  refuse  it.  What  is  oflered  to  thee,  thou 
raayest  receive;  only  thou  are  not  therefore  greater  than  thy  fellovv.'  (This 
translation  is  partly  due  to  Zimmer,  Gott.  gel.  Anz.  1891,  p.  168.)  It  will  be 
seen  that  the  verse  is  an  answcr  to  Ncssan's  qucstion  in  S  '  utrum  oblationes 
hominum  acciperet,  an  repelleret  %  which  M  T  have  obliterated.  In  M  T  the 
verse  appears  as  follows  :  '  Donneitheach  nis  frithcor,  7  sealba  [sealbaidh  M] 
for  tun  no  scuch  otliar  tart  nangaba  seach  minnide  in  cealla  [sealla  M].'  Both 
MSS.  give  the  following  Latin  gloss  interliued  :  '  id  est,  ne  inuenias  cor  tuum 
ad  periurium,  et  posside  liin,  id  est  ueritatem  ;  id  est  depone  a  te  morbos  pecca- 
torum  commissorum  ;  i.  e.  preterita  peccata  mitiga  et  diminue,  uel  plange  in 
cella  tua' — which  is  all  the  merest  guesswork.  '    =  S  §  51  ;   R-  u.s.  ;  not 

in  Ir.  '  Buairnen  M  ;  Briarne  S  ;  Briarneum  R.  <   =  S  §  53  ;  R-  u.s. 

■*  Ara  M  ;  gens  Arad  S  ;  populus  Aradensium,  id  est  illius  terre  que  Ara  dicitur 
R  ;  Ara  Cliach  Ir.  «  Ir.  p.  118.  ''  Et  ait  A.  o»<.  T. 


VITA  SANCTI  ALBEI  63 

mcnsnni '  pancm  commedetis,  et  ncmo  nocebit  vobis.'  Ita  lupi  cotidic 
veiiiebant-  ad  sanctum  Albeum,  et  commcdebant'  ante  eum ;  et  postea 
reuertebantur  ad  loca  sua.  Et  nemo  nocebat  illis  ;  nec  ipsi  nocebant 
alicui. 

11  xlv.  Cum  *  esset  sanctus  Albeus  in  finibus  illius  regionis,  id  est 
Corcumruad',  habebat  sedem  iuxta  mare,  in  qua  orabat  ad  Deum, 
et  Dei  mirabilia  cerncbat.  Inundacio  maris  cotidie  circa  scdem  Albei 
veniebat,  et  in  altum  surgebat ;  nec  tamen  in  sedeni  vbi  erat  sanctus 
Albeus,  intrare  audebat. 

ir  xlvi.  Alio  ^  tcmpore  cum  sanctus  Albeus  sedisset  in  eadem 
regione'  super  ripam  maris,  viderunt  nauem  eream  habentem  circa 
se  velamen,  de  occeano  ad  se  venientem,  vocesque  cantancium  in 
choris '  audiebant  in  ea  ;  procul  autem  ab  eis  supra  mare  illa  nauis 
stetit.  Tunc  misit  sanctus  Albeus  vnum  de  discipulis  suis,  ut  salu- 
taret  eos ;  set  nullum  responsum  datum  est  illi.  Similiter  omnes, 
vnus  post  vnum,  nauigauerunt  ad  nauem  ;  et  nulli  eorum  responsum 
est  de  naui.  Postrenio  autem  beatus  Albeus  in  suis  ficonibus  super 
mare  ambulans  perrexit  ad  eos,  et  apertum  est  velamen  ei ;  et  in- 
gresso  sancto  nauem,  statim  reuersa  est  in  occeano.  Discipuli  vero 
Albei  videntes  hoc,  fleuerunt  valde ;  donec  angelus  Domini  dixit 
eis :  '  Nolite  contristari ;  seruus  Dei,  patronus  vester  Albeus,  reuer- 
tetur  ad  vos.'  Commanentes  ibi  fratres  fere  tribus  horis,  nauem  ad 
se  venientem  iterum  viderunt.  Descenditque  statim  Albeus  de  naui, 
portans  in  manu  palmitem  cum  fructu ;  et  honorifice  habebatur 
palmes  ille  apud  Albeum  tribus  annis.  Postea'  istum'"  palmitem 
angelus  Domini  abstulit  a"  sancto  Albeo,  dicens :  'Miles  Christi, 
Albee,  vade  ad  ciuitatem  tuam  Ymlech  ;  quia  tempus  migrandi  tibi 
de  hoc  seculo  venit,  ut  ibi '-  sepelieris,  sicut  dictum  est  tibi  a 
Domino.' 

11  xlvii.  Tunc  "  beatus  Albeus  venit  ad  ciuitatem  Ymlech  ;  et  statim 
dolore  correptus  est.  Letus  autem  erat  sanctus  Albeus  ;  omnis  vero 
populus,  et  omnes  Hibernenses  tristes  erant".  Tunc  perhibuerunt " 
angeli  Dei  apparentes  ante  omnem  clerum,  quia  sanctus  Albeus  tota 
Dei  mandata  die  noctuque '°  compleuit.  Sanctus  quidem  Albeus, 
postquam  multos  populos  baptizauit,  et  conuertit  plurimas  gentes 
ad  fidcm  Christianam,  et  ecclesias  multas  construxit  in  nomine 
Domini ;   et  postquam   crucifixit   se   ipsum  in  vigiliis   nocturnis,   in 

'  cura  nostris  fratribus  S  add.  -  uen.  cot.  M.  '  cum  fratribus  S  R 

add.  *   =  S  §  53  ;    R-   f.   134''  ;    not  in   Ir.  '  -ruadh    M  ;    Corchum- 

drueth  S.  «   =  S  §  54  ;  R-  u.s.  '  in  finibus  Corchudruoth  S; 

Corchumrad  R.  *  choriis  T.  '  Ir.  p.  rig.  '»  illum  M.  "  oni.  M. 

'2  om.  T.  "   =  S  §  55 ;  R-  f.  135°.  '»  erant  tristes  M.  '^  pro-  M. 

"  nocteque  M. 


64  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

ieiuniis  triduanis,  in  orationibus  as[s]iduis^  inter  angelorum  choros 
suauia  carmina  canencium  migrauit  ad  Dominum  lesum  Christum, 
cui  est  honor  et  gloria,  in  secula  seculorum.     Amen. 

ir    EXPLICIT    VITA    SANCTI    AlBEI 
ARCHIEPISCOPI   ET   CONFESSORIS 


'  Into  this  character  of  Ailbe  R  inserts  the  following  curious  disquisition  : 
Archa  .  ,  .  teslamenti  noui  et  ueteris  luit.  In  ipso  enim,  tanquam  in  archa  illa 
mistica,  erant  due  tabule  uirtutis  prudencie  in  euitando  malo  et  operando  bonum 
erant.  Similiter  uirga  correccionis  quantum  ad  equitatem  iusticie  in  eius  corde 
erat.  Similiter  urna  aurea,  que  significat  temperanciam,  que  plena  erat  in 
corde  eius  manna  spirituali,  id  est  fortitudine,  que  necessaria  est  in  perferendis 
molestiis  huius  uite. 


Vita  sancti  .ISarri  rpiscopi  (Corcagic 

InCIPIT   VITA   SANCTI    BaRRI  '    EPISCOPI    ET   CONFESSORIS  ^-  '33  ' 

i.  Sanctus^  Dei  electus  atque  dignus  pontifex  Barrus  de  gente 
Connacthorum '  silicet  de  nepotibus  Bruin*  ortus  est.  Comes 
siquidem  nepotum  Briuyn  '  in  adulterio  genuit  filium  nomine  Amar- 
genus',  et  assumpsit  eum  in  comitatu  suo.  Ipse  enim  commes'  post 
ebrietatem  deceptus,  similitudine  Loth,  cum  sua  filia  concubuit ;  et 
ipsa  duos  filios  peperit.  Et  vnus  eorum  in  ampnem  proiectus  est,  ne 
scelus  hominibus  appareret,  quod  Deum  celare  non  potuit.  Alter 
uero,  id  est  Amargenus,  bestiis  in  deserto  relictus  est  deuorari. 
Diuina  autem  providencia  luppa''  eum  nutriuit,  donec  adultus  fuit. 
Postea  autem  subulci  lustrantes  deserta  siluarum  inuenerunt  illum, 
et  adduxerunt  secum  ad  mansionem  suam ;  et  forma  nobilissima 
apparuit  ipse.  Interea  adduxerunt  eum  ad  commitem,  qui  fuit  pater 
ipsius.  Et  cognouit  commes,  quod  filius  suus  esset ;  et  diligens  eum, 
assumpsit,  sicut  predictum  est,  in  commitatu  suo.  Deinde  causa 
verecundie,  iubente  sibi  patre  suo,  venit  ipse  filius,  Amargenus 
nomine,  in  provinchiam  Mumenensium,  et  in  australi  parte 
Momenie*,  id  est  in  regione  Hua  Liathain',  habitauit.  Et  ibi  semen 
eius  creuit  in  gentem  magnam,  vt  non  potuissent  manere  in  vno  loco ; 
et  diviserunt  se  per  diuersas  regiones  Mumenie.  At  quedam  pars 
eorum  ad  terram  ducis  Raith  Luyn '"  venit,  et  de  ea  sanctus  silicet 
Barrus  oriundus  fuit. 

ii.  Hoc  "  signum  mirabile  Dominus  fecit  propter  sanctum  Barrum, 
antequam  nasceretur,  dum  adhuc  in  vtero  matris  esset.  Pater  enim 
eius  Amargenus  faber  ferrarius  ducis  Raith  Luin '"  erat,  et  ipse  dux 
Tyagernacus  "  vocabatur,  qui  fuit  ex  nepotibus  Echach  ^^  filii  id  est 
Cass.  In  regione  autem "  ipsius  ducis  quedam  puella  satis  pulcra 
crat,  quam  ipse  volebat  habere  concubinam ;  et  precepit  ut  nemo 
assumerct "  eam  in  vxorem.     Quod  edictum  Amargenus  faber,  valde 

'  Barrini  R^;  no  incipit  in  R' ;  in  M  on  the  lower  margin  is  an  Irish  pedigree 
agreeingvery  nearlywiththat  inLL.  352/.  2  T  f.  109"  ;  R' f.  ii8<*,  R=  f.  137'*. 
'  -actonim  T.  *  Briun  T ;  Y  Bruyn  Ratha  R'  R^.  s  .gen  T.  «  comes  T. 
'  culpa  R'  R2  (!).  8  Momonie  T.  »  Liahain  T ;  Hu  Liathan  R',  Hu 

Lithan  R=.  'o  Raithm  T ;  rig  Raithlenn  Ir.  "  R'  f.  119",  R2  f.  138". 

'■  Tig-  T  ;  Ir.  gives  his  pedigree.  's  Exhach  M  T.  '<  om.  T. 

'»  sumeret  T. 


66  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

eam  amans,  contempsit ;  accepitque  eam  vxorem,  et  dormiuit  cum  ea. 
At  illa  concepit  ab  eo  sanctum  Barrum.  Hoc  audiens  supradictus 
dux,  iratus  est  nimis  ;  et  uocati  sunt  '  ipsi '  ad  eum,  et  ait  iuuencule  : 
'  Quis  te  duxit  vxorem  ?  An  ex  '  adulterio  occulte  concepisti  ? '  Illa 
respondit  dicens  :  '  Non  in  adulterio,  set  iste  me  duxit  vxorem,  et  ab 
eo  concepi.'  Tunc  dux,  ira  plenus,  iussit  illos  alligari ;  et  precepit 
f.  laa^^suis  seruis  rogum  maximum  facere  ex  lignis  |  aridissimis,  et  illos 
ambos  in  illum  ^  proiicere.  Set  diuina  potencia  hoc  prohibuit ;  nam 
elementa  'obedierunt'  Deo,  repugnantes  inter  se,  ne  factum  illud 
consummaretur.  Ignis  enim  extinguebatur  in  mirum  a  lignis  aridis- 
simis  quasi  humidis  lapidibus.  Hoc  Deus  fecit  gratia  sancti  infantis, 
qui  clausus  erat  in  vtero  matris  sue,  quam  illi  comburere  volebant. 
Hoc  facto  narrato  ante  ducem,  illi  sunt  presentati  ad  eum^  Tunc 
sanctus  infans  Barrus  ex  utero  matris  sue  clara  voce  loqutus*  est, 
dicens :  '  O  dux,  opus  sacrilegum  et  nequissimum  facere  disponis ; 
si  plus  laboraueris '  in  tali  opere,  cito  morieris,  et  in  infernum  ibis.' 
Tunc  dux,  nimis  timens,  dixit  seruis  suis :  '  Expectate  paulisper, 
ut  videamus  quid  sibi  hic  wlt,  et  ut  sciamus  quis  est,  qui  loquitur 
nobiscum.'  Et  sciens  ipse  veraciter,  quod  infans  de  vtero  loqutus'' 
est  ad  eum,  dimisit  illi  parentes  suos  liberos,  quia  Deo  non  potuit 
repugnare  ;  et  omnes  qui  ibi  erant,  magnificabant  Deum  in  talibus 
miraculis.  Deinde  post  breue  spatium  genitus  est  sanctus  et  mirabilis 
infans  Barrus;  et  gratia  Dei  plenus  apparuit.  Et  statim  supradictus 
dux  venit  humiliter  videre  eum ",  et  petere  benedictionem  ab  eo. 
Itaque  sanctus  infantulus  salutauit  ducem,  rogans  eum  benefacere 
parentibus  suis.  Et  postea  siluit  vsque  ad  tempus  congruum 
infantibus  loquendi ;  et  que  petebant  parentes  eius  a  duce,  reddidit 
dux  eis  omnia.  Deinde  illi  reuersi  sunt  ad  regionem  suam,  id  est 
campum  Dunteon'  cum  suo  filio  gaudentes,  et  nutrierunt  filium 
suum  diligenter  ;  et  boni  mores  mirabiliter  in  eo  apparuerunt '. 

iii.  Eodem'  tempore  tres  anachorite"  de  Mumenia"  in  regione 
Laginensium  fuerunt,  qui  aliqua  causa  cogente  ad  regionem  suam 
reuersi  sunt ;  et  uenientes  secus  domum  Amargeni,  patris  beati 
Barri,  declinauerunt  ad  eam,  et  ibi  nutu  diuino  illa  nocte  manserunt ; 
et  videntes  puerum  elegantem,  dixit  vnus  senior  ex  eis  :  '  Pulcer  est 
puer  iste  facie,  set  pulcrior  est  vera  fide.  Scio  quod  electus  Dei  est, 
et  Spiritus  Sanctus  habitat  in  eo.  Vtinam  esset  nobiscum,  et  legeret ; 
quia  gratia  Dei  fulget  in  facie  eius.'    Hoc  audiens  Amargenus,  pater 

I  in  T.  =  eum  T.  =  -tati  illi  T.  *  -cutus  T.  ^  -aberis  T. 

•  qui,  antcquam  esset  natus,  minas  infernales  ei  fecit  add.  R'  R'.  '  This 

might  be  read  Diniteon  ;  Dunteon  T  ;  Achad  Durbcon  Ir.  (recte).  *  Bishop 

Mac  Cuirb  baptizes  him  by  the  name  of  Liian  Ir.  *  R'  f.  119'',  R''  u.s.  ;  no 

new  paragraph  in  M  or  T.  ^"  Named  Breanuin,  Lochan,  and  Fiodhac  Ir. 

"  Memonia  T. 


VITA  SANCTI   BARRI  67 

jlliiis,  dixit  eis :  '  Si  vvltis,  ducite  eum  vobiscum,  et  legat.  Nos  cnim 
sumus  parentes  eius,  et  oflerimus  eum  Deo.'  Seniores  responderunt, 
ct  dixerunt  :  '  Non  modo  vcniet  nobiscum,  quoniam  '  longius  volumus 
ire,  et  iterum  huc  reuerti,  et  redire  in  regionem  -  Laginensium  ;  et 
tunc  euntes,  perget  nobiscum,  quia  iam  est  hoc  a  Deo.'  Et  ita  factum 
est.  Nam  alio  die  sancti  seniores  predicti  reuertentes,  beatum  puen.mi 
a  parentibus  secum  asumpserunt  in  tempore  estatis. 

iv.  Venientes'  autem  in  illo  loco  qui  Scottice  dicitur  Munchyll 
Monaidh*,  sitiens  puer,  multum  fleuit,  et  quesiuit  potum  lactis. 
Tunc  videntes  ceruam  prope  in  monte,  vnus  senior  illorum  dixit 
ministro  suo  :  '  Perge  ad  ceruam  iilam,  et  muige  eam,  et  potum  lactis 
duc  puero  ab  ea ;  quia  sanctitas  pueri  faciet  eam "  mitem  tibi.'  At 
ille  confidens  in  verbo  senioris,  perrexit  ad  eam  ;  et  ilia  ante  mini- 
strum  erat  mitissima,  sicut  ad  vitulum  suum  ;  et  mulsit  |  ille  ab  ea  vas  f.  133" 
plcnum  lacte,  et  duxit  puero,  et  ipse  bibit,  et  extinctus  est  sitis  eius. 
lila  siquidem  hora  et  in  eodem  locodixit  alter  eorum  commitibus  suis  : 
'  Modo  aptum  est,  vt,  vbi  fecit  Deus  tale  signum  mirabile  pro  hoc 
sancto  puero,  illic  ipse  alphabetum  legat,  et  tondeatur*'  coma'  eius  in 
nomine  Domini.'  Et  ibi  legit  alphabetum,  et  mirati  sunt  omnes, 
qui  ibi  erant,  de  ingenio  eius ;  et  tonsus  est  secundum  verbum  sancti 
senioris.  Quando  autem  tondebatur,  dixit  senex  :  '  Pulcra  est  coma, 
quam  habuit  iste  seruus  Dei.*  Alter  dixit  senior:  '  Bene  dixisti,  quia 
nomen  eius  mutetur,  et  vocabitur  Findbarr';  tamen  non  ita  eum 
nominabunt,  set  tantum  Barra.'  Ipse  enim  prius  uocabatur  Locanus'; 
et  modo  ab  omnibus  Barra  vocatur '",  sicut  prophetice  senex  dixit. 

V.  In  "  eodem  quoque  die  sanctus  Brendanus  senior  septem  mira- 
cula  preclara  in  Christi  nomine  fecit.  Et  cum  esset  in  eodem  monte, 
id  est  Munchylli'^,  vbi  sunt  cruces  Brendani,  amare  fleuit,  et  postea 
subrisit ".  Discipuli  autem  eius  videntes  eum  ita  esse,  mirati  sunt, 
dicentes:  '  Pater,  indica  nobis  cur  nunc  fles,  et  nunc  subrides.'  Et" 
sanctus  senior  respondit  dicens :  '  Indicabo  vobis,  o  filii  karissimi,  quia 
ideo  subrid[e]o,  quod  propter  quendam  puerulum,  qui  nunc  prope 
nos  consistit,  Deus  fecit  magna  mirabilia,  et  adhuc  plura  faciet.  Ipse 
Barro"  uocatur,  qui  magnum  honorem  habebit  apud  Deum  et  homines. 
Ideo  autem  contristor,  eo  quod  non  impetraui  a  Deo,  quod  ab  eo  rogaui 
oculte  modo^'' ;  set  illi  sancto  puero  donauit,  ipse  non  rogans  ;  id  est, 

'  qui  T.  =  -ne  M.  '  R'  R^  u.s.  *  Munchilli  Moni  T;  Sliabh 

Muinchille.  7  Ros  Choille  ainm  eile  do  Ir.,  i.e.  Slieve  M.  and  R.  C.  is  .-inother 
name  for  it.  °  illam  T.  «  -detur  M  T.  '  comma  M  T.  *  et 

vocabitur  a  coma  pulcra,  quam  in  sacrificio  Dei  obtulit,  Finbarrus  .i.  pulcra  coma 
R'  R-.  '  Lochanus  R'  R- ;  T  marg.  '"  For  '  tamen  .  .  .  vocatur  " 

R'  R-  read  :  unde  a  nonnullis  uocatus  est  postea  Finbarrus,  ab  aliis  Barrus,  et 
inde  communiter  in  Hibernica  lingua  Barri.  "  R'  f.  119"^,  R^  138'' ;  no  new 
paragraph  in  M  T.  "  -chilli  T.  's  -rissit  M.  "  om.  T.  >6  Barra  T. 
'*  modo  occ.  T. 

F  2 


68  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

ut  concederet  mihi  manere  in  mediis  istis'  regionibus"  pacificis,  vbi 
potuissent  monachi  mei  esse  cum  pace  post  obitum  meum.  Quia  in 
confinio  est  habitacio  nostra,  et  frequenter  ibi  erunt  lites  et  bella ;  et 
bene  Deus  meus  sedem  pacificam  prebuit  illi  puero,  qui  ipse  multum 
pacifice  viuet.'  Et  dicens  hec  verba  sanctus  senior  Brendanus  de 
beato  Barro,  recessit  in  viam  suam. 

vi.  Seniores  ^  autem  predicti  cum  suo  puero  Barro  in  regionem 
Laginensium  exierunt*;  et  construentes  cellam  in  eadem  regione^, 
preceperunt  ei  signare  et  benedicere  eam.  Renuens  autem  ipse  hoc 
facere  ante  eos,  dixerunt  ei :  '  Non  ita  erit,  set  tu  signabis  cellam 
nostram  ;  quia  omnis  locus  quem  tu  signaberis  *  benedictus  erit,  et 
habitabitur.'  Tunc  signauit  cellam  eorum  que  dicitur  Cyllin  cantiliz'; 
et  mansit  ibi  apud  suos  seniores,  et  legit  apud  eos.  Creuit  quidem  ibi 
corpore,  set  plus  spe  et  fide  et  caritate,  patiencia*,  modestia,  humiH- 
tate,  castitate  °,  et  ceteris  virtutibus '". 

vii.  CuM  "  autem  peruenisset  ad  etatem  maturam,  tunc  venit  Roma  '^ 
sapiens  vir  et  sanctus,  qui  fuit  alumpnus  sancti  Gregorii  pape,  et 
peritus  in  reguhs  ecclesiasticis.  Illi  autem  '^  sancti  seniores,  magistri 
sancti  Barri,  miserunt  eum  ad  illum,  ut  disceret,  et  legeret  apud  ipsum, 
qui  venit  Roma".  Venit  autem  sanctus  Barrus,  accepta  benedictione 
et  licentia  suorum  seniorum,  cum  aliquibus  discipuhs,  legere  et 
discere  apud  illum.  Contigit  autem,  ut  quidam  vir  bonus  immolaret  | 
f-  133''  agrum  ei '^,  in  quo  edificaret  cellam  in  nomine  Domini.  Et  signauit 
vir  Dei  cellam  ibi,  que  dicitur  Cul  Caysseal'°,  et  dimisit  ibi  di- 
scipulos,  qui  eam  edificarent,  et  manerent  in  ea.  Et  benedicens  illis, 
perrexit  in  viam  suam.  Et  eo  iter  agente,  occurrit  ei  vir  potens, 
dicens  :  'Vir  Dei,  veni  mecum  adiuuare  in  Christi  nomine  miseriam 
meam.'  Eunte  autem  eo  cum  illo,  adduxit  ad  cum  vir  ille  fihum 
suum  cecum,  et  filiam  mutam''.  Tunc  vir  sanctus,  videns  miseriam 
eorum,  benedixit  eos  plenus  fide,  et  statim  salui  facti  sunt  ante  eum. 
Locuta  est  enim  "  filia '  clara  uoce,  et  respexit  filius  lumine  claro ; 

•  istiis  M.  ^  Here  Ir.  inserts  theboundariesof  thethree  territoriesasked  for 
by  Brendan  :  O  Abhuinn  ni6ir  go  Laoi,  70  Laoi  go  Bandain,  7  o  Banduin  go 
Cl^ire  7  go  Baoi  Bhdara,  i.e.  from  the  Blackwater  to  the  Lee,  from  the  Lee  to 
the  Bandon,  from  the  Bandon  to  Cape  Clear  and  Beerhaven.  '  R'  R^  u.s.  ; 

no  new  paragraph  in  M  or  T.  ■■  go  Belach  Gabrain,  ait  Cill  [meic]  Cathail 

aniugh  Ir.,  i.  e.  to  Gowran  Pass,  where  is  Kilmacahill  [the  church  of  the  son 
of  Cathal]    at   the    present    day.  ^  reg.    ead.    T.  '  i.  e.   signaueris. 

'  Chell  inn  Cantilir  T:  01«.  R'  R- ;  an  obvious  corruption  of  the  Irish  name 
Cell  mic  Cathail.  »  et  pac.  T.  "  et  cast.  T.  ">  bonis  T.  "  Ri 

f.  iig"*,  R'  {.  139°.  "  Romam  M  T.  "  om.  T.  "  Romam  M  T. 

'5  eiagr.  T.  "  Caisseil  T;  Chuil  Cassin  R'  R^  (recte)  ;  Cill  Chaissin  an 

Osruidhibh,  7  as  uirthe  tugthar  Cill  Barra  .  .  .  aniugh.  Ir.  (Du.)  i.  e.  Cill 
Chaissin  in  Ossory,  and  the  name  Cill  Barra  is  given  to  it  to-day  ;  Cul  Caissine 
Ir.  (Br.).  "  fihus  illius  erat  mutus,  et  filia  similiter  R'  R^. 


VITA  SANCTI    BARRI  69 

ct  rcddidit  cos  sanos  parentibus  suis,  quasi  niehil  mali  antea  pate- 
rciitur. 

viii.  Post'  hoc  miraculum  conuencrunt  in  vno  loco  sanctus  Barrus 
et  dux  Fyachna'.  Consalutantes  ipsi  se  invicem,  audierunt  de  pro- 
pinquo  loco  ploratum  lugubrem  magnum.  Tunc  dux  ait  ad  uirum 
Dei :  '  Contristor  ualde  modo,  sancte  Dei,  quia  vxor  mea  nunc  mortua 
est.  Iste  enim  vlulatus  manifestat  eam  mortuam  esse,  quia  supra  vires 
infirmabatur.'  Sciens  vtique  sanctus  Barrus,  quod  Deus  resuscitaret 
eam  per  orationem  suam,  dixit  duci :  '  Lauetur  domina  nostra  in  ista 
aqua,  et  viuet.'  Tunc  vir  sanctus  orans  benedixit  aquam,  et  portata 
est  aqua  benedicta  ad  ductricem  mortuam',  ut  lauaretur  ea.  Cumquc 
lauata  esset  illa  aqua,  quasi  de  sompno  graui  sana  surrexit.  Tunc 
dux  Fyachna'  immolauit  sancto  Barro  locum  illum  in  eternum,  qui 
dicitur  Raith  Hyrair*. 

ix.  DEinde*  quidam  homo  potens  temptauit  beatum  Barrum'', 
dicens  :  '  Volumus  aliquod  signum  mirabile  a  te  videre  de  mirabilibus, 
que  Deus  perficit  per  te  cotidie.'  Vir  Dei  respondit,  dicens  :  '  Potens 
est  Deus  facere  quecumque  voluerit.'  Tunc  tenipus  vernale  erat, 
et  ipsi  foris  sedebant  sub  vmbra  arboris  nucis.  Sciensque  vir  sanctus 
quod  ille  temptaret  diuinam  potenciam,  in  se  occulte  orauit ;  et  ilico 
nux,  sub  cuius  vmbra  erant,  fluit'  in  sinus  eorum  nuces  maturissimas, 
ita  ut  pleni  essent.  Tunc  sanctus  ait :  '  Sentite  potentiam  Dei  in 
tali  facto.'  Vir  autem  Llle  fecit  voluntatem  serui  Dei,  agens  peni- 
tentiam  *. 

X.  Post'  hoc  pervenit  famulus  Dei  Barrus  ad  virum  sanctum 
predictum,  et  apud  eum  legit  'euangelium  secundum  Matheum 
apostolum ",  et  regulas  ecclesiasticas,  sicut  ille  a  Gregorio  papa" 
accepit,  et  didicit.  Et  postquam  legit  hos  libros,  dixit  ei  magister 
suus :  '  Ego  nunc  volo  'a  te'  accipere  fenus  laboris  mei.'  Sanctus 
Barrus  respondit,  dicens  :  '  Tibi  dabitur,  si  ego  habuero.'    Ille  sanctus 

'  R'  f.  119'',  R-  138"  ;  no  paragraph  in  M  or  T.  -  Fi-  T;  Fyechna  R'  R=  ; 
Fachtna  Fergach  mac  Coelbaidh  Ir.  (Br.).  '  Fi-  T.  ■■  Irthair  T  ; 

Irthir  R'  R-.  ^  R'  f.  120",  R-  f.  138''.  °  7  ase  ionnad  iona  rabhadar, 

a  n-Doire  Coille  Ir.,  i.  e.  and  the  place  in  vvhich  they  were  was  D.  C.  '  sic 

MSS. ;  ?pluit.  *  Here    R'    R-   insert  :  '  Alio  tempore,  'post'quam  limina 

visitauit  apostolica,  redeundo  ad  propria,  declinauit  ad  sanctum  Dauid,  ut 
benedictionem  eius  hereditarie  possideret.  Cumque  ad  tempus  cum  eodem 
sancto  viro,  Dauid,  Barri  maneret,  timens  ob  suam  absentiam  imminere  suis 
discipuUs  periculum,  peciit  a  sancto  episcopo  Dauid  equum.  in  quo  equitare 
solebat,  ut  celerius  itersuum  perageret,  Quo  concesso,  acbenedictione  optenta, 
equum  ascendit,  et  sic  super  eum  mare  confidenter  [intrauit],  et  usque  ad 
Hiberniam  peruenit.  Equum  vero  prefatum  in  seruicio  fratrum  secum  retinuit. 
Set  in  memoria  miracuH  discipuli  eius  fecerunt  equum  eneum,  qui  usque  hodie 
apud  Corkagiam  manet.'  *R'R-u.s.  ">  quatuor  evvangelia  et  epistolas 

PauU  R'  R!.         "  om.  T. 


70  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

magister  dixit :  '  Id  volo  a  te,'  ait,  '  ut  in  vno  loco  in  die  iudicii 
resurgamus.'  'Sic  erit,'  inquit  Barrus, 'ut  dixisti;  in  vno  enim  loco 
consepulti  erimus,  et  resurgemus^.' 

xi.  PosT^  hoc  vir  sanctus  Mac  Cuirp',  prefatus  magister,  Romam 
perrexit  ad  magistrum  suum  Gregorium,  ut  gradum  episcopalem  ab 
eo  acciperet.  Cui  sanctus  Gregorius  dixit :  '  Gradum  episcopalem 
a  me  non  accipies,  quia  dignior  me  est,  qui  te  consecrabit.  Te  enim 
et  sanctum  Barrum  in  loco  resurrectionis  vestre  angeli  Dei  con- 
secrabunt  episcopos.'  Et  ille  amonitus  hiis  verbis,  reuersus  est  ad 
Hyberniam. 

xii.  iNterea*  sanctus  Barrus,  angelo  sibi  iubente,  «d  regionem  | 
f- 133 '^  Mumenensium  perrexit,  et  ibi  cellam  que  dicitur  Achad^  Durbhcon' 
edificauit.  Illic  angelus  Domini  venit  ad  eum,  dicens  :  '  Non  hic  est 
resurrectio  tua.'  Deinde  vir  Dei  venit  ad  cellam  Cluane',  et  fundauit 
ilhc  ecclesiam  ;  et  mansit  ibi,  donec  venerunt  ad  eum  duo  alumpni 
sancti  Ruadani ',  querentes  locum  vbi  manerent.  Tunc  sanctus  Barrus 
reliquit  eis  suum  locum  cum  omnibus  qui  ibi  erant,  dicens:  '  Manete 
vos  hic,  et  ego  ibo  ad  alium  locum  querendum,  quia  non  hic  'est' 
resurrectio  mea.'  Angelus  autem'  Dei  venit  ad  virum  sanctum,  et 
duxit  eum  cum  discipuHs  suis  secum  a  loco  predicto  ad  locum,  in 
quo  nunc  est  ciuitas  eius,  que  dicitur  Corchaidh  i",  et  dixit  ad  eum: 
'  Mane  in  isto  loco ;  erit  enim  hic  resurrectio  tua.'  Postea  sanctus 
Barrus  illic  primitus  ieiunauit  triduo,  et  incessanter  orauit,  volens 
benedicere  suuni  locum  ieiunio  et  oratione.  Tunc  vir  plebeus,  nomine 
Aedh,  filius  Comgalli,  de  nepotibus  Maic  Hyer",  querens  uaccam 
fiigientem  ab  armento  ut  secum  crearet,  venit  vbi  erat  vir  Dei  cum 
suis.  Illa  autem  vacca  nutu  Dei  affuit  ad  sanctos  viros,  et  peperit 
apud  illos  vitulum.  Ille  vir  hoc  videns,  miratus  est;  et  interrogauit 
eos,  dicens  :  '  Quid  hic  facitis  ? '  Sanctus  Dei  Barrus  respondit : 
'  Hic  sumus  querentes  "  locum,  in  quo  Deum  rogaremus  pro  nobismet 
ipsis,  et  pro  illo  qui  dedisset  nobis  in  honore  Domini.'  Ille  'ager", 
in  quo  ipsi  erant,  illius  hominis  fuit,  qui  venit  ad  eos  post  vaccam. 
lUe'  autem  Spiritus  Sancti  gratia  inspiratus,  dixit  eis :    '  Ego,  sancte 

1  Here  Ir.  inserts  a  very  interesting  list  of  Bairre's  fellow  pupils,  and  of 
those    who    commended    their   churches   to    him.  '  R'  f.  120'',  R'  f.  138''. 

3  Chuirp  T.  *  R>  R=  u.s.  ^  AcladT.  ^  Duibhcon  M  ;  Durbcon 

R'  R^;  Duirbcon  T  ;  Cill  Achaidh  Durbcon;  ata  cuas  annsin  .i.  Cuas  Barra  a 
ainm,  7  ata  linn  maith  ana  fharradh  Ir.,  i.  e.  the  Church  of  A.  D.  there  is  a  cave 
there,  called  Barra's  Cave.  and  a  good  pool  of  water  near.  ^  Cluene  T  ;  ad 

locuni  qui  Cluan  dicitur  R'  R- ;  tainic  .  .  .  tar  an  abhainn  budhea  go  Cill  na 
Cluaine  Ir. ,  i.  e.  he  crossed  the  river  southwards  to  the  Church  of  the  Meadow. 
»  i.  Cormac  7  Baoithine  Ir.  '  Sanctus  aut.  ang.  T.  "  Corcliach  T  ; 

Corchar  R'  R=.  "  Mec  Chier  T ;  meich  Tyri  R'  R»  ;  do  Uaibh  Ciarmaic  Ir. 

CDu)do  Uibh  micTair  Ir.  (Br.).  '-  oiH.  R' R^.  '3  ager  illeT;  '  ager 

in  quo  ,  ,  .  ille  '  on  marg.  in  M  ;  homoiotel. 


VITA  SANCTI    BARRI  71 

Dei  Barre,  tibi  offero  in  honore  Domini  hunc  locum,  et  vaccam,  quam 
Deus  ad  vos  adduxit,  habere.'  Tunc  vir  Dci,  gratias  agens,  bene- 
dixit  illum  cum  semine  suo  ;  et  ipse  gaudens  reddiit  ad  sua.  Famulus 
autem  Domini  ibi  mansit  sanctissime  in  vita  mirabili  vsque  ad  obitum 
suum'. 

xiii.  Denique'  non  post  multum  tempus''  vir  sanctus  Mac  Cuirp*, 
magister  beati  Barri ",  a  Roma  reuersus  est,  et  venit  ad  sanctum 
Barrum,  et  susceptus  est  ab  eo  honorifice ;  et  narrauit  ei  omnia,  que 
dixerat  sibi  sanctus  Gregorius  Rome.  Hiis  auditis,  plures  alii  sancti 
venerunt  de  aliis  ecclesiis  hanc  promissionem  videre ".  Et  ordinato 
die'  intrauerunt  omnes  in  ecclesiam,  et  orabant,  expectantes  diuinuni 
misterium.  Ita  ipsis  orantibus,  ecce  angeli  Dei  descendentes  apparue- 
runt  sanctis  ;  et  leuauerunt  sanctum  Barrum  et  sanctum  Mac  Cuirp 
sursum  secum,  et  consecrauerunt  eos  ibi  episcopos  ;  et  dimittentes 
ipsos  iuxta  ahare,  perhibuerunt  eos  episcopos  esse.  In  signum 
huius  uirtutis  ibi  tunc  iuxta  altare  oleum  e  terra  prorupit  multum, 
donec  venit  trans  ficones  eorum  qui  ibi  stabant.  Ibi  onines  gratias 
Deo  agebant  pro  hiis  mirandis  rebus,  glorificantes  sanctos,  quos 
angeli  consecrauerunt.  Post  hec  in  illo  die  sanctus  Barrus  episcopus, 
et  sanctus  episcopus  Mac  Cuirp,  et  alii  clerici  cum  eis  signauerunt 
cimiterium  ecclesie  sancti  Barri,que  vocatur  Corchach*;  et  postquam 
consecrauerunt  illud,  promittentes  hoc  in  nomine  Domini  dixerunt : 
'Omnis  quicumque  in  humo  huius  cimiterii  sepultus  fiierit,  infernus 
super  eum  post  diem  iudicii  non  claudetur.'  Tunc  rogauit  sanctus 
episcopus  Mac  Cuirp '  ut  ipse  in  illo  cimiterio  primus  sepultus  esset, 
et  audita  est  oratio  eius.  Ipse  enim  statim  dolore  correptus,  feliciter 
obiit ;  et  cum  honore  a  venerabili  episcopo  Barro  et  aliis  clericis 
sanctis  primus  sepultus  est  |  in  cimiterio  Corchaighe.  Ipse  fuit  f.  133  '^ 
sanctissimus  vir  et  sapiens  multum,  discipulusque  "  sancti  Gregorii 
Rome,  et  magister  sancti  Barri ;  et  ipse  cum  suo  alumpno  sancto 
Barro  ab  angelis  Dei  consecrati  sunt  episcopi".  In  illo  autem  loco 
sanctus  Barrus  usque  ad  obitum  suuni  mansit ;  et  ibi  in  honore  eius 
maxima  ciuitas  creuit,  que  eodem  nomine  vocatur,  id  est  Corcach  ^-. 
Et  multi  sancti  fuerunt  ibi  discipuli  eius,  de  quibus  hiis  nominibus 
aliqui'^  nominantur,  id  est  Fachtna  filius  Monghich'*,  et  Mocholmog'^ 
fihus  Gilliain"",  et  Mocolmog'^  Cainnich'''  et  Fachtnanus,  et  Fergus, 

'  tainic  iarsin  Aodh  mac  Mianaidh,  7  ro  iodbhair  do  Barra  Coill  [Foithrib  Br.] 
n-Aodha  a  Muigh  Tuath  Ir.  add,^  i.  e.  there  came  afterwards  Aedh  son  of 
Mianach,  and  offered  to  Bairre  Aedh's  Wood  in  Magh  Tuath.  ^  R'  f.  120', 

R-  f.  139".  '  temporis  T.  *  Cuyrbius  R'  R^.  "  bea.  B.  mag.  T. 

*»  videre  cupientes  R'  R-.  "^  die  assignato  ab  eodem  sedis  apostoHce  nuncio 

R'  R\         *    -chac  T.  «  Curbius  R'  R^.  '»  qui  discipulus  T.  "  -tus 

est  episcopus  T.  '-  Corchac  T  ;  Corchaya  R'  R*.  '^  ahi  T.  '*  Morgg- 
ich  T.  '^    Moclomoc  T.  "  Gillein  T.         "    Cainn  Eich  T  ;  Mocholmog 

rogabh  Ceann  Eich  Ir.,  i.  e.  M.  who  settled  at  C.  E. ;  therefore  Ceinn  Ekh  is 
probably  the  right  reading. 


72  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

et  Conaire^  et  Silennus'',  Segenus ',  et  Trienus,  et  Liber  episcopus, 
et  alii  multi'.  Ipsi  propter  sanctitatem  suam  adducti  sunt  in  aliis 
locis ;  et  sua  loca  et  se  ipsos  suo  sancto  magistro  Barro  obtulerunt ; 
et  loca  eorum  vsque  hodie  successoribus  sancti  Barri  seruiunt. 

xiv.  Sanctus^  Barrus  post  obitum  sui  magistri,  episcopi  Mec 
Cuirp,  nesciuit  quem  haberet  patrem  confessionis  sue.  Proinde 
cogitauit  adire  sanctum  senem  Colingum^,  ut  haberet  eum  patrem 
confessionis  sue,  aut  interrogaret  illum  si  hoc  ipse' noluisset,  queni 
alium  deberet  habere.  Et  periti  dicunt  quod  ille  sanctus  senior 
beatum  Barrum  baptizauit.  Sanctus  siquidem  Colingus,  inspiratus 
spiritu  prophetali,  preuidit  aduentum  sancti  Barri,  et  dixit  ad  familiam 
suam  :  '  Sanctus  hospes  cum  beatis  commitibus  hodie  ad  nos  venient ; 
preparate  iam  in  adventu  illorum  hospitum  balneum  et  cibum*.'  Et 
postquam  illuc'  uir  Dei  [aduenerat],  receptus  est  cum  honore ;  ac 
mansorius  sancti  Colingi  dixit  ad  beatos  hospites,  salutans  eos : 
'  Sanctus  senior,  magister  noster,  valde  letus  est  in  aduentu  vestro. 
Soluantur '"  calciamenta  de  pedibus  vestris,  ut  lauentur  aqua,  et  postea 
balneate.'  Respondit  sanctus  Barrus,  dicens :  '  PIus  placet  nobis 
prius  salutare  senem,  quam  balneare.'  Ista  verba  ministro  mon- 
strante  sancto  Colingo,  respondit  dicens :  '  Dic  tu  beato  Barro,  ut 
lauentur  pedes  eius",  et  hac  nocte  sumat  caritatem  nostram  ;  crastina 
autem  die  pergat  ad  cellam  suam,  et  illic  eum  salutabo ;  nam  in 
septimo  die  veniam  ad  eum,  et  nos  ambo  invicem  ibi  salutabimus, 
quia  sic  placet  Deo.  Talis  enim  vir  non  debuit  tantum  laborem 
sustinere  propter  me ;  et  ideo  non  videbo  eum,  donec  ego  laborem 
habuero  propter  eum  tam  magnum.'  Et  ita  factum  est.  Nam  sanctus 
Barrus  crastino  die  reuersus  est  ;  et  in  septimo  post  eum  sanctus 
Colingus  venit'^.  Veniente  iam  sancto  Colingo  in  ecclesiam  Corcha- 
ghie  "  susceptus  est  honorifice  '*  a  venerabih  antistite  Barro.  Et  statim 
procidit  ille  senex'°  ante  pedes  episcopi,  dicens :  '  Quidquid  modo 
dedero  tibi,  promitte  mihi  accipere.'  Et  promisit  ei  episcopus. 
Tunc  ille  sanctus  senex  ait :  '  Ecce  corpus  meum,  et  animam  meam '", 
et  locum,  Deo  et  tibi  offero  in  eternum.'  Hoc  audito  sermone  sanctus 
episcopus  amare  fleuit,  dicens :  '  Heu,  non  id  cogitaui  in  mente  mea, 
set  me  cum  loco  meo  Deo  et  tibi  oflferre.'  Respondit  sanctus  senex, 
et  dixit:  '  Non  ita  fiet  ",  set,  sicut  ego  dixi,  sic  erit ;  carior  enim  et 

1  Conair  T.  -  Sinell  Ir.  ^  Finghen  Ir.  *  The  list  stands  thus  in 

R'  R*  :  Factnatheus  et  duo  Colmani,  scilicct  Colmanus  mac  Lenyn  et  Colmanus 
cognomento  Cham,  et  Facthnanus,  et  Fergus,  et  multi  alii  sancti  uirL  The  fullest 
list  is  in  Ir. ,  which  gives  interesting  details  as  to  the  churches  occupied  by 
these  disciples.  ^  R'  f.  120'',  R^  139'.  '^  Eolang  Ir.,  audita  fama  sancti 

Eolyngi  R'  R'' ;  on  margin  of  R',  Moling.  '  ille  T.         *  prep.  eis  hospicium 

et  alia  necessaria  R'  R^.  '  bis  M  m.  pr.  •"  -uentur  M  T.  "  ut 

sumat  caritatis  a  nobis  obsequia,  R'  R".  '^  ad  ciuitatem  Corcagensem  R'  R^ 

add.         "  .age  T.  "  honorabiliter  T.  i^  Eolyngus  R'  R».         «  om.  T. 

"  fiat  T. 


I 


VITA  SANCTI   BARRI  73 

maior  es  apud  Deum  quam  ego ;  set  fenus  huius  oblacionis  postulo 
a  te,  id  est  in  vno  loco  resurrectionem  expectemus.'  Sanctus  Barrus 
respondit :  '  Illud  tibi  prestabitur';  set  questio  mea,  pro  qua  ego  ad 
te  exiui,  non  est  adhuc  soluta  de  patre  confessionis  mee.'  Sanctus 
Colingus  dixit  ei :  '  Verum  |  confessorem,  verumque  amicum  anime,  f.  134  ° 
qui  est  Christus,  habebis.  Ipse  manum  tuam  modo  de  manu  mea 
accipiat,  et  purissimam  confessionem  tuam  exaudiat-.'  Quod  sic 
factum  est.  Nam  ibi  in  illo  die,  presente  angelorum  et  archangelorum 
turba  non  modica,  fidelium  autem  hominum  ac  sanctorum  choro 
circumstante,  Christus  Dominus  manum  beatissimi  pontificis  Barri 
de  manu  sancti  senis  Colingi  ^  accepit*;  atque  audita  pura  confes- 
sione,  dimisit^  luxta  crucem  autem'^  que  dicitur  crux  Colingi 
factum  est  hoc.  Ab  illo'  vero  die  usque  ad  mortem  sancti  Barri, 
visu  carnali*  manus  eius  propter  nimiam  claritatem  suam  aspici  non 
potuit,  et  ideo  manica  circa  eam  semper  erat. 

XV.  CuM '  appropinquaret  exitus  beati  famuli  Dei  Barri  de  hac  vita 
ad  veram  lucem,  nunciauit  paucis  ydoneis  discipulis  quod  moreretur 
in  sua  ecclesia'",  que  dicitur  Corcaidh".  Sciens  autem  ipse  ubi 
moriturus  esset,  perrexit  ad  cellam  Cluaine^-  ad  sanctos  viros 
Cormachum  "  et  Buchenium,  quorum  memoriam  superius  fecimus. 
Vir  sanctus  simulauit  quasi  visitare  eos.  Spacium  enim  septemdecim 
annorum  erat  a  tempore  quo  beatus  Barrus  ecclesiam  Corcaich  '■* 
edificauit,  usque  ad  obitum  suum.  Postquam  autem  peruenit  amabilis 
athleta  Barrus  ad  cellam  Cluaine  '°,  et  salutauit  supradictos  sanctos, 
statim  infirmitate  comprehensus  est,  et  accepto  eterno  viatico 
corporis  et  sanguinis '°  Christi,  vbi  nunc  est  crux  in  medio  celle 
Cluaine'*,  circumstante  sanctorum  turba,  suum  spiritum  felicissimum 
Deo  emissit.  Corpus  autem  eius,  collecta  diuersi  habitus  hominum 
multitudine,  cum  honore  debito  adductum  est  ad  suam  ciuitatem, 
Corcach,  et  honorifice  sepultum  est  in  ea.  Et  postea  reliquie  eius" 
a  uenerabilibus  episcopis,  abbatibus,  monachis,  clericis,  sanctimonali- 
bus,  et  multis  wlgarium  hominum  venientibus  turbis,  eleuate  sunt, 
signis  eas  commitantibus,  et  cum  psalmis  et  ympnis  et  canticis  spirit- 
ualibus  in  loculo"  argenteo  sunt  condite.  Hec  preclara  silicet  et 
miranda  valde  signorum  dona  Deus  sancto  Barro  donauit,  que  non 
sunt  frequenter  audita.  Gratia  enim  Dei  prestauit  illi  loqucionem 
ante  natiuitatem,   dum  esset  in  vtero   matris  sue,  et  statim    post 

>  prest.  tibi  T.  2    om.  T.  »  Eolyngi  R'  R\  <  ag  ulaid  Eolaing 

Ir.  add.,  i.  e.  by  EoIang's  monument.  '  in  pace  dim.  R'  R-.     According  to 

Ir.  Christ  was  taking  Bairre  direct  to  heaven,  but  Eolang   entreated  that  he 
might  not  be  taken  yet.  '  ont.  T.  '  illa  T.  *  uisus  carnalis  M  T. 

'  R'  f.  121'',  R-  f.  139''.  '"  quod  cito  esset  recessurus,  non  tamen  in  ciuitate 

sua  R'  R2.        11  Corchac  T.        12  ClueneT;  de  Cluayn  R'  R\       '3  -macum  T ; 
cf.  p.  70  note  8.  '<  -chach  T.         '=  Cluene  T.         "  corpore  et  sanguine  T, 

"  multis  iam  perpetratis  miraculis  add.  R'  R''.  '*  loco  T. 


74  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

natiuitatem  loqucionem  apertam  ante  congruum  tempus  loquendi, 
et  immolacionem  ei  a  potentibus  hominibus  ante  baptismum  suum, 
et  signorum  largiorem  gratiam  sine  imprecacione  ;  et  angeli  semper 
ducebant  eum  quocunque  ibat,  et  in  commitatu  eius  sepius  erant, 
et  quod  episcopalem  gradum  ab  eis  accepit ;  et  Dominus  manum 
eius  de  manu  Colingi  sancti  senis,  multis  sanctis  testibus  aspicienti- 
bus',  accepit".  Sanctus  uero  episcopus  Furseus,  cum  esset  in  ciui- 
tate  Corcaighe'',  vidit  scalam  auream  iuxta  tumulum  viri  Dei  ad 
suscipiendas  animas  ad  regna  celestia;  et  vidit  sum[m]itatem  illius 
scale  pervenire  ad  celum.  Vir  felix  Barrus  magnus  et  mirabilis  in 
celo  et  in  terra,  qui  fuit  stabilis  in  fide  ut  Petrus,  doctor  egregius  ut 
Paulus,  virilis  ut  Andreas,  supplantauit  vicia  ut  lacobus,  plenus  gratia 
Dei  ut  lohannes.  Quid  plura  ?  omnes  virtutes  perfectorum  virorum 
'•'34  in  se  hauriebat ;  id  est,  humilitatem,  obe|dienciam  ;  pacienciam,  spem, 
fidem,  caritatem,  et  cetera.  Ipse  pater  sanctus  ideo  regnum  celeste 
merito  promeruit,  et  eterni  regis  conspectum  silicet  post  multa 
miracula  patrata,  post  certamen  certatum,  post  cursum  consum[m]a- 
tum,  post  fidem  seruatam  *,  vii  Kal.  Octobris  fehciter  inter  choros 
angelorum  migrauit  ad  Dominum. 

EXPLICIT   VITA  SANCTI    BaRRI 

EPiscopi  Corcaghie  K 


'  accipientibus  M.  ^  percepit  T  ;  R^  R^  adti. :  sl  consecratione  autem  eius 

usque  ad  transitum  vii  anni  fiuxerunt.  ^  Corcach  T.  *  cf.  2  Tim.  iv.  7. 

^  -cagie  T  ;  no  explicit  in  R*. 


Vita  sanrti  Brrnrfji  at)t)at(s  tir  (flhiaiu 
ilToirptfjc 

Incipit  uita  sancti  Berachi'  confessoris  et  abbatis 

i.  Inter  cetera  que  Dei  plena  potentia,  infinita  sapientia,  perfecta  f.  58° 
bonitas  in   creaturis  huius  nascentis  mundi  ab  ipsius   exordio   tam 
niagnifice   quam    mirifice    perfecit,  ipsa  in  se   "incomprehensibilis 
dcitas  summe  et  excellenter  in  sanctis  quos  ab  eterno  predestinauit 
atque  preordinauit,  specialiter  relucet. 

ii.  Regnum  '  siquidem  Hibernie  insule  ab  ortu  solis  longius  existens, 
ipsius  incolas,  ydolatrie  cultui  diu  inherentes,  per  plures  sanctos 
gloriosos,  in  quibus  Dominus  suam  uoluntatem  mirificauit,  uoluit,  ne 
perirent,  uisitare.  Inter  hos  enim  sanctos  post  sanctissimi  patris 
Patricii  transituin  surrexit  in  finibus  Conactie  de  genere  regali  uir 
preclarus  et  magni  apud  Deum  meriti,  Berachus  nomine,  qui  uelut 
nouum  sidus  refulgens  obscura  queque  tollebat,  et  uiam  ueritatis' 
errantibus  in  regione  umbre  mortis  ostendebat. 

iii.  Fuit*  enim  homo  a  Deo  missus,  qui  uiam  Domini  preparabat 
in  huius  mundi  |  heremo.  Ipse  etenim  populum  culturis  demonum  f.  58'* 
deditum''  pie  uisitans,  nunc  increpando,  nunc  exhortando,  nuncque 
niiraculis  coruscando,  ad  fidem  Christi  perfecte  conuertit.  De  ipso 
quoque  potest  dici  illud  prophetie  :  '  populus  qui  ambulabat  in 
tenebris  uidit  lucem  magnam*.'  De  hoc  enim  sancto  uiro  beatus 
Patricius  spiritu  prophetie  plenus  prophetauit  dicens.  Nam  cum  ter- 
ram,  in  qua  uir  Dei  nasceretur,  ex  more  uisitasset,  nec  tamen  cultores 
eius  a  gentilitatis  errore  omnino  conuerteret ;  discipulis  hoc  admiran- 
tibus,  quare  monitis  et  sanctis  exhortationibus  tanti  predicantis  non 
obedirent,  Spiritu  Sancto  edocente  fertur  prophetando  dixisse : 
'  Sinite,  fratres,  sinite ;  in  breui  post  me  uenturus  est,  qui  hanc 
plebem  uita  et  doctrina  illuminabit,  qui  et  de  hoc  genere  hominum 
nascetur,  et  hic  potens  erit ;  non  solum  gentem  hanc,  quam  ferocem ' 
et  indomitam  conspicitis,  verum  etiam  innumeras  alias  plebes  suis 

'  R-  f.  191''.  In  R=  there  is  a  little  miniature  of  the  Saint,  and  an  Irish 
pedigree  in  a  later  hand.  •   =Br.  c.  2".  '  on  erasure.  *   =  Br. 

cc.  2",  4.  6  debitum  R>  R».  «  Is.  ix.  2.  '  frontera  R^ ;  quam 

furentem,  quam  indomitam  F  Colg. 


76  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

sanctis  documentis  uelut  agnos  mansuetos  ad  Christum  conuertet.' 
Et  hoc  totum  euenit  ut  propheta  egregius  prenunciauit. 

iv.  Huius'  uiri  sancti  pater  Vendalus"  mater  uero  Finscriad' 
uocabatur.  Hii  licet  inter  nobilium  cateruas  essent  educati,  et 
terrenis  rebus  nimium  locupletati,  omni  tamen  mentis  studio,  spretis 
ydolatrie  cultibus,  celibem  uitam  actjtare  satagebant.  Hunc  enim 
cum  in  primeuo  iuuentutis  flore  genuissent,  in  natiuitatis  ipsius 
primordio*  qualis  futurus'  esset  diuinitus  premonstratur  eis.  Nam 
illa  nocte  qua  matris  uterum  exiuit,  sanctus  Fregius*  circa  mediam 
noctis  horam  post  laudes  matutinales  cellam  exiens,  et  versus  fines 
Conactie  oculos  dirigeret,  circa  locum  habitationis  parentum  eius 
conspicuum  lumen  conspexit,  ac  si  globus  ignis  extitisset.     Admirans 

f-  59"  quoque  uir  |  sanctus  quid  hoc  signum  portenderet,  quodam  de  suis 
ad  se  accersito,  ait :  '  Ad  domum  Uendali  generi  mei  progredere,  et  si 
forte  soror  mea  partum  edidit  masculum,  ad  me  cum  partu '  eueniat.' 
Nuntius  uero  iussa  patris  Fregii  complens,  ad  domum  parentum  pueri 
nati  ueniens,  speciosum  ualde  infantem  cum  matre  reperit ;  ac  uolun- 
tatem  hominis  Dei  eis  indicauit.  Auditis  quoque  nuntii  uerbis,  mox 
infans  ad  sanctum  Fregium  ducitur.  Conspiciens  autem  uir  Dei 
infantem  donis  Dei  luculenter  preuentum,  gratias  diuine  pietati 
reddens,  ait :  '  Hunc,'  inquit,  '  infantem  ad  ecclesiam  perducite,  ut 
lauacro  salutis  abluatur,  et  sic  Christo  capiti '  adiungatur.  Cumque 
ad  locum  baptisterii  adduceretur,  a  sancto  Fregio  requisiti  parentes 
quo  nomine  infans  uocaretur,  respondent :  '  Ipsum  Berachum  °  uocate.' 
Eo  uero  baptizato,  et  hoc  nomine  ei  imposito,  ait  sanctus  Fregius  : 
'  Recte  hoc  nomen  ei  est  impositum,  nam  beatus  erit,  et  locus  eius  in 
celis  permanebit.'  Infantem  in  Christo  regeneratum  mater  secum 
conabatur  detinere,  ut  silicet  lacte  proprio  tenerius  aleretur,  quam 
cum  nutrice  alia  alieno.  Set  sanctus  uir  Dei  hoc  non  permisit, 
dicens :  '  Scias,  soror  mea  karissima,  quod  huius  pueri  sollicitudinem 
amplius  non  subportabis.  Mecum  enim  in  Christi  nomine  remanebit. 
Potens  est  enim  Deus,  qui  ipsum  creauit,  ut  ad  perfectum  proueniat 
incrementum  membrorum  absque  ministerio  lactis  mulierum.'  Quod 
et  rei  probauit  euentus.  Nam  cum  a  uiro  Dei  diligenti  cura  educare- 
tur,  solitus  erat,  ut  matris  mamillam,  sancti  Fregii  auriculam  sugere 
dextram.  Sicque  factum  est  nutu  illius,  qui  mel  de  petra  potens  est 
producere,  ut  contactu  auricule  uiri  Dei  puer   cresceret,  'tan'quam 

f.  59''  omnem  lactis  materni"'  ex|uberantiam  haberet. 

'   =Br.  c.  6.  ^  Nendalus  F  Colg. ;  Nemhnall  Br.  ;  the  pedigrees  differ 

as  to  the  name  of  Berach's   father.  ^  Finscad   F  Colg. ;  Finmaith  Br. 

'  R'  f.   igi"*.  ^  futurus  0111.  K''  F  Colg.  '  cruimther  Fiaoch 

Br.  i.  e,  Fraech  the  priest.  '  cum  partu  ad  me  R'^.  *  capiti  om.  R^ 

FColg.  ^  According  to  Br.  c.  5  his  baptismal  name  was  Fintan  ;  Berach 

('  pointed  ')  being  a  name  given  to  him  on  account  of  his  acuteness.    R  seems  to 
connect  berach  and  beattis.  '"  -ne  R'  R^. 


VITA   SANCTI   BERACHI  77 

V.  Peractis  siquidem  infantilibus '  annis,  literarum  studiis  traditur 
imbuendus,  in  quibus  magno  animi  ingcnio  et  intellectus  capacitate 
de  die  in  diem  proficiebat.  Hic  siquidem  doctoris  sui,  sancti  silicet 
Fregii,  vestigia  sacra  diligenti  animo  amplectens,  nunc  studio  nunc 
orationi  ac  Dei  laudibus  uaccabat.  Sub  tanto  quoque  doctore 
proficiens,  eius  uota  -  Deus  ex  alto  prospiciens  bonis  operibus 
sanctum'  decorauit,  ut  uix  in  terra  similis  putaretur  ei. 

vi.  Postquam'  uero  ad  annos  peruenit  discretionis,  parentum 
suorum  consortium  eflfugere  satagens,  licentia  doctoris  sui  habita, 
ad  partes  Laginie  angelo  comite  properat,  vno  eum  comitante 
ministro.  Ad  ciuitatem  quoque  Glendacolensem ''  perueniens,  sub 
sancto  Kymino,  monasterii  Glendacolensis  preclarissimo  abbate, 
se  subicit  discipline.  Cum  ecclesiam  oraturus  ingrederetur,  ecce 
sanctus  Kyminus  pre  foribus  eiusdem"  ecclesie  consistens,  preuidens 
in  spiritu  quante  conuersationis  futurus  esset,  eum  intuens  fratribus 
dixit :  '  Ecce  seruus  Dei ;  eamus,  ut  salutemus  eum.'  Quem  cum 
salutassent,  causam  sui  itineris  ab  eo  querunt.  Quibus  di.xit :  '  De 
finibus  Conactie  usque  huc  veni,  cupiens  omni  desiderio  sancti  patris 
Kymini  parere  preceptis,  ac  sacre  doctrine  pocula  ab  eo  haurire.' 
Quo  audito,  sanctus  abbas  Kyminus  gratias  Deo  egit,  ac  eius  pro- 
posituni  commendans  eum  benigne  suscepit,  atque  sacre  religionis 
habitum  ei  tradens,  normam  bene  uiuendi  edocuit. 

vii.  Anno'  siquidem  probationis  in  nouitiatu  elapso,  professionem 
ex  more  iuxta  ordinis  obseruantiam  compleuit.  Qui  deinceps  ob 
sanctitatis  meritum  et  propositi  stabilitatem  ab  omnibus  commenda- 
tur,  et  in'|ipsius  monasterii  prepositum  communiter'  assumitur.  f.  59« 
Set  uir  Dei  sollicitudinem  tanti  officii  patienter  supportans, ministerium 
sibi  traditum  iuxta  datam  sibi  a  Deo  gratiam  conuenienter  administra- 
bat.  Nunc  enim  necessitatibus  fratrum  prouide  intendens,  nunc 
pauperum  inopie  pie  subueniens,  interdum  culture  et  aliis  laboribus 
ipsius  monasterii  insistebat ;  sicque  curam  quam  suscepit,  tanquam 
strenuus  dispensator,  cum  summa  diligentia  peragebat.  Sub  ipsius 
enim  cura  bona  monasterii  de  die  in  diem  crescebant ;  de  quo  omnes 
gratias  Deo  et  sibi  referebant. 

viii.  Posti"  hec  euigilante  monasterii  armentario  minus  caute  erga 
curam  armenti  sibi  commissi,  ecce  lupus  e  uicino  loco  predam 
expectans,rapido  cursu  irruens  uitulum  cuiusdam  vacce  in  lactis  copia 
superhabundantis  secum  tulit,  atque  comedit.  Protinus  mater  uituli 
horribiles  mugitus  dabat,  ac  huc  illucque"  discurrens,  quasi  insana 

>  -talibus  R'.  2  r2  f.  ^g^".  '  -tus  R^  R'.  *  =  Br.  c.  9. 

'  -lochensem  F  Colg:.  ^  illius  R' F  Colg.  '   =Rr.  c.  11.  '  et  iii 

bis  R'.  '  This  vvord  is  much  contracted  in  the  MSS. ;  F  Colg.  substitute 

'  illo  renitente  '.  '»  cf.  Br.  c.  13.  "  illudque  R^. 


78  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

ferebatur.  Set  uiro  Dei  orante,  res  mira  accidit.  Lupus  enim, 
amissa  feritate,  ad  mugientem  uaccam  reuertitur ;  ac  more  uituli  se 
mansuetum  ofrerens,  eum  vacca  lambendo  lac  habundanter  prebebat'. 
Sicque  factum  est  ut  Dei  uirtute  feritas  lupina  in  uitulinam  conuerte- 
retur  mansuetudinem  ;  ita  quod  non  ut  lupus,  set  ut  uitulus,  in  posterum 
uacce  seruiret. 

ix.  Non  '  multo  post  tempore  filius  regis  '  Laginie ',  qui  cum  sancto 
Caimino  °  a  pueritia  fuit  nutritus,  tam  graui  infirmitate  detinebatur ",  ut 
uitalem  uideretur  exspirare  spiritum.  Ad  quem  sanctus  Kyminus  ' 
accedens  ait :  '  Heu,'  inquit,  '  mihi  misero,  nam  non  habeo  quod  dolori 
tuo  possit  mederi.'  Cui  puer  infirmus  ait :  '  Ad  refrigerandum 
calorem  intolerabilem,  quo  interius  exuror,  pomis  et  accidolis  opus 
mihi  est  pro  remedio  sanitatis  opportuno.'  Tunc  sanctus  Kyminus 
f-  59''  accersiuit  |  sanctum  Berachum'  ad  se,  dicens  :  '  Mi  frater  Berache, 
cito,  si  placet,  egredere  ;  et  tecum  defer,  que  anima  languentis  huius 
pueri  desiderat.'  Tunc  Berachus  iussionem  patris  Caymini  complere 
desiderans,  ascendit  in  uicinum  collem  ;  et  flexis  genibus  Dominum 
orauit,  ut  desideriis  infirmi  subueniret.  Sciens  quoque  se  in  oratione 
exauditum,  salicibus  vicinis  in  nomine  Domini  imperans,  ait :  '  In 
nomine  Domini  nostri  lesu  Christi,  qui  omnia  creauit  ex  nihilo,  fiat 
ut  hii  salices  poma  producant,  et  terra  accidulas  germinet,  ut  sciat 
omnis  populus  quia  tu  es  Deus  solus,  potens  cum  Patre  et  Spiritu 
Sancto  omnia  ex  nihilo  creare.'  Et  subito  flores  produxerunt  salices, 
ac  speciosa  poma  postmodum  protulerunt.  Similiter  in  hiemis  algore, 
cum  tunc  terra  esset  sterilis  et  arida,  dedit  copiose  accidulas.  Collectis 
quoque  herbis  cum  pomis  de  salicibus  productis,  gratias  Deo,  cui 
omnia  sunt  possibilia,  egit,  ac  ea  sancto  patri  Kymino  optulit. 
Cumque  hos  fructus  mirabiles  uir  Dei  infirmo  puero  conferret, 
mox  sanitatem  recuperauit.  In  hoc  miraculi  insoliti  signum  fertur, 
quod  usque  ad  hec  tempora  in  eodem  loco^  salices  ibi  crescentes 
poma  producunt,  que  infirmis  sepe  conferunt  sanitatem.  Hac  in  re 
omnipotentis  Dei  magnificentia  debet  deuotissime  uenerari,  qui  tam 
mirabiliter  extra  nature  potentiam  ostendit  suam  inexhaustam  suffi- 
cientiam. 

X.  Quodam"'  alio  tempore  uxor"  regis  Lagenie,  maligno  eam 
excitante  spiritu,  eundem  regis  filium  cogitauit  arte  maligna'''  ut 
perfida  nouerca  interimere.  Timuit  enim  quod  proli  sue  preualeret, 
ac  eam  contempneret,  si  post  obitum  regis  regnaret.    Ascendit  ergo 

'  se  prebeat  R'  R'.  '   ^-Br.  cc.  14,  15.         '  R^  f.  192^  *  Faolan  mac 

Colmain  Br.  add.       ^  Caymano  R^      "  cepit  laborare  F  Colg.       '  Cayminus  R*. 
*  suuni  baculum  F  Colg.  ;  and  this  is  apparently  the  reading  of  R^.  '  in  hoc 

loco  eodem  R^;  in  loco  eod.  F  Colg.  ">   =  Br.  c.  16.  "  named  Cainech, 

according  to  Br.  "  magica  F  Colg. 


VITA  SANCTI   BERACHI  79 

cum  aliis  concionatricibus'  magice  artis  peritis  cuiusdam  collis 
summitatem,  ut  adorando  demones  ab  eis  impetrarent  uel  filii  regis 
mortem,  uel  membrorum  eius  mutilationem.  Set  desiderium  pecca- 
tricis  regine  |  periit;  quia  Spiritui  Sancto,  qui  in  sancto  suo  operaba-  f.  60" 
tur,  contraire-  non  preualuit.  Dei  enim  uirtute  instigante,  uir  Dei 
ad  uidendum  peccora  cundem  locum  ascendit,  ac,  Deo  sibi  reuelante, 
quidnam'  ibi  regina  ageret,  didicit.  Quamobrem  uir  Dei  ad  orationis 
pre'si'dia  conuolans,  Deum  celi  deuotissime  rogauit,  ne  malignantium 
mulierum  incantationes  puero  innocenti  preualerent.  Et  exaudiuit 
Dominus  sanctum  suum,  puerum  innocentem  defendendo,  ne  magica 
ars  ei  preualeret.  Set  qui  uindictam  accipit'de  iniquitate  malorum, 
laqueum  portantibus'  fecit  cadere  in  laqueum.  Sicut  enim  quondam 
terra  deglutiuit  Dathan  et  Abiron  propter  malitiam  suam,  sic  simili 
pena  has  magicas  concionatrices "  cum  regina  terra  absorbuit. 

xi.  Post'  hec,  cum  iam  omnipotens  Deus  vitam  sancti  huius  super 
candelabrum  in  domo  Dei  ponere  conaretur,  ut  omnibus  radios  lucis 
sue  immitteret,  ecce  uir  Dei  in  noctis  uisu  angelicum  accepit  respon- 
sum  ei  dicens ' :  '  Cras  mane  occurret  tibi  ceruus  ad  fores  monasterii ', 
quem,  sarcinolis  appositis,  sequaris  recto  tramite;  et  in  loco  quo 
requiescet,  ibi  et  tu  fac  requiem.  Nam  ibi  erit  sedes  tua,  et  memoriale 
tuum  in  posterum.'  Mane  igitur  facto,  ceruum  ad  fores  monasterii 
reperit ;  et  sancto  Kymino  ac  fratribus  uocatis,  quid  in  uisione  sibi 
fuerat  ostensum,  enarrans,  licentiam  eorum  cum  benedictione 
recepit'".  Apposuit  igitur  sarcinolas  suas  super  ceruum  tanquam 
super  domesticum  asinum.  Eum  gressu  mansueto  precedit ;  et  uir 
Dei  cum  suo  rninistro  "  laudantes  Deum  eum  secuntur.  Ab  hoc  igitur 
itineris  labore  non  cessant,  usque  quo  ad  locum,  qui  hodie  Cluayn 
Charpi  dicitur,  peruenientes  quiescunt.  Et  cum  ibi  ceruus  onus 
suum  deponeret,  paulisper  requiescens,  ab  oculis  |  uiri  Dei  disparuit.   f.  60  *■ 

xii.  Tunc^-  sanctus  Berachus  gratias  Deo  agens  mandat  ministro 
ut  locum  querat  oportunum,  in  quo  solitarii  possent  Deo  seruire. 
Cumque  minister  locum  aptum  ad  manendum  requireret ",  reperit 
octodecim  corpora  in  terra  palpitantia,  ac  si  eadem  hora  essent  illi 
uiri  occisi.  Duo  enim  filii"  regum  hostilem  inibi  commissere 
confiictum,  sicque  in  conflictu  eodem  cecidere  totidem  uiri.  Horrore 
igitur  ac  terrore  minister  attonitus,  ad  uirum  Dei  reuertitur,  nuncians 
ei  quod  uiderat;   silicet  agrum  quendam  ad  inhabitandum  aptum'^ 

'  concinn-  F  Colg.  ;  con  a  bantracht  cumachta  Br.  lit.  with  her  vvomen  of 
power,  i.  e.  magical  power.  '  R^  f.  i92<^.  s  quanam  R= ;  quaenam  F  Colg. 
*    accepit    R'   F  Colg.  »   F   has  port-   corrected   to  par-,   which 

Colg.   reads.  «  concinn- F   Colg.  '   =Br.   c.   i8.  *  dicens   ei 

R-  F  Colg.  9  manast-   R'.  i»  obtinuit  F  Colg.  "  named 

Maolmollach  or  Maolmothlach  in  Br.  "  =Br.  cc.  19,  20.  "  -rent  R-. 

"  Donnchadh  of  Tara,  and  Tipraite,  son  of  Tadg,  of  Cruachan,  according  to  Br. 
"  R'  f.  192^. 


8o  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

nisi  quod  sanguine  nouiter  occisorum  corrumperetur  ac  fedaretur. 
Cui  uir  Dei^ait:  'Tu  quidem  ignorans  nomen  loco  illi  imposuisti^ 
Ager  enim  corumptus  in  posterum  uocabitur,'  quod  in  Hybernico 
CToyn  Corpi'  dicitur.  Corpti*  enim  in  Hibernico  sonat  corumptum, 
vel  mortale  peccatum.  Tunc  uir  Dei  ad  locum  accedens  eundem, 
Deum  pro  occisis  illis  suppliciter  rogauit,  et  resuscitationem  eorum 
promeruit.  Resuscitati  igitur  ad  uiri  Dei  pedes  se  prosternunt  ^, 
ac  gratiarum  uota  Deo  et  sibi  persoluunt.  Filii  quoque  regum,  qui 
inter  ceteros  erant  resuscitati,  in  posterum  uite  sue  tempus  se  mutuo, 
ac  si  essent  duo  germani,  diligentes,  usque  ad  finem  Deo  fideliter 
seruierunt. 

xiii.  Fuit^  in  regione  eadem  vir  magni  honoris  inter  gentiles,  qui  in 
magice  artis  peritia  erat  ualde  peritus'.  Hic  enim  apud  illos  quasi 
numen  celeste  uocabatur,  ac  in  reuerentia  habebatur.  Idem  magus 
vendicabat  sibi  ius  hereditarium  in  terra,  quam  uir  Dei  ex  miraculo 
ibi  facto  possederat.  Audiens  enim  quod  uir  Dei  ibi  inhabitare 
proponeret,  festinus  ad  locum  accessit,  et  suis  machinationibus  et 
magicis  artibus  turbare  [e]um  incepit.  Verbis  enim  eum '  contume- 
f.  60  "  ijosis  afificiens',  ipsum  a  suo  proposito  subuertere  |  satagebat.  Set 
homo  Dei  nec  minis  nec  terroribus  quatiebatur;  set  tanquam  murus 
inexpugnabilis  constanter  permanens,  opus,  quod  inceperat,  Deo 
commendabat.  Tandem  magus  sanctum  ad  examen  regis  conuocat ; 
in  cuius  presentia  allegat  quod  iure  suo  naturali"  nemo  priuari  debet, 
nec  ipse  terra  sua  natiua.  Cui  constanter  uir  Dei  respondens,  ait : 
'  Pater  tuus  Sathanas  a  celesti  hereditate  deiectus,  ad  yma  miserabi- 
liter  (^orruens,  profunda  petiit  inferni.  Tu  ergo  tuo  similis  patri 
dignus  non  es  hanc  terram  Deo  dedicatam  possidere  ;  quin  potius 
in  hereditate  infernali  cum  patre  tuo  diabolo  comparticlpabis.' 

xiv.  Hiis  aliisque  rationibus  coram  rege  decertantibus,  de  precepto 
regis  ad  Edanum  filium  Gaurani,  Scotice  gentis  regem  ",  mittuntur, 
ut^''  questionis  mote  litem  determinando  diiudicet.  Cumque  iussu 
mittentis  principis  ad  opidum  regis  Scotie  uenirent,  magus  gressu 
ueloci  uirum  Dei  preuenit,  ac  pueris  regie  aule  ad  pilam  ludentibus 
in  platea  ait:  'O  iuuenes  nobiles,  hunc  miserum  pauperem  me  in  uia 
sequentem  cernite,  et  a  uestro  conspectu,  quo  dignus  non  est,  proicite. 
Non  enim  decet  nobilitatem  vestram  ut  per  vos  transitum  faciat.' 
Cuius.'monitis  iuuenes  lasciui  parentes,  in  virum  sanctum  impetum, 

^  Dei  ofii.  R2.  2  tu  loco  quem  ignoras  nomen  imp.  F  Colg.  ^  Coirpthe 

FCoI.g.  *  altered  to  Corpi  R^.  ^  proslrauerunt  R' F  Colg.  "  §§  xiii- 

xvi,  xix-xxiii  =  Br.  c.  23,  whicli  is  much  fuller,  and  more  origina!.  "^  Called 

in  Br.  Diarmait,  chief  poet  and  driiid  of  Aedh  son  of  Eochaid  Tirmcarna,  king 
of  Connaught.  '  eum  om.  R^  F  Colg.  "  afficiens  01«.  R^  F  Colg. 

'"  naturali  oin.  R^  F  Colg.  *'  go  h^dan  mac  Gabrain,  go  righ  Alban  Br. 

"  et  Ri  R2. 


VITA  SANCTI   BERACHI  ,8i 

vnanimitcr  fecerunt ;  atque  quidam^ex  eis  lapides  in  eum  proiece- 
runt,  alii '  alapis  percutiebant,  alii  vcrbis  contumcliosis  ei  impropera- 
bant.  Set  Dei  uirtute  factum  est  ut  pedes  iniproperantium  terre, 
quam  calcabant,  sic  fixi  inhererent,  acsi  lapides  grandes  immobiliter 
permanerent.  Mago  uiro,  cum  esset  cult[i]oribus  uestitus  indumentis, 
hostium  palacii '  regalis  statim  aperitur.  Set  uiro  sancto  Beracho 
tanquam  despectabili  ac  vilibus  pannis  induto  clauditur.  ]  f.  60^ 

XV.  Cumque  uir  sanctus  sic  spretus  prope  portam  staret,  et  massam 
ibi  dc  niuibus  confectam  conspiceret,  inuocato  nomine  Dei  uiui  insuf- 
flauit  in  eam,  et  mox  congeries  illa  niuea  instar  lignorum  aridorum 
flamma  vechementi  exuritur,  ita  ut  edes  uicina*  porte  inciperet  comburi. 
Talium  itaque  signorum  notitia  ad  aures  regis  cum  perueniret,  illum 
magum  ea  fecisse  putauit.  Ad  quem  ait :  '  O  bone  uir,  scimus  te  in 
magicis  artibus  potentem,  et  quod  numina''  deorum  tibi  parent  ad 
nutum.  Vade  ergo  ad  pueros  et  eos  solue,  et  ignem  similiter 
extingue,  ne  eius  incendio  periclitemur.'  Cumque  magus  hoc  nequiret, 
licet  attemptaret,  rex  suum  uocat  ariolum,  mandans  eidem  ut  cito 
egrederetur,  et  quenam  essent  hec  signa  agnosceret ".  Qui  cum  iussa 
rcgis  compleret,  et  quis  esset  horum  signorum  factor  addisceret, 
ad '  regem  reddiens,  ei  nunciat,  quod  vnus  sanctus  de  Hibernia, 
Berachus  nomine,  qui  cum  in  omni  opere  bono  sit  potens,  a  pueris 
illusus  esset,  et  ad  fores  curie  regalis  sederet',  et  quod  ifi  Dei 
omnipotentis  virtute  hec  signa  fecisset.  Quo  audito,  rex  ad  uirum 
Dei  accedens,  eius  pedibus  prouolutus,  veniam  petiit  de  offensis, 
et  eum  cum  honore  debito  admisit,  qui  talia  fecit  signa.  Insuper 
rogat,  ut  pueros  soluat,  atque  ignem  extingat. 

xvi.  Hiis  iam  peractis,  sanctus  uir  causam  sui  itineris  ac  magi  regi 
per  ordinem  enarrauit.  Rex  igitur,  consilio  cum  suis  inito,  senten- 
tiam  questionis  huius  in  se  suscipere  pertimescens,  ad  arbitrium 
Odonis  nigri',  regis  silicet  Brefnensium,  et  Odonis  principis  Thef- 
feorum  ^"  ipsos  decreuit  remittendos.  Promisit  nihilominus  amplas 
agrorum  possessiones  sancto  Dei,  si"  secum  in  regno  suo  uellet 
permanere.  Set  uir  Dei  renuit  hoc,  nolens  |  deserere  locum  a  Deo  f.  61" 
sibi  deputatum.  Duo  quoque  leprosi  et  tres  ceci  sanctum  ibi 
secuntur,  clamantes  importune,  ut  sanitati  restituerentur.  Qui 
miserorum  infirmitati  compatiens,  in  Deo  suo  confidens  aqua  bene- 
dicta  leprosos  aspergit,  et  mox  mundauit ;  et  loca'-  oculorum  cecorum 
eadem  aqua  lauit,  et  statim  sanitati  pristine  restituit. 

xvii.  Responso"  siquidem   regis  Scotorum  accepto,  uir    Dei    et 

'  R2  f.  193".               '  MSS.  aliis.  '  pelacii  R'.                *  uincta  Ri  R-. 

5  munera  R-.              «  MSS.  -rent.  '  et  ad  R=.               «  sedet  R-  F  Colg. 

'  Aodh  dubh   mac    Fergna  Br.  '"  Aodh   mac   Brenainn   ri  Tethba   Br. 

"  sancto  Deo  si  bis  R^  m.  pr.  '^  R^  f.  ig^!».             's   —  gr.  c.  10. 

PLUUMER.  G 


82  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

magus,  alta  pelagi  remigantes,  ad  propria  remearunt.  Tandem  per 
Midencium  terram  iter  agentes,  ad  quendam  locum  qui  nunc  Cell 
Berayciii  nominatur,  perueniunt.  Tunc  uir  Dei  labore  itineris 
fessus,  domum  cuiusdam  diuitis,  qui  ibi  dominabatur,  subintrans,  et 
se  sitis  angustia  grauari  pandens,  potum  sibi  dari  familiam  ^  ex- 
hortatur.  Set  licet  septem  vassa  medone  plena  iam  pro  rege  terre 
villicus  prefatus  haberet  parata,  viro  tamen  sancto  repulsam  dedit, 
asserens  quod  pro  eo  potum  non  habuit  paratum.  Cui  sanctus : 
'  Queso  omnipotentis  Dei  potentiam,  ut  sic  fiat,  prout  ore  tuo  es 
locutus.'  Tunc  sancto  recedente  ^  rex  'ad'uenit  statim,  ac  potum 
sibi  propinari  postulauit.  Cumque  pincerna  vasa  per  ordinem  pro- 
baret,  et  Dei  uirtute  uacua  reperiret,  nil  aliud  quam  aranearum 
telas  in  eis  se  reperisse  regi  nuntiauit.  Qua  de  re  hospes  plurimum 
contristatus,  regi  nuntiat,  quod  cuidam  uiro  ad  se  uenienti,  ac  potum 
in  Dei  honore  petenti,  denegauit ;  et  quod  in  hec  uerba  prorumperet. 
'  Dixit :  "  Sic  fiat,  prout  ex  tuo  ore  es  locutus."  Dixi  enim  quod  pro 
eo  potum  paratum  non  habui.'  Quo  audito,  rex  statim  agnouit,  quod 
sanctus  Berachus  fuit,  qui  hec  uerba  sibi  dixisset,  et  quod  in  penam 
potus  sibi  denegati'  eorum  vassa  fiebant  vacua.  Tunc  rex  ministros 
suos  statim  in  equis  velocibus  post  sanctum  misit,  ut  ad  eum  re- 
f.  6i  ^"  ducatur  cum  honore,  qui  sine  ho]noris  dignitate  recessit.  Precibus 
quoque  supphcantium  condescendens  uir  sanctus  reuertiturad  regem, 
a  quo  cum  gaudio  est  receptus.  Ad  pedes  uero  eius  rex  procidens, 
ueniam  de  commissis  postulauit.  Sanctus  itaque  regiis  devictus 
precibus,  inuocata  Dei  potentia,  stans  supra  uassa  vacua,  infundens 
benedictionem,  liquore  pristino  sunt  repleta. 

xviii.  Quam  ob  rem  rex  multas  sancto  donauit  ibi  terras.  Ibi 
quoque  uir  Dei  construxit  in  honore  Dei  omnipotentis  cellam  ad 
cuius  constructionem  rex  reddit  ^  necessaria.  Et  licet  magus  mali- 
ficus  tantis  uirtutibus  coruscare''  uiruni  Dei  conspiceret,  flecti  tamen 
non  potuit  ut  in  Deum  crederet.  Potentes  adeo  contra  eum  pro- 
uocabat,  ut  non  sanctum,  set  malificum,  eum  estimarent.  Quod  tamen 
.  uir  Dei  patienter  sustinuit,  ut  per  patientiam  uinceret  maliciam,  et 
Dei  expectaret  de  mago  iudicium. 

xix.  [Tunc '  uir  Dei  et]  niagus  presentiam  illorum  iudicum  adeunt, 
cupientes  diffinitiuam  audire  ab  eis  sententiam.  ludices  quoque 
timentes  offendere  partes,  uiros  sanctos  petunt  sibi  assessores,  silicet 
sanctum  Finnianum  et  Vltanum,  et  sanctas  virgines  Samtannam  et. 

^  Dellbe  Raych  R^ ;  R^  has  erased  the  top  of  the  d  meaning  to  aUer  it  to  c, 
but  has  left  the  wrong  division  of  the  words  ;  Disert  Beraigh  Br.,  which  places 
the  incident  in  a  dilTerent  connexion.       ■    ^  famulam  F  Colg.  '  reddnte  R', 

reddeunte  R- ;  recedente  F  m.  sec.  Colg.  *  -gari  R'  R^.  ^  dedit  R* 

F  Colg.  «  -cantibus  R^  f.  193".  '   =  Br.  c.  23". 


VITA  SANCTI   BERACHI  83 

Athracteam,  cum  aliis  prclatis,  uiro;inibus,  ac  uiris  sanctis.  Magus 
ucro  demonibus  immolat,  nomina  deorum  suorum'  inuocans,  ut  eum 
in  suo  certamine  contra  tot  sanctos  viros  ac  sanctas-  defendant. 
Tunc  iudices  cum  aliis  in  vnum  conuenicntes,  cum  magna  uirorum 
ac  mulierum  multitudine'  ad  iudicium  audiendum  properant,ut  finem 
rei  uiderent.  Vnus  quoque  ex  iudicibus,  silicet  Odo  niger,  qui  rex 
Breffnensium*  dicebatur,  ait :  '  Heu  milii  intelici  cum  sim  turpis  et 
niger  corporc,  quod  inter  tot  honestos  uiros  ac  muheres  debeani 
comparere.  Quid  enim  mihi  nunc  prodest  generis  nobilitas,  aut 
diuitiarum  opulentia,  cum  a  tot  hominibus  habeam  obprobrium  mee 
turpitudinis  ?  |  Vadam  ',  inquit,  '  ad  hos  sanctos,  quorum  uirtutem  f.  61 ' 
noui  esse  admirabilem  in  sanandis  infirmorum  corporibus,  ac  suf- 
•  fragium  pietatis  eorum  implorabo,  ut  pusilli  corporis  mei  deformis 
statura°  conuertatur  in  elegantiorem  *  ac  maiorem  staturam.'  Cum- 
que  presidium  omnium  horum  sanctorum  nominatim  imploraret,  ad 
ultimum  se  ad  sanctum  Berachum  conuertit,  flagitans  obnixe  ut 
desiderium  suum  adimpleret.  Ad  quem  uir  Dei  ait :  '  Fili,  rem 
insoHtam  tibi  petis  a  nobis  dari.  Set,  ut  experimento  sensibili  adiscas 
potentiam  Dei  nostri  esse  infinitam,  et  ad  omnia  queque'  uult  esse 
paratam,  cuculla  mea  temodo  indue,  ac  fidem  Trinitatis  in  corde 
amplectere.'  Cumque  rex*  iussa  uiri  Dei'  compleret,  ac  se  ueste 
eius  indueret,  super  gremium  sancti  recumbens,  graui  est  sompno 
soporatus.  Pro  quo  dormiente  uir  sanctus  per  unam  horam  Deum 
exorat,  ut  staturam  ac  formam  corporis  eius  mutaret.  Tunc  a  sompno 
exurgens,  se  agnoscere  non  poterat,  eo  quod  longam  staturam  tunc 
se  habere  sentiret,  qui  paruus  homuncio  ante  erat ;  et  speciosam 
formam  se  habere  conspiceret,  qui  ante  deformis  ac  niger  erat. 
Ministri  quoque"',  qui  eum  comitabantur,  ipsum  agnoscere  recus- 
sabant,  quousque  signis  euidentibus  se  miraculose  sic  transfiguratum 
asserebat ". 

XX.  Magus^-  quoque  perfidia^'  atque  inuidia  plenus  iudicium  coram 
tot  uiris  bonis  subire  recusauit.  Dixit  quoque  magus,  quod  in  loco 
qui  Rathin "  dicitur,  et  non  in  alio  subiret  iudicium  ;  et  hoc  ideo 
promisit,  quod  ibi  erat  arbor  quedam  excelsa,  in  qua,  ut  fertur, 
diabolus  responsa  dare  consueuit  infidelibus.  Arte  enim  magica 
inclusus  ibi,  cultoribus  suis,  que  poterat,  responsa  dabat.  Credens 
enim  ut,  presidio  demonum  fulcitus,  ibi  facilius"  posset  iudicum '* 
sententiam  |  pro  se  flectere,  et  propter  hoc  sub  arbore  demonibus  f.  61  ** 
consecrata  iudicium  "  subire  uoluit.    Cui  iudices  aiunt :   '  Quia  illuc 

'  suorym  bis  R'.  ^  mulieres   sanctas  R'  m.  pr.  ;  mulieres   erased. 

'  -nem  R^.  ■■  Breffen-  R*  F  Colg.  ^  statura  .  .  .  maiorem  om.  R- 

(homoiotel.) ;  F  and  Colg.  read  :  '  ut  pusilli  corporis  mei  reforment  staturam.' 
•  R' lias  releg- for  in  eleg-.  '  quecunque  R- F  Colg.  '  res  R' R- m.  pr.  '  Dei 
om.  R2  F.  '»  R2  f.  193''.  "  -bant  R'  R^  '^  =  Br.  c.  23^.  "  .^i^^  ri 
"  a  Rathann  Br.  i^  faciculus  R^  "  -cium  R^  F  m.  pr.  "  -cum  R=. 

G  2 


84  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

nobis  eundi  accessus  non  patet,  tu  qui  arte  magica  es  imbutus, 
radices  arboris  illius  solue,  et  illam  ad  nos  ducere  festina,  ex  quo 
in  ea  confidit  anima  tua.  Aliter  enim  equum  et  vere  iustum  iudica- 
mus,  ut  si  sanctus  Beraclius  in  nomine  Dei  sui  in  hoc  tibi  preualeat, 
ut  silicet  possit  arborem  adducere,  tu  ipse  subcumbas.'  Tunc  sanctus 
Berachus,  assumens  secum  uiros  sanctos  ac  uirgines,  prostrantes  se 
in  oratione  fere  usque  ad  quatuor  horas  diei  permanserunt  prostrati. 
Tunc  nubes  caliginosa  vniuersum  populum  operuit,  et  ecce  arbor 
illa,  quam  magus  desiderabat,  per  aera  virtute  orationis  sanctorum 
ad  eos  uolitabat,  tanquam  alter  Abacuc  ad  Iacum'leonum  vbi  Daniel 
orabat.  Ibi  quoque  miraculose  arbor  illa  in  terra  est  transplantata, 
atque  firmiter  radicata.  De  hoc  signo  insolito  populus  qui  aderat 
admirabatur,  et  Deum,  qui  in  suis  sanctis  est  mirabilis',  collaudabat. 

xxi.  Post'*  modicum  uero  tempus  lux  inmensa  de  celo  refulsit, 
ac  in  admiracionem  omnes  duxit.  Facto  autem  silentio  audita  est 
uox  angeU  de  medio  fulgoris  dicentis  :  '  Hoc  mandat  Dominus,  iudex 
magnificus,  quod  magus  ^  perfidus  est  victus  cehtus.'  Quo  audito 
vehementer  omnes  sunt  stupefacti ;  et  iudicium  angeHca  uoce  pro- 
latum  sin[e  dubio] '  se  recepisse  protestantur ;  set  et  iudices  ipsi,  quod 
non  est  opus  in  hac  causa  humano  labor'ar'e°  iudicio,  ex  quo  diuino 
est  satisfactum.  Magus  quoque  nec  voci  angelice  nec  arboris  trans- 
plantacioni  mirifice  ad  credendum  est  motus,  quin  immo,  more 
f.  62"  furentis  bestie  furore  repletus,  in  uerba  contumellie  ac  blasp[h]emie 
prorumpere  non  formidauit.  Asserebat  enim  non  fuisse  verum  quod 
in  aere  intonuit  verbum,  set  esse  p[h]antasticuni.  Vir  itaque  sanctus 
moleste  tulit  quod  magus  uoce  malefica  dixit.  Vnde,  oratione  ad 
[D]eum  prius  fusa,  coram  omnibus  dixit:  '  Videte,  fratres  mei,  quid 
malificus  iste*  agat,  qui  nec  Deum  timet,  nec  angelum  uel  hominem 
reueretur.  An  non  dignum  est  vt  ultione  diuina  feriatur,  qui  signis 
diuinis  credere  renuit'?  Nunc  igitur  omnipotentis  Dei  clementiam 
obsecro,  ut  miser  ille  maledicus  officio  lingue  sit "  priuatus,  ne  in 
Deum  viuum  et  verum  verba  blasphemie  valeat  amplius  proferre, 
quousque  penitentiam  de  commissis  uellit  peragere.' 

xxii.  Et  quod  sanctus  optauit  celitus  euenit.  Magus  enim  vindicta 
Dei  correptus  loquelam  amisit.  Antiqui  enim  hostis  laqueo  con- 
strictus,  iam  penitere  noluit  *,  set  se  in  quodam  loco  secreto  abscondit, 
a  ceterorum  hominum  communi  cohabitacione  segregatus ;  vbi  per 
totum  annum  deorum  suorum  flagitabat  auxilium,  set  non  inuenit. 
Expleto  quoque  anno  quo  se  sic  occultauit,  ecce  venatores  regis 
ceruum   quendam   insequentes,  ad  habitaculum  magi  peruenerunt. 

1  Ps.  Ixvii.  36.  ^  =  Br.  c.  23".  '  magnus  R'.  ■•  Here  there  is  blank 
space  in  R^ ;  R'^  ignoring  tliis  wriles  sinse  ;  se  F  Colg.  ^  labore  R^  m.  pr.  R2. 

«  R2  f.  194".         '  renuitur  R>  R=.         ^  sic  R^.         ^  uoluit  R>  R-  F  m.  pr. 


VITA  SANCTI    BERACIII  85 

Magiis  quoque  clamore  ac  strcpidu  venatorum  commotus,  per  fenc- 
stram  respicit,  quid  tantus  tumultus  portenderet,  scire  cupiens.  Set 
nutu  Dei  accidit,  \t  uenator  hastam  post  ceruum  '  aptare  cupicns,  non 
ceruum  set  ipsum  magum  in  frontis  uertice  uulnerauit.  Et  sic,  fracta 
ccruice,  miserabiliter  miser  interiit,  et  ceruus  nusquam  comparuit. 

xxiii.  Non  post  multum  uero  temporis  spacium  post  liec  supradicti 
magi  nepotcs  circiter  octo  conuenientes  consilium  fecerunt,  ut  uirum 
Dei  occiderent ;  et  sic  sanguinem  fratris  sui  vindicarent.  Ex  eis  vero 
quidam  existimabant  fore  iustum  opus  in  sanctum  irruere,  et  |  eum  f.  62 
mala  morte  dampnare.  Alii  autem,  si  hoc  fieri  non  posset,  annuunt 
monasterium  ipsius  incendio  deuastare,  et  sic  eius  habitatio  fieret 
deserta.  Set  superna  pietas,  que  suos  nouit  semper  protegere,  hoc 
peccatorum  desiderium  non  permisit  impleri.  Nam  miseris  sanguinem 
innocentem  effundere  cupientibus  infortunium  tale  mox  contigit.  Terra 
enim  sub  pedibus  eorum  se  aperiens  viuos  eos  transglutiuit,  sicut 
quondam  Dathan  et  Abiron  absorbuit.  Vnde  adhuc  est  ibi  puteus 
ualde  pro[fundus]  -  et  horribilis,  qui  ab  incolis  loci  illius  puteus  in- 
fernalis  uocatur.  Ex  eo  enim,  ut  fertur,  immensus  fetor  ascendit,  ita 
quod  pre  nimio  horrore  uix  ei  aliquis  appropinquare  audeat. 

xxiv.  Non '  est  pretermittendum  hic  qualiter  quidam  impii,  numero 
duodecim,  venerunt  quadam  nocte  ad  monasterium  uiri  Dei  ;  et,  vt 
hberius  ualea[n]t  predam  secum  deferre,  vnum  ex  fratribus',  qui 
super  bonismonasterii  custodiendis  inuigilabat,  occiderunt.  Cumque, 
capta  preda  boum  silicet  monasterii,  per  quoddam  vadum  saxosum 
transire  uellent,  factum  est  Dei  uirtute,  ut  haste,  quas  manibus 
tenebant,  saxis  uadi  firmiter  inhererent'',  ac  manus  ^*  eorum  similiter 
hastis  ;  et  sic  immobiliter  in  medio  fluminis  stabant,  tanquam  lapides 
inunobiles  essent.  Quod  factum  est,  cum  ad  notitiam  uiri  sancti 
celitus  peruenisset,  multitudine  monachorum  secum  assumpta,  ad 
locum,  ubi  defuncti  fratris  corpus  iacebat,  festinat ' ;  et  prece  a[d] 
Dcum  omnipotentem  fusa,  occisum  fratrem  ad  vitam  resu- 
scitauit.  Ad  miseros  quoque  fures  propter  scelus  suum  hgatos 
postea  accedens,  eos  misericorditer  absoluens  abire  permisit.  Qui  ad 
pedes  viri  [Dei]  se  prosternentes,  sub  ipsius  monitis  in  posterum 
religiose  vixerunt. 

xxv.  Fuit*    in  uenerabili  collegio  sancti  patris  Berachi  monachus 
quidam  ',  qui  sine  consensu  sui  superioris  votum  emisit  peregrina- 
cionis,  I  videlicet  quod  limina  apostohca  nouiter  visitaret.     Hic  cum  f.  62"= 
propositum  suum  adimplere  omnino  desideraret,  de  eius  recessu  pius 
pater,  eo  quod  eum  tenere  diligeret,  plurimum  anxius  erat.    Vnde 

'  tergum   R-  m.  pr.  =  a  blank  in  R' ;  ualde  et  hor.  R^;  ualde  Iior.  F 

Colg.       3   ^  Br  (..  29.        '  named  Sillen  Br.        >>  inherent  R^.        «  R^  f.  194*. 
'  -nant  R^  F  Colg.  «   =  Br.  c.  30.  »  Colman  Cael  of  Cluain  Ingrech  Br. 


86  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

excogitansquomodo  eum  auoto  sue  peregrinacionis  retrahere  ualeret, 
ait :  '  Mi  frater,  cellam  nostram  ambo  intremus  ante  ingressum  tui 
itineris.'  Quod  cum  complessent,  clauso  hostio,  per  tres  dies  et 
totidem  noctes  ieiuniis  et  oracionibus  ibidem  vacantes,  tandem 
discipulus  sompno  est  oppressus.  Quo  tandem  euigilante,  sompnium 
quod  uiderat  enarrare  uiro  sancto  curauit.  '  Uidi,'  inquit,  '  me  iter 
peregrinacionis  arripuisse,  in  qua  iuuenis  quidam  ualde  decorus  se 
mihi  in  itinere  sociauit ;  et,  marinis  fluctibus  transactis,  recta  uia 
eodem  comite  me  ducente  Romam  perueni,  et  per  ordinem  peregrina- 
cionem,  quam  uoui,  cum  predicto  iuuene  ad  nutum  uoluntatis  mee 
peregi.  Idem '  quoque  iuuenis  me  per  eandem  uiam  usque  huc 
perduxit ;  qui  cum  magna  hilaritate  a  me  recedens,  dixit  se  angelum 
Dei  fuisse ;  et  insuper  asseruit,  quod  peregrinacionem,  quam  ego 
voui,  complete  peregi.'  Quo  audito,  Altissimo  gratias  reddiderunt, 
qui  uouentis  desiderium  adimpleuit,  et  caritatis  ardorem  in  sancto 
Beracho  augmentauit. 

xxvi.  Postquam  ^  uero  sanctissimus  pater  Berachus  tantis  miracu- 
lorum  prodigiis  coruscaret,  fama  sanctitatis  eius  per  prouinciam 
Hibernie  diffusa,  ecce  ad  eum  ex  diuersis  terre  partibus '  confluunt 
diuersigenerislanguidi  ac  infirmi,  ut  sanitati  ualeant  restitui.'  A  quo 
quicumque  fide  integra  sanitatem  poscebant ',  eam  optinebant  ^  Ipse 
enim  in  '  se  mire  perfectionis  et  sanitatis''  erat,  et  prepotens  in 
eiciendo  demones  de  obsessis  ab  eis.  Hic''  multis  preerat  monacho- 
1.  ^a^^rum  gregibus,  quos,  Dei  opijtulante  gratia,  perfecte  rexerat,  ueluti 
abbas  preclarus,  sanctitate  uite  enitens,  et  luce  sapientie  refulgens, 
et  caritate  feruida  flamescens.  Ipse  quoque  aspectu  erat  deCorus, 
sermone  facundus,  predicatione  mellifluus,  in  oratione  deuotus.  In 
iudicio  uerax,  in  iniur[i]is  sibi  illatis  pacientissimus,  in  morum 
disciplina  rigidus,  in  conuersacione  mansuetus.  Cum  igitur  hiis  et 
aliis  polleret  uirtutibus,  cernens  mortem  corporis  esse  vicinam,  armis 
se  celestibus  muniens,  astantibus  fratribus  benedicens,  ac  Deo 
animam  suam  recommendans,  signo  se  salutifere  crvcis  muniuit,  et 
sie  in  pace  dormiens,  beatam  animam  suo  reddidit  Creatori. 

ExPLICIT   VITA    SANCTISSIMI    BeRACHI    ABBATIS. 

Oracio. 
Deus,   qui   beatum    Berachum   abbatem    in   terris    fecisti   magnis 
coruscare  miraculis,  concede  propicius  eius  hic  nos  precibus  adiuuari, 
et  eterna  beatitudine  cum  angelis  adunari.     Per  Dominum. 

1  Idem  .  .  .  peregi  oi>i.  F  Colg.  (homoiotel.).  «   =Br.  c.  30''.  '  Here 

MSS.  insert  ad  cttm  again.  *  possebant  R^.  ^  -bat  R'.  ^  sancti- 

F  Colg.  '  R-  f.  194". 


Vita  sancti  Borrii  rpisropi  Dr  IHainistir 

Incipit  vita  sancti  Boecii  episcopi'  ^-  'j'* 

i.  [De  ortu  et  conceptione  sancti  Boecii.] 

Sanctus  pater  et  electus  Dei  pontifex  Boecius,  generosis  ortus 
parentibus,  prius  gratia  quam  natiuitate  mundo  innotuit.  Ea  enim 
qua  conceptus  est  nocte,  parentibus  eius  secretis  in  locis  propter 
inetum  pyratarum  sub  diuo  uigilantibus,  steHa  igneo  fulgore  coruscans 
e  celo  descendens  uisa  est  os  matris  intrare. 

ii.  De  clericis,  qui  diuino  nutu  ad  baptisandum  eum 

SUNT    MISSI. 

Postquam  autem  puer  noster  natus  est^,  a  quo  baptizaretur 
parentum  animos  non  mediocriter  solicitabat.  Tunc  enim  pauci  erant 
sacerdoteE  ;  et  qui'  tunc  erant  tales,  remoti  ab  ipsis  erant.  Interea 
ignotos  quosdam  clericos  nauicula  uectos  in  portu  propinquo  appli- 
care  conspiciunt.  Ad  quos  infantis  pater  letus  et  festiuus  accurrens, 
interrogat  si  eorum  quisnam  baptisinatis  sciret  per[a]gere  officium. 
Et  respondit  ille  qui  primus  et  principalis  inter  illos  fuit  :  'Ob  hoc,' 
inquit,  '  huc  nos  misit  Deus,  ut  natum  paruulum  baptizaremus. 
Ipsum  quoque  huc  ad  nos  adducite.'  Quo  adducto,  iubet  ille  aquam 
afierri.  Pater  infantis  ait :  '  Ecce  fluuius  ad  manum.'  Et  ille :  '  In 
simplici,'  inquit,  '  aqua  baptismi  misterium  debet  agi.'  Erat  enim 
tunc  marinus  accessus  fluuiali  aque  immixtus.  Et  respondente  patre 
aliam  non  esse  in  propinquo  aquam,  iubet  uir  sanctus  manum  infantis 
terre  applicari.  Et  cum  factum  fueraf*,  ut  ille  imperauit,  confestim 
fons  purissimus  mellei  saporis  ex  eodem  loco  ebulliuit ;  qui  ob  insoliti 
miraculi  signum  usque  hodie  MelHfons  nominatur.  Denique  uir  ille 
sanctus,  paruulum  aqua  perfundens,  totum  baptismatis  ordinem  com- 
pieuit,  eumque  Boecium  nominauit.  Vnde  et  prophetico  spiritu  loquens 
de  puero  "^  ait :  '  Magnus,'  inquit,  '  hic  erit  apud  Deum  et  homines  ;  et 
erit  uita  et  doctrina  precipuus,  multisque  preerit  et  proderit.'  Et  hiis 
dictis,  et  puero  et  parentibus  eius  benedictis,  enauigauit  ipse  cum  suis. 

»  From  F.  MS.  set.  '  MS.  qui  et.  <  MS.  fieret.  ^  MS. 

spiritu. 


88  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

iii.  De  profectu  pueri,  et  miraculis  que  Deus  per  eum  fecit. 

Puer  autem  crescebat  et  confortabatur  in  spiritu^,  signorum  fre- 
quencia  emiccans  et  miraculorum.  Quodam  enim  [tempore]  mater 
sua  misit  eum  pro  uitulis  adducendis  domum.  Et  cum  hora  debita 
non  rediret,  parentes  uehementi  dolore  contristantur,  et  querentes 
puerum  gemitus  ac  clamores  multiplicant.  Et  quia  lucerna  tam 
ardens  et  lucens  latere  non  potuit,  ecce  igneam  columpnam  de  uicino 
f.  154«  arundineto  usque  ad  ce|lum  surgere  conspiciunt.  Et  quia  multis 
eum  clarere  miraculis  ante  nouerant  -,  puerum  ibidem  esse  non 
dubitauerunt.  Accelerantes  quoque  ad  locum  ipsum,  inuenerunt 
dormientem.  Quem  cum  a  sompno  excitarent,  ipse  eos  reprehen- 
dendo  ait  :  '  Inprouide,'  inquit,  '  fecistis,  me  a  sompno  excitantes. 
Angeli  namque  Dei  me  docuerunt  huc  usque  psalmos  ceterumque 
officium  ecclesiasticum  ;  et  si  usque  ad  hanc  diei  crastine  horam 
a  sompno  non  excitarer,  perfecte  sapientiam  addiscerem.'  Ad  que 
mater  ait :  '  Ne,'  inquit,  '  fili,  ob  hec  contristeris  ;  quia  ad  plenum  te 
Deus  docebit.'  Cui  ille  :  '  Uerum,'  inquit, '  dicis,  mater ;  sic  enim  fiet.' 
Post  hec  puer  Boecius  cum  parentibus  domum  rediit,  et  erat  sub- 
ditus  illis'. 

iv.  Qualiter  in  Ytaliam  perrexit. 

Ut  igitur  plenius  aquas  sapientie  salutaris  hauriret,  et  peregrinus 
existens,  Deo  securius  deseruiret,  natale  solum  deserens,  nauem 
ascendit,  et  Ytaliam  perueniens,  sancti  patris  Tyliani  monasterium 
ingressus,  ibi  monastice  uite  disciplina  et  sacre  scripture  scientia 
adprime  eruditus  *,  humilitate  et  mansuetudine  omnibus  acceptabilis 
erat.  Transactis  uero  aliquot  ibidem  annis,  diuino  oraculo  admonitus 
est  repatriare.  Accepta  igitur  benedictione  atque  licencia  sancti 
patris  Tyliani,  et  misso^  cum  eo  ipso  sancto  seniore  Codro,  qui  furias 
eius  in  malignantes  temperaret,  datisque  eis  sacris  uoluminibus  et 
uestibus,  necnon  et  sanctorum "  reliquiis,  trigesimo  peregrinacionis  sue 
anno  iterum  regressus  est.  Fama  uero  eius  in  itinere  deuulgata, 
iunxerunt  se  ei  quidam  uiri  sancti  de  Germania,  numero  sexaginta, 
quorum  decem  fuerunt  germani  fratres,  et  decem  uirgines.  Per- 
uenientes  itaque  ad  mare  nauem  ascendunt,  et  prospero  nauigio  in 
Pictorum  finibus  applicuerunt. 

•  V.  Qualiter  Nectannum  regem  a  morte  resuscitauit. 

Contigit  autem  tunc  temporis  Nectannum  illius  terre  regem  viam 
vniuerse  carnis  migrasse.  Ad  eius  quoque  exequias  inuitantur  et 
illi,  ut  scilicet  super  defunctum  regem  uigilarent,  et  pro  ipso  ad 
Dominum  orarent.     Cumque  domum  in  qua  exanime  corpus  iacebat 

I  Luke  i.  80.         '  MS.  nominauerant.  *  Luke  ii.  51.         *  MS.  -dicionis. 

'  MS.  missus.  '  MS.  sociorum  (wrong  expansion  of  contraction). 


VITA  SANCTI   BOECII  89 

pcrucnirent,  ceteris  exclusis  uir  Dei  Boecius  se  in  orationem  dedit. 
Complcta  igitur  oracione,  ecce  defunctus  a  mortis  faucibus  resurrexit. 
Stupent  omnes  ;  iuctus  in  gaudium  uertitur ;  et  Deus  in  suo  sancto 
glorificatur.  Deniquc  re.\  castrum  illud,  in  quo  factum  [est]  miraculum, 
cum  omni  sua  possessione  beato  Boccio  contulit.  Quo  ipse  in  cellam 
eonsecrato,  qucndani  suorum  ibi  in  custodcm  reliquit. 

Vi.    QUALITER    FILIAM    REGIS    DaIL    RiATA  '    ADIIUC    RESUSCITAUIT.  f.   154'' 

Post  Iiec  ad  Hybernicum  mare  peruenit,  et  ibi  nauem  ascendit ; 
in  regione  Dayl  Riata  nomine  portum  tenuit,  ubi  regis  eiusdem  terre 
filiam  iam  defunctam  resuscitauit.  Qua  propter  et  rex  terram  ei 
optulit,  in  qua  ipse  ecclesiam  fundauit ;  et  relicto  ibi  presbytero 
quodam  de  suis,  in  paternum  solum,  id  est  Kyanacteorum,  gressum 
direxit.    Et,  cum  regem  adiret,  eum,  quia  gentilis  erat,  non  admisit. 

Vii.   QUALITER    DE    NOCTE   FUIT   SUB    DIUO,    ET   A   NIUE 
INTACTUS    PERMANSIT. 

Pernoctante  igitur  uiro  Dei  cum  suis  ante  castellum  regis,  dextera 
Domini  fecit  uirtutes  *,  atque  suos  a  niue  profunda,  que  illa  nocte 
faciem  uniuerse  terre  cooperuerat,  sic  prote.xerat,  ut  non  solum  eos 
non  tangeret,  uerum  etiam  uicina  eis  loca  non  attingebat.  Rex  uero 
crastina  die  [a]  preposito  suo^  hoc  quod  factum  fuerat  audiens,  promtus 
ad  sancti  uiri  pedes  prouolutus  accessit.  In  satisfactionem  delicti 
sui  locum  illum  cum  omni  possessione  sancto  uiro  donauit.  Ipso 
uero  fundato  monasterio,  uerbum  salutis  per  uniuersam  predicauit 
regionem.  Regem  quoque  suosque  familiares  et  alios  quam  plurimos 
lauacro  salutari  ipse  baptizauit. 

Viii.    Qu.\LITER   QUENDAM    NOBILEM    UIRUM    [uIR]    DeI    RESUSCITAUIT. 

Post  hec  homo  Dei  ad  fratres  suos  carnales  uisitandos  properauit. 
Et  cum  illuc  peruenisset,  quendam  nobilem  ibi  defunctum  oratione 
facta  uite  pristine  restituit.  Hic  uiro  Dei  amplam  terram  ad  inhabi- 
tandum  donauit ;  que  a  nomine  dantis  Campus  Dornglays  uocatur. 
Denique  in  terram  Kennacteorum  ad  suum  monasterium  remeauit. 

ix.    Qualiter  angelus  monuit  eum  ire  ad  terram 
Bregnensium. 

Transacto  autem  ibidem  aliquanto  tempore,  in  Bregnensium  fines 
ire  ab  angelo  admonitus  est.  Itaque  Nectano  episcopo  illic  relicto, 
cum  sacro  suo  coUegio  uiam  suam  aggressus  est.  Ad  terram  igitur 
illam  angelico  premonitus  oraculo  perueniens,  a  rege  terre  Eugenio 
filio  Cassii  honorifice  susceptus  est ;  et  prediis  sibi  ab  eo  coUatis 
>  MS.  Dail  iraU.  2  Ps.  c.Kvii.  16.  s  ^5.  prepositi  sui. 


90  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

celebre  monasterium,  quod  a  nomine  ipsius  sancti  Monasterium 
Boecii  usque  modo  nominatur,  ibidem  edificauit.  Ibi  quoque  ipse 
cum  suo  sacro  collegio  bene  uiuendo  et  instanter  docendo  multos 
ad  emendacionem  uite  prouocabat,  et  celestium  donorum  imbre 
perfundebat. 

X.       QUALITER    MULTA    MONASTERIA    CONSTRUXIT. 

Plurimis  itaque  ad  eum  confluentibus,  seruorum  Dei  in  eodem  loco 
multiplicatus  est  numerus  ;  ita  ut  de  horreo  frumenti  puri  ibi  collecti 
multa  monasteria  tanquam  multi  agri  replerentur.  De  illo  enim 
f-  155"  monasterio  tanquam  de  plantalrio  bonorum  omnium  multi  uiri  sancti 
creuerunt,  atque  pastores  perfecti  effecti  sunt  animarum,  in  caulam 
dominicain  multas  animas  tanquam  oues  mansuetas  adduxerunt. 
Monialium  quoque  monasterium  in  remoto  fieri  a  loco  uirorum  ipse 
ordinauit,  ne  in  aliquo  fama  castitatis  lederetur.  Impossibile  est  enim' 
ad  plenum  dignis  hunc  uirum  laudibus  per  singula  describere. 

Xi.    QUALITER   FURES   QUI    CABALLOS   FRATRUM    FURATI   SUNT 
TOTA    NOCTE   ERRAUERUNT. 

Quodam  tempore  uenerunt  fures,  et  abstulerunt  caballos  qui  erant 
necessarii  ad  usus  fratrum.  Impii  quoque  recto  itinere  ire  putantes, 
tota  nocte  in  circuitu  monasterii  ambulabant.  IIIu[ce]scente  uero  die 
quod  accidit  admirantes,  culpam  suam  recognoscentes,  ad  beatum 
uirum  uenerunt,  et  semetipsos  pro  forefactis  reddentes,  monastico 
habitu  ab  eo  suscepto,  reliquum  uite  sue  sub  iugo  regularis  discipline 
eius  Deo  deuote  seruierunt. 

xii.     De  aliis  latronibus  qui  porcos  monachorum 

ABSTULERUNT. 

Alii  etiam  latrones  porcos  monasterii  furtum  abstulerunt ;  quos 
occidentes  decoquere '  proposuerunt.  Set  cum  die  integro  ignem 
incessanter  cacabo  subponerent,  carnes  ad  uesperum  adeo  crude 
fuerant,  ut  in  principio  apparebant.  Quo  uiso  miraculo,  corde 
compuncti  ad  uirum  Dei  confestim  accurrunt,  et  pro  tanto  facinore 
sibi  satagantes,  se  suosque  posteros  eius  dominio  ac  dicioni  subdi- 
derunt. 

xiii.     Qualiter  sanauit  lupum  vvlneratum. 

Die  quadam  fratribus  ad  negocia  monasterii  exeuntibus,  et  beato  uiro 
solo  in  claustro  residente,  ecce  lupus  adueniens  uitulum  vnice  vacce 
fratrum  occidit  atque  comedit.  Fit  clamor  et  uociferationis  tumultus 
in  loco.     Quo  audito,  sanctus  uir  exiit  ad  uidendum  quenam   sit 

'  MS.  dequoquere. 


VITA  SANCTI   BOECII  91 

causa  clamoris.  Interea  lupus  uallum  transiliens  sude  suflbssus  est 
in  pede  ;  et  sic  miraculose  pro  forefacto  est  detentus,  quod  ncc  fugere 
nec  mouere  se  potuit.  Accurrit  pius  pater,  opem  indigenti  lupo  coUa- 
turus.  Quod  lupus  percipiens,  feritate  deposita, aures  submittit,  ac  signa 
mansuetudinis,  licet  insolite,  pretendit.  Set  pius  pater  red[d]ens 
bonum  pro  malo,  sudem  de  pede  lupi  leniter  extraxit,  ac  crucis 
signum  uulneri  inprimens,  confestim  illud  sanauit. 

Xiv.      QUALITER   LUPUS   HYNNULUM    PRO   VITULO   OCCISSO 
SIBI   ADDUXIT. 

Deinde  lupus  nemora  peciit,  et  postmodum  hynnulum  quendam 
adducens,  uiro  Dei  se  presentauit.  Quem  ipse  signo  crucis  signans, 
de  fero  mitem  reddidit';  eumque  orbata  uitulo  vacca  ut  proprium 
vitulum  adamauit. 

XV.      QUALITER   LEPROSO    DEDIT    EQUUM,  |  ET    DE    CECO   ET   CLAUDO         I 
FECIT   SANUM. 

Aiiquando  accidit  quod  cum  afflictorum  patronus  Boecius  cuiusdam 
femine  rogatu  ad  liberandum  eius  filium,  quem  rex  terre  Bregnen- 
cium,  Euchodius"  nomine,  in  uinculis  tenuit,  perexisset,  leproso 
cuidam  postulanti  alterum  equorum,  qui  currum  eius  portabant, 
eidem  dedit.  Cumque  currum  cum  altero  equo  ascendere  attemptas- 
set,  ecce  admirande  pulcritudinis  equus  colore  glaucus  adueniens,  se 
currui  per  omnia  mansuetus  subiugauit.  Denique  cecus  quidam 
claudum  portans  post  ipsum  uenit,  quorum  uterque  sollicite  postula- 
bat  sanitatem.  Quibus  miserorum  pater  benigne  locutus  est  dicens : 
'  Si,'  inquit,  '  quicquam  aque  in  currus  orbita  remanet,  membra  uestra 
exinde  linite.'  Quod  ipsi  conplentes,  confestim  optatam  sanitatem 
recuperauerunt. 

Xvi.    QUALITER   FILIUM    MULIERIS    lAM    lUGULATUM    RESUSCITAUIT. 

Cumque  vir  Dei  ad  Boannam  flumen  peruenisset,  marino  refluxu  illud 
extunc  exundabat.  Tunc  predicta  femina  sibi  occurrens  uehementer 
de  tardacionfe  itineris  conqueritur,  dicens:  'lam,'  inquit,  'modo  de 
filii  mei  uita  despero.'  At  pius  pater  a  pietatis  ope  retardari  moleste 
ferens,  et  in  Patre  misericordiarum  multum  confidens,  accepta  de 
manu  aurige  uirga,  flumen  in  nomine  Domini  percussit,  et  statim 
iter  rectum  habuit,  sicut  Moyses  quondam  habuit  per  mare  rubrum. 
Cumque  quo  uolebat  ueniret,  rex  prefatus  obuiam  ei  ueniens  ipsum 
honorifice  salutauit.  Cui  interroganti  causam  ipsius  aduentus  homo 
Dei  exposuit.  Et  rex  ait :  '  Domine,  si  homo  ille  quem  petis  uixisset, 
uoluntarie  tibi  eum  concederem.    lam  enim  decollatus  est.'    Tunc  uir 

1  MS.  rediit.  2  MS.  -dium. 


92  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

Dei  ad  corpus  eius  accedens,  matri  iubet  caput  aptare  collo.  Quod 
cum  fieret,  ipse  orat,  et  cum  omnium  astancium  admiracione  is,  qui 
ante  decollatus  fuerat ',  incolumis  et  sanus  resurrexit.  Cunctis  igitur 
hoc  miraculum  cernentibus,  laudum  [sacrificium]  cum  preconiis 
ofFerentibus,  committante  eum  resuscitato,  ad  sua  remeauit.  Homo 
uero  ille  reliquo  uite  sue  tempore  ortum  monasterii  e'x'colebat. 

xvii.     De  raptu  eius  ad  celum  per  scalam  auream. 

Talibus  ac  tantis  beatissimus  pontifex  Boecius,  sicut  sol  meridianus 
eftulgens,  licet  corpore  habitabat  in  terris,  animo  tamen  et  deuocione 
conuersabatur  in  celis.  Cumque  aliquando  die  Kalendarum  mensis 
Maii  cimitherium  monasterii  sui  perlustraret,  celestium  desiderio 
[injeffabiliter  exarsit.  Et  ecce  subito,  tanquam  alter  He[I]yas,  ab 
angelis  in  quadam  scala  aurea  in  celum  assumptus,  secreta  que  non 
f.  '55  nouerat  |  audiuit  atque  vidit.  Quod  cum  fratribus  innotesceret,  ad 
locum,  quo  ille  eleuatus  est,  concurrunt ;  et,  multiplicatis  gemitibus 
flentes,  conqueruntur  se  inopinate  a  patre  suo  deseri,  antequam  eos 
confortaret  ac  benediceret.  Taliter  igitur  in'ter'  se  conquerentibus. 
atque  miserabiliter  plangentibus,  sanctus  pater  ab  angelis  reductus 
ad  eos  descendit,  uitrea  rota  uultui  suo  apposita,  per  quam  deinceps 
uidens  non  uidebatur. 

xviii.  Qualiter  prophetauit  de  sanxto  Columba,  et  de  eius 
transitu  de  hoc  mundo. 

Extunc  usque  ad  vii.  idus  Decembris  cum  discipulis  suis  deguit, 
eos  instanter  admonens,  et  secretorum  celestiu[m]  que  uiderat 
relacione  recreans,  et  de  futuris  temporibus  multa  prophetans.  S.et 
et  ipso  sanctissimo  die  obitus  sui  de  sancto  Columba  spiritualiter 
uaticinans  ait:  '  Hodie,'  inquit,  '  natus  est  infans,  cui  nomen  Columba, 
qui  coram  Deo  et  hominibus  gloriosus  existet ;  quique  post  triginta 
annos  abhinc  huc  ueniet,  et  meum  sepulcrum  reuelabit,  ac  cimi- 
therium  designabit ;  et  super  hunc  locum  [et]  eius  habitatores  bene- 
dictionem  suam  infundet.  Post  hec,  fratribus  cum  benedictione 
paterna  confortatis  et  Deo  recommendatis,  dominici-  corporis  et 
sanguinis  communione  percepta  exitum  suum  feliciter  muniuit ; 
et  sic  ab  angelis  assumptus,  spiritum  rcddidit  Deo,  qui  viuit  et  regnat 
per  omnia  secula  seculorum.     Amen. 

xix.  De  miraculis  beati  uiri  Boecii  in  pueritia;  et  primo  qualiter, 

adueniente  inundacione,  et  igne  extincto,  accendit  quinque 
digitos  suos,  ex  quibus  fuit  reaccensus  ignis. 

Quadam  autem  uice,  cum  inundacio  fiuminis  et  marinus  refluxus 
'  MS.  inserts  et. 


=  c<' 


VITA  SANCTI   BOECII  93 

concurrerent,  ct  cioniuin  in  qua  puer  erat  cum  eius  utcnsilibus 
inuadcrent,  totus*  ignis  in  eadein  domo  fuit  cxtinctus,  adeo  ut  nec 
scintilla  eius  uiua  rcmanerct.  Puer  uero  puerili  more  esuriens, 
a  matre  peciit  aliquid  ad  comedendum.  Cui  mater  respondit : 
'  Quare,'  inquit,  'tu  non  preparas  ignem,  et  nos  tibi  parabimus  refe- 
ctionem.'  Qui  mox  ad  ucrbum  matris  surgens,  insufflauit  in  dexteram 
manum  suam,  et  ecce  quinque  digiti  manus  eius  ut  quinque  cerei 
continuo  succensi  sunt.  Quibus  accensis,  ignis  subito  accenditur,  ex 
quo  sibi  refectio  preparata  est. 

XX.    QUALITER    lUSSU    MATRIS    UACCAM    RESUSCITAUIT. 

Quodam  tempore  cum  mater  eius  ad  mulgendas  uaccas  properaret, 
et  ipse  eam  more  pucrili  [al]loqueretur,  ecce  vna  uaccarum,  quasi 
ceteris  elegancior,  subitanea  percussa  [plaga'],  decidit  mortua.  Tunc, 
cum  puer  a  matre  lac  ad  bibendum  |  quereret,  ipsa  in  eo  diuinam  f.  155 
habitasse  uirtutem  intelligens,  respondit :  '  Illam,'  inquit,  '  uaccam 
mortuam  resuscita,  ut  de  lacte  eius  ualeas  recreari.'  Puer  uero 
materne  iussioni  obtemperans,  manum  suam  super  mortuam  mittens, 
a  morte  eam  statim  resuscitauit.  Quod  cum  fieret,  de  resuscitata  lac 
concupitum  ipse  inuenit  -. 

xxi.  De  uacc^  alia,  que  fuit  absort.\  a  terra  propter 

IMPERIUM    EIUS. 

Quadam  autem  die  mater  pueri  benedicti  misit  eum  pro  uaccis,  ne 
accessum  haberent  ad  uitulos.  Cumque  puer  matri  obediret,  ecce 
vna  uaccarum,  que  arctius  uitulum  suum  diligebat,  contra  voluntatem 
ipsius  ad  uitulum  conabatur  accedere.  Tunc  puer,  humanum  senciens 
aliquid^,  ad  uaccam  ait :  'Possibilius,'  inquit,  'tibi  sit  a  terra  deglutiri, 
quam  ad  uitulum  attingere.'  Et  statim  terra  aperiens  os  suum 
uaccam  illam  inobedientem  transglutiuit.  Et  huius  miraculi  signum 
usque  hodie  in  eodem  loco  manet. 

Xxii.  QUALITER  aceruum  bladi  per  vaccas  perditum  conmutauit 
IN  aceruum  puri  grani. 

Cuin  quadam  uice  uacce  patris  eius  segites  cuiusdam  conuicini, 
qui  uocabatur  Conallus  filius  Euchodii,.  intrarent,  et  frumenta  eius 
uiolarent,  uillicus  eiusdem  Conalli  secum  detulit,  et  in  custodia 
detenuit.  Quod  audiens  pater  pueri  Boecii,  Bronachus  nomine, 
filium  pro  uaccis  requirendis  destinauit.  Qui  cum  se  predicto  Conallo 
presentaret,  ait  ad  eum  :  '  Pro  uaccis,'  inquit,  '  deliberandis  missus 
sum  ad  uos.'  Cui  ille  :  '  Si,'  inquit,  '  poteris,  ut  aceruus  farris  perditi 
fiat  granum  purum,  uaccas  poteris  reducere,  et  non  aliter.'     Cui  puer 

•  F  marks  that  a  word  is  wanting ;  but  does  not  suggest  anything.  ^  MS. 

aduenit.  ^  MS.  a''. 


94  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

ait :  '  Numquid  habeo  eas  pro  Deo  ?'  At  ille :  '  Non.'  Ad  quem  puer  : 
'  Non  est  lioc  quod  petis  impossibile  Deo.'  Quo  dicto,  domum  rediit. 
Uillicus  uero  Conalli  mane  sequentis  diei  surgens,  uidit  blada  perdita 
in  granum  purum  redacta.  Quo  stupefactus  miraculo,  rediens  ad 
dominum  suum,  narrat  que  uidit,  dicens :  'Non  est,'  inquit, 
'  impotens  puer,  cui  lieri  dedisti  repulsam.  Aceruus  enim  bladi, 
sicut  petisti  ab  eo,  conuersus  est  in  aceruum  grani  puri.'  Cui  Co- 
nallus  :  '  Male,'  inquit, '  erit  nobis,  si  non  satisfiat  ei.'  Et  tunc  Conallus 
cum  suo  uillico  ad  ptlerum  properant,  et  humiliafites  se,  uaccas  sibi 
deliberant.  Post  hec  Conallus  sepedictus  donauit  sibi  duos  campos 
ibidem,  et  opidum  suum  nomine  Raith  Conaill. 

f.  156"  xxiii.  De  vasse  fracto  et  lacte  rema|nente  in  vasse. 

Accidit  vero  uno  dierum,  cum  quidam  portaret  uas  lacte  plenum 
ad  monasterium  uiri  Dei,  et  portitor  onere  pregrauatus  hinc  inde  se 
moueret,  uas  amisit  suum  fundum  ^.  Quod  senciens  homo  ait : 
'  Beatus,'  inquit,  '  Boecius  adiutor  assit.'  Quo  dicto,  cepit  fundum 
uassis  in  manu  tenere,  et  ipsum  uas  in  dorso  portare.  Res  mira 
accidit  et  insolita.  De  lacte  enim  illo  nec  gutta  aliqua  ex  uasse 
cecidit,  donec  hoc  ad  monasterium  uenit.  In  huius  enim  miraculi 
memoriam  nomen  loci  illius  uocatur  in  Hibernico  Achad  na  Derba, 
id  est,  colhs  muTc^tJri. 

xxiv.  De  uitulo  ab  eo  resuscitato. 

Quadam  alia  uice  accidit  quod  quidam  latro  uitulum  monachorum 
secum  tulit.  Cumque  pius  pater  pro  restituendo  uitulo  ad  domum 
latronis  accederet,  et  tunc  maliuolus  ille  carnes  uituli  decoqueret ; 
timens  argui  super  furto  quod  coinmiserat,  assumens  arma  contra 
uirum  Dei,  conabatur  seuire,  et  ait :  '  Quare,'  inquit,  '  huc  uenisti  ? ' 
Ad  quem  uir  Dei  ait:  '  Ad  querendum,'  inquit,  'uitulum  quem 
abstulisti,  ueni.'  Et  ait  latro :  '  Non  est  uerum,'  inquit,  '  quod 
asseris.'  Quo  dicto,  uitulus  coctus  in  caldario  dedit  mugitum,  quasi 
furti  et  mendacii  proditor.  Quod  cum  latro  audiret,  feritate  deposita, 
et  armis  abiectis,  prostrauit  se  in  terram,  et  ueniam  petens,  se  et  suos 
in  seruicium  sancti  Boecii  in  sempiternum  concessit.  Ad  quem  uir 
sanctus  ait :  '  Hoc  admitto,  salua  uituli  restitucione.'  Quo  dicto,  tunc 
precepit  uitulo  in  nomine  [Dei]  ut  resurgeret ;  et  statim  surrexit 
viuus  de  caldario  ;  quem  uir  sanctus  adduxit  secum  ad  monasterium. 

XXV.  De  cipho  celitus  sibi  misso. 

Cum  quadam  uice  uisitaret  suos  monachos,  in  loco  cui  nomen  Luin- 
nach,    in    aduentu    eius  multi  fratres    exhilarati,   caritatiue    ipsum 
1  MS.  infundens. 


1 


VITA  SANCTI   BOECII  95 

hospicio  susceperunt.  Tempore  uero  refeccionis,  cuni  iam  potus 
portaretur,  et  nec  ciphus,  nec  aliquod  uas,  de  quo  potus  posset  pro- 
pinari,  haberctur,  confestim  homo  Dei  suspiciens,  et  in  Dcum  omnium 
bonorum  largitorcm  confidens,  hunc  ciphi  defectum  ei  supplendum 
commentauit ;  et  ecce  exaudiuit  Dominus  seruum  suum.  Nam 
uasculum  quoddam  de  electro  optimo,  non  tam  in  eorum  penuriam 
supplendam  quam  in  consolatoriam  utilitatem,  in  sinum  sancti  patris 
dilapsum  est. 

XXvi.    QUALITER   ANGELI    SUBUENERUNT   EI  '    IN    EXTRAHENDO 
BOUES    DE    LATICE. 

Quodam  alio  tempore  cum  rediret  uersus  suum  monasterium  de 
loco  fratrum  qui  erant  apud  Mellifontem,  sic  enim  locus  uocabatur, 
occurrit  ]  ei  puer  quidam,  qui  boues  cum  curru  regebat.  Cumque  in  f.  156'' 
itinere  simul  transirent,  uenerunt  ad  quendam  laticem  in  cuius  pro- 
fundum  boues  usque  ad  colla  deciderunt  ;  ex  quo  ipsi  propria  uirtute 
eos  extrahere  nuUatenus  potuerunt  Tunc  uir  Dei  ad  solita  oracionis 
suflragia  se  conuertens,  et  illi  qui  se  tanquam  bouem  in  ara  crucis  pro 
genere  humano  imniolauit,  exorauit  ut  in  tanta  necessitate  sibi  sub- 
ueniret.  Et  ecce  subito  angelicum  affuit  presidium,  cum  quo  facillime 
de  profundo  latice  traxerunt  currum  et  boues. 

xxvii.  QuALiTER  BoEcius  uiR  Dei  adiuuit'  mulierem,  que  defecit 

IN   CONFECTIONE  COLORIS,   QUO  TINGEBATUR   PALLIUM   REGIS. 

Cumque  ad  castrum  Euchodii,  regis  uirorum  Bregnensium,  pro 
liberatione  cuiusdam  captiui  uenisset,  ecce  occurrit  ei  uxor  cuiusdam 
uiri,  Mend  nomine,  que  conquesta  [est],  quod  color,  quo  clamidem 
regis  consuerat  intingere,  illo  anno  deficeret.  Quandam  enim  herbam 
ortensem  antiqui  habebant,  nomine  glassen,  ex  cuius  succo  tincturam 
pannorum  suorum  faciebant.  Anxia  igitur  mulier  ob  defectum  illius 
herbe,  sanctum  uirum  obnixe  rogauit  ut  eius  necessitatibus  sub- 
ueniret.  Qui  dixit  ad  eam :  'Omnes,'  inquit,  'herbas,  qui  sub  isto 
curru  sunt,  euelle ;  insuper  et  uiride  gramen  ^  adde,  et  in  nomine 
Domini  commisce,  et  nihil  sordidum  inmittas.'  Quo  facto,  mulier 
tantam  tincture  copiam  habuit,  ut  omnibus  pannis  tocius  patrie 
colorandis  sufficienter  haberet. 

xxviii.   Qualiter  ortolanus*  ITERUM  recidiuauit,  et  caput 
EIUS  decidit  de  collo. 

Cum  ortolanus  monasterii,  quem  ipse  mirifice  resuscitauit ',  se 
nullum  dampnum  monachis  in  suo  seruicio  facturum  obligaret,  quadam 

'  MS.  inuenerunt  eum.  "  MS.  adiuit.  '  MS.  grai/amen.  *  For 

'  ortolanus '  the  MS.  reads  '  per  eum  '.     F  is  correct.  ^  See  §  xvi. 


96  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

uice,  cum  in  orto  persisteret,  vxor  eius  cum  filio  extra  atrium  stantes, 
aliquid  de  orto  exposcunt.  Quibus  ortolanus  respondit:  'Non  audeo,' 
inquit,  '  sine  licentia  aliquid  uobis  dare.'  Et  addit  mulier:  'Non 
oportet,'  inquit,  'timere,  set  da  saltem  de  porris  filio  tuo.'  Deuictus 
ergo  homo  precibus  supplicantis,  proiecit  eis  de  porris  extra  ortum. 
Et  tunc  cum  uir  sanctus  sacrificium  salutis  in  oratorio  suo  immolaret, 
Spiritu  Sancto  reuelante  didiscit,  qualiter  ortolanus  transgressor  uoti 
fuit,  et  dixit :  '  Decidat,'  inquit,  '  caput  quod  est  super  collum  tuum 
in  hac  hora  super  terram.'  Missa  uero  celebrata,  sanctus  uir  pulsauit 
ad  ostium  signum,  et,  conuocatis  fratribus,  ait:  '  Ite,'  inquit,  'post 
ortolanum,  cui  nomen  est  Moelcaych,  quia  in  hac  hora  decidit  caput 
'  eius  de  collo  propter  dampnum  |  quod  fecerat  fratribus,  eo  quod 
dederat  porrum  eorum  uxori  et  filio  sine  licentia.  Ite  igitur,  et 
adducite  eum,  et  sepelite,  et  orate  pro  anima  eius.'  Quod  et  factum 
est. 

xxix.   De  federe  miro  inter  sanctum  Boecium  et 

SANCTUM    MoDUCA. 

Fuit  autem  fedus  quoddam  spirituale  in'ter'  sanctum  Boecium  et 
sanctum  Moduca,  ut  quicumque  monachus  indueretur  cum  sancto 
Moduca,  apud  sanctum  Boecium  gratiam  consequeretur  remissionis 
peccatorum ;  moniales  cum  sancto  Boecio  uelande  apud  sanctum 
Moduca  consimilem  consequerentur  gratiam.  Quadam  autem  die 
accidit  quod  quedam  monialis  quendam  de  monachis  pro  uestimentis 
suis  lauandis  adueniens,  illa  nocte  propter  intemperiem  aeris  ex- 
pectauit  ibidem  cum  eo ;  [et]  quia  impossibile  est,  quin  palea  igni 
approximata  ardeat,  hinc  temptatio  monacho  sugessit,  ut  monialcm 
prope  se  iacentem  cognosceret.  Cumque  eam  carnaliter  cognosceret, 
et  mulier  conciperet,  mox  horrore  facinoris  contriti,  ad  medicum 
animarum,  Boecium,  properantes,  peccatum  pure  confitentur,  et  ab 
eo  cum  penitentia  condigna  absolutionem  merentur.  Quibus  uere 
contritis,  consolando  eos  ait :  '  Ex  hoc,'  inquit,  '  bonum  eueniet.  Nam 
uir  ille  qui  de  immundis  mundos  facit  et  iustos,  de  conceptu  tuo, 
O  mulier,  faciet  futurum  abbatem  ac  successorem  mihi  in  monasterio 
meo.'  Nato  ergo  puero  tempore  debito,  ac  batizato,  Nemanus  uocatus 
est ;  qui  secundus  '  sancti  Boecii  abbas  ei  successit  ibi. 

XXX.     QUALITER   ADIUIT   SANCTUM    TlLI.\NUM   ABBATEM,    APUD 
QUEM    DOCTRINAM    DIDISCIT   SAPIENTIE   ET    MORUM. 

Post  hec  transtulit  se  uir  sanctus  ad  Gallias  et  postmodum  ad 
Ytaliam,  et  deinde   ad   famosum   ac   religiosum   abbatem  Tilianum 

'  MS.  s.  (which  elsewhere  is  the  abbreviation  for  '  secundum ').  F,  not 
understanding  this,  reads :  '  qui  puer  S.  Boecio  Abbas  successit ; "  thus  oblitera- 
ting  an  interesting  fact.     For  '  secundus  abbas  '  see  Glossary. 


VITA  SANCTI   BOECII  97 

noniine  ut  ab  eo*  disceret  sapientiam  et  moruni  disciplinam.  Cumque 
ad  ipsum  sanctus  Boecius  perueniret,  Tilianus  abbas  cum  gaudio 
eum  suscepit,  et  in  uisceribus  caritatis  nutriuit.  Et  quia  obedientia 
cum  ucra  humilitate  est  fundamentum  omnis  operis  uirtuosi,  pater 
abbas  dedit  ei  custodiam  apum  monasterii,  ut  eas  diligenter  custodiret 
atque  nutriret.  Quam  obcdientiam  uoluntarie  ipse  admisit,  et  illibatas 
eas  custodiuit^  Uixit  quoque  filius  uere  obedientie  sub  disciplina 
tanti  patris  cum  magna  morum  [integritate]  et  honestate. 

XXxi.    QuALITER   CONCENTUM   APUM    INTELLEXIT. 

Quadam  |  uero  die  cum  ad  uisitandas  apes  more  solito  aduenisset,  f.  156'' 
audiuit  magnum  tumultum  in  aluearibus  cum  eis.  Cum  propius  ad 
explorandum,  si  quid  aduersi  eis  accideret,  accederet,  causam  mur- 
muris  sine  enigmate  intellexit.  Quod  cum  magistro  suo  intimaret, 
et  ille  fratribus  exponeret,  quidam  ex  eis  uolens  experiri  si  ex  sonitu 
apum  posset  homo  experimentalem  habere  scientiam,  panem  latum 
preparauit,  et  butiro  superficiem  eius^     .     .     . 

'  ad  m.  pr.  -  MS.  -dlsset.  '  Here  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence  the 

Life  ends ;  though  there  is  no  mutilation  in  the  MS.  For  the  explanation  see 
Introduction.     F  notes  :  ■  aliqua  desiderantur.' 


Vita  prima  sancti  13rcntiaiu  abiatis  tre 
(Eluain  jFerta 

f.  72  "^  InCIPIT  '   VITA   SANCTISSIMI    BrANDANI   ABBATIS    DE    ClWANFERTA 

i.  Fuit  ^  uir  uite  uenerabilis,  Brandanus  nomine,  qui  tanquam  aurora 
rutilans  peccatorum  tenebras'  a  multorum  cordibus  fugauit;  et  in 
mari  uiciorum  errantibus  ducatuni  infallibilem  ad  portum  salutis 
prebuit.  Hic  de  Kerraigensium  genere  ortum  duxit.  Pater  eius 
uir  erat  fidelis  et  prudens,  Fynlogus  nomine ;  mater  uero  dicta  est 
Cara  ;  ambo  secundum  precepta  a  sancto  Erco  episcopo  eis  tradita 
caste  uiuebant.  Cara  uero  mater  eius,  antequam  filium  benedictionis* 
pareret,  sompnium  uidit ;  scilicet  sinum  suum  plenum  esse  auro 
obrizo,  et  mamillas  suas  ingenti  luce  splendere.  Cum''  sompnium 
mirificum  sancto  episcopo  Erco  intimaretur,  spiritu  reuelante  ait 
marito  eius  :  '  Vxor  tua  pariet  tibi  filium,  potencia  quidem  magnum, 
f.  ■j^"  sancti|tatis  splendore  mundum  irradiantem.'  Concepit  mulier,  et 
demum  peperit  promissionis  filium. 

ii.  Eo^tempore  contigit  quendamproplietam,  Beccmac  Denomine', 
in  uicina  cuiusdam  potentis'  domo  hospitari.  Cumque  propheta  de 
futuris  ab  hospite  interrogaretur,  securus  respondit :  '  Hac  in '  nocte 
nascetur  versus  mare  infans  quidam,  qui  dominus  tuus  futurus  erit ; 
et  non  solum  tibi  dominabitur,  uerum  etiam  multis  aliis.'  Audiens 
ille  diues  futurum  dominum,  crastina  die  illu[ce]scente  aurora,  dili- 
genter  quesiuit,  ubi^"  puer  sit  natus.  Inueniens  uero  preciosam 
margaritam,  in  ulnas,  tanquam  alter  Simeon  iustus,  humiliter  sus- 
cepit ;  et  sacrificium  tanto  domino  ofterens,  triginta  uaccas,  que  eadem 
nocte  tot  uitulos  pepererunt,  donauit,  ac  dixit:  'Confiteor,'  inquit, 
'  te  alumpnum  meum  ac  futurum  dominum  ".' 

iii.  Ad  "  sanctitatis  huius  infantis  mox  editi  [iVidicium]  accessit  uisio 
mirabilis  quam  sanctus  episcopus  Ercus  nocte  natiuitatis  eius  uidit. 

>  R2  f.  ioi"=.     The  incipit  is  not  in  Ri.  =   =  M  c.  i  ;  S^   §  i  ;  S^   §  i  ; 

L.  3305  ff.  ;  Capg.  i.  136.  ^  R*  f.  loi''.  <  MSS.  -dictionem,  altered  to 

-dictum.  ^'  MSS.  cui.  ^   =  M  c.  2  ;  S^  §  2  ;  L.  3341  ff.  ;  Capg.  u.  s. 

'  est  adii.   R'.  '  maic  Arddoe  maic  Fidaig,   LL.  27 1":  filius  Airde  M  ; 

LL.  calls  him  King  of  Ciarraige  Luachra.  "  erased  in  R^.  '"  ut  R^ 

'^  et  gaudens  reuersus  est.     Cuius  regio  et  genus  est  hodie  in  parrochia  sancti 
Brendani  adJ.  M.  '^   =  M  c.  3  ;  S^  3  ;  L.  3354  ff. ;  Capg.  i.  137. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  99 

Intuebatur  enim  totam  illam  rcgionem,  in  qua  natus  est  puer,  luce 
immensa  splendcre',  et  angelos  in  uestibus  albis  pcr  aera  circum- 
uolare.  Illc  uero  mane  exurgens,  uenit  ad  locuni  ubi  puer  erat  natus  ; 
eum  in  manibus  accipicns,  leuauit,  et  dixit :  '  Homo  Dei,  suscipe 
me  monachum  tibi  parentem.  Homo  Dei,  letentur  et  exultent  in  tuo 
aduentu  corda  hominum,  et  maxime  meum.'  Et  genu  flexo,  fundens 
lacrimas  ad  Deum  orauit.  Exurgens  *  quoque  uir  Dei  ab  oracione 
infantem '  baptizauit,  Brandanum  eum  uocans,  eo  quod  multus  in  die 
baptismi  eius  ros  esset*.  Set  et  ros  ille  temporalis  designabat  rorem 
illuni  spiritualem  quo  anima  pueri  sancti  perfundebatur ;  et  celestium 
donorum  dulcedine  perfruebatur. 

Postquam  uero  in  domo  |  parentum  compleuit  annum  sue  ablacta-  (■  73' 
tionis  infans  benedictus,  episcopus  Ercus  eum  secum  adduxit,  ac 
cure  sancte  uirginis,  nomine  Ita',  commisit.  Hec  enim  uirgo  multos 
sanctorum  Hibernie  ab  infantia  nutriuit.  Vno  quoque  dierum,  cum 
infans  ad  annos  fahdi  et  sermonem  exprimendi  peruenisset,  nutrix 
sancta  intuens  uultum  pueri  letitia  perfusum,  ait :  'O  sancte  infans, 
quid  sic  prouocat  te  ad  ridendum^?'  Et  respondit:  'Quia  uideo 
te  semper  mihi  loqui,  et  alias  tibi  similes,  que  plures  sunt  numero,  et 
me  letificant,  tenentes  in  manibus '.' 

iv.  Cumque  *  per  quinquennium  apud  virginem  '  nutriretur,  ac  bonis 
moribus  informaretur,  ad  se  eum  episcopus  adduxit,  atque  litteras 
edocuit.  Puer  autem  crescebat,  et  a  Domino  confortabatur,  et  bonis 
moribus  exenipla  ^"  sanctitatis  ostendebat.  Magister  "  enim  supernus, 
qui  intus  eum  docebat,  feritatem  creaturarum  siluestrium  ad  eius 
nutum  domabat.  Cum  enim  puer  existeret,  et  more  puerilis  etatis 
lac  concupisceret,  et  aliunde  liquorem  desideratum  non  haberet,  eo 
quod  sanctus  episcopus  Ercus  uaccas  non  possideret,  ipse  confidens 
in  eo,  qui  pullis  coruorum  eum  inuocantibus  dat  pastum '-,  Deum 
orauit,  ut  ei  in  necessitate  posito  subueniret.  Et  quia  oratio  uiri 
iusti  penetrat  celos^",  ecce  una  cerua  cum  suo  hj'nnulo  de  monte  pro- 
pinquo  "  cotidie  ueniens,  tanquam  ouis  mansueta  effecta,  copiam  lactis 
necessitatibus  eius  prebebat. 

Habebat'^   quoque   germanam    uirginem,   nomine   Brigam,   quam 

'  MSS.  -dore,  correcled  in  R'.  -  R"  f.  102".  '  octauo  .  .  .  die, 

add.  S- ;  L.  says  that  his  original  name  was  Mobhi.  *  This  is  the  reading 

of  R- :  in  R'  it  has  been  altered  to  '  eius  vuUus  in  die  baptismi  eius  ut  ros  esset.' 
The  meaning  of  the  text  is  that  the  writer  deri%'es  the  name  of  Brend.in  from 
the  Irish  word   '  broen ',   a  drop.  ^  in  suo  .  .  .  monasterio  quondam  dicto 

Cluain  Credal,  modo  uero  Ceall  Yte,  id  est  Cella  Yte,  iuxta  radices  raontis 
Luaciira  in  regione  Hua  Conayll  Gabra  M  ezdd.  ^  uidendum  R^  m.  pr.  R'. 

'  Postquam  .  .  .  manibus  oiii.  Capg.  ;  '  Vno  quoque  .  .  .  manibus'  om.  S-. 
'   =  M  c.  4  ;  S*  §  3  ;  L.  3393  ff.  ;  Capg.  u.s.  '  sic  K'  ;  oiii.  R'  m.  pr.  ;  eam 

R^  m.  sec.  '"  extra  R'  m.  pr.  "  S-  omits  the  rest  of  the  section. 

"  Ps.  cxlvi.  9.  "  cf.  Ecclus.  XXXV.  21.  "  monte  Luachra  M.  ^^  Capgrave 
omits  the  rest  of  the  section. 


loo  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

intime  diligebat;  quia,  etsi  natura  sanguinis  reddebat  eam  caram, 
gratie  tum  iDustracio  faciebat  cariorem^  Hac  enim  gratia  interiores 
pueri  occulos  illuminante,  faciem  sororis  aliquando  uidebat  similem 
aspectui  lune  splendentis,  et  faciem  magistri  sui,  sancti  silicet  Erci 
f.  73  "  episcopi,  quasi  globum  |  solis  aspiciebat. 

V.  Cum-  uero  puer  esset  decim  annorum,  die  quadam  sanctum 
episcopum  ad  docendum  plebem  sibi  commissam  iterum  comitatus, 
ad  locum  predicationis  peruenerunt.  Descendente  vero  uiro  Dei  de 
curru,  ut  uerbum  uite  in  cordibus  audientium  seminaret,  currum  cum 
ceteris  utensilibus  cure  discipuli  commisit.  Cumque  psalmos  Deo 
suo  deuote  caneret,  inuidens  inimicus  bonis  eius  operibus,  puellam 
quondam  nobilem  incantauit',  atque  ad  ludendum  cum  eo  concitauit. 
Ad  currum  quoque  puella  regia  accedens,  puerum  Brandanum  sup- 
pliciter  rogauit,  ut  eam  currum  ascendere,  atque  cum  eo  ludere 
concederet.  Quod  uerus  castitatis  amator  abhorrens,  ne  silicet 
colloquia  praua  mulieris  animam  eius  corrumperent,  mox  ut  disce- 
deret  imperauit.  Que  cum  monitis  eius  non  acquiesceret,  uerbis 
increpatoriis  corripiens  ait :  '  Quare  huc  uenisti,  maledicta  inter  mu- 
lieres?  Ad  propinquos  tuos  reuertere,  et  cum  coetaneis  tuis  digneris 
ludere.'  Et  cum  redire  non  acquiesceret,  accipiens  flagellum  eam 
uerberauit.  Et  quia  uexacio  dat  intellectum^,  licet  tristis,  reuersa  est 
sic  confussa  ad  suos.  Finito  uero  sermone,  reddiens  episcopus  ad 
currum,  increpauit  puerum  dicens  :  'Quare,' inquit, 'percussisti  uir- 
ginem  non  cognoscentem  malum  ?  Penitentiam  igitur  age  de  tanta 
temeritate  et  culpa.'  Et  respondit  uerus  humilitatis  professor,  di- 
cens :  '  Paratus  sum,  pater,  quodcumque  dixeris  implere.  Dic  ergo 
quod  uis  ;  et  ego  complebo  illud.'  Audiens  autem  pius  pater  filii 
ad  obedientiam  pronitatem,  ad  tempus  distulit  de  penitentia  in- 
iu[n]genda  mandatum.  Cumque  ad  propria  redirent,  et  cuidam 
spelunce  in  itinere  appropinquarent,  senior  ait  discipulo  :  '  Mane,' 
inquit,  '  in  hac  spelunca  usque  ad  sequentis  diei  mane.'  Specum" 
f.  73''  igitur  protinus  |  Brandanus  intrauit,  et  usque  ad  tempus  a  patre  sibi 
diffinitum  celestium  speculator  eifectus,  orando  atque  psallendo  per- 
mansit".  Magister  uero,  discipulo  nesciente,  prope  locum  contem- 
plando  sedit ;  atque  angelos  inter  specum  et  celum  per  totam  noctem 
descendentes  et  ascendentes,  ut  alter  lacob  factus,  uidit.  Tanta 
deinceps  vvltum  sancti  Brandani  Deus  claritate  illustrauerat,  ut  in 
faciem  eius,  tanquam  esset  alter  Moyses,  preter  sanctum  Fynanum 

^  et  post  tempus  ipsa  sub  cura  sancti  Brandani  Christi  ancillas  nutriuit  add.  M . 
2  =M  c.  5  :  S''  §  4  ;  L.  3403  S. ;  Capg.  i.  137.  'i  R-  f.  102''.  *  Is.  xxviii.  19. 
^  speluncam  Ri  m.  sec.  R^  "  atclos  tra  foghur  gotha  Brcnainn  .  .  .  mile 

ceimeann  for  cech  leth  L.  add.,  i.  e.  and  the  sound  of  Brendan's  voice  was 
heard  for  a  mile  in  every  direction. 


4 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  loi 

cognomcnto  Cham,  qui  similem  sortitus  est  gratiam,  homincs  intendcrc 
non  ual[er]cnt. 

vi.  Non '  est  hoc  pretereundum  qualiter,  quodam  alio  tempore 
sui  conies  niagistri  in  itinere  eflectus,  laycum  quendam  conuiatorem 
ab  irruentibus  ininiicis  orando  liberauit.  Ambulantibus  autem  simul  ^ 
in  itinere,  ecce  inimici  illius  hominis  ex  improuiso  occurrunt  eis. 
Quos  cum  ille  uidisset,  ad  patrocinium  sanctorum  confugiens,  ait : 
'  Sub  umbra  alarum  uestrarum  me  protegite ".  Ecce  enim  hostes 
mei*  appropinquant,  qui  me  occidere  cupiunt.'  Cui  puer  Brandanus, 
tanquam  mons  Syon  in  fide  stabilis,  ait :  '  Vade,'  inquit,  'homo, 
ad  lapidem  istum  stantem  prope  uiam,  et  non  timeas'  a  facie  inimi- 
corum  ;  quia  potens  est  Deus  de  lapidibus  filios  hominum  facere  si 
uoluerit.'  Ad  lapidem  uir "  ille  deueniens,  et  lapidi  uiuo  Christo 
tanquam  scuto  inexpugnabili  se  committens,  ac  de  orationibus  san- 
ctoriuTi  confidens',  euentum  fortune  expectabat.  Ouid  plura?  Sanctus 
puer  Brendanus,  uelut  alter  Moyses  in  monte  contemp[Iationis]  * 
positus,  manus  puras  in  oratione  contra  Amalechitas  illos  eleuauit, 
atque  uirtutem  eorum  ene[r]uauit.  Dans  enim  uir  benedictionem 
suam  super  hominem  simul  et  |  lapidem,  apparuit  persequentibus  f.  74" 
lapis  ut  homo,  et  homo  ut  lapis.  Delusis  ergo  oculis  persequentium, 
inimicum  suum  capitalem  occidere  putabant ;  set  in  ueritate  lapidem 
prope  eum  percutiebant.  Sed  hoc  uir  Dei  in  uirtute  illius  fecit,  qui 
uxorem  Loth  in  statuam  lapideam  conuertit,  apud  Luacayr.  Lapis 
uero,  ab  inimicis  illius  hominis  sic  percussus,  usque  in  hodiernum 
diem  ibidem,  quasi  corpus  sine  capite,  in  prodigium  multis  patet. 
Videns  uero  pius  pastor  Ercus  cecitatem  cordis  et  oculorum  illorum, 
motus  pietate,  duritiam  cordis  eorum  increpans,  ait :  '  O  homines, 
penitentiam  agite,  et  uidete  quia  lapidem  percus[s]istis  et  partem 
eius  pro  capite  inimici  uestri  portatis.  Ipse  uero  abscessit.'  Tunc 
uiri  illi,  numero  septem,  penitentiam  egerunt,  et  usque  ad  diem 
mortis  sub  regula  sancti  episcopi  Erci  in  seruicio  Dei  perman- 
serunt. 

vii.  Alio "  tempore  cum  sancti  uiri  in  monte  quodam,  silicet  Luacra 
nomine,  simul  sederent,  et  senior  siti  in  calore  estiuo  pene  deficeret, 
discipulus  defectum  magistri  moleste  ferens,  terre  licet  pre  nimio 
estu  aridissime  in  uirtute  illius,  qui  aquam  de  petra  durissima 
affiuenter  produxerat '",  imperauit,  ut  aquam  dulcem  produceret.  Et 
'-tatim  ad  verbum  eius  terra  fonte[m]  edu.xit,  et  usque  hodie  in  testi- 
inonium  sanctitatis  Brandani  aquas  uiuas  transtillat". 

>   =  M  c.  6 ;  S-  §  5  ;  L.  3435  fi".  ;  Cipg.  u.  s.      2  £;„,„]  autera  R-.  ^  pg  xvi.  8. 

I       *  R2  f.  102'".             5  o«(.  R=.              6  ubi  R2_              7  o,„  R2  8  erasure  in 

I       R' ;  R-  Iias  only  '  contemp'.         '  =  M  c.  7  ;  S-  §  5  ;  Capg.  u.  s.  '"  produxit 
ac  R-.          "  et  dicitur  fons  Erendani  M  add. 


102  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

viii.  Post'  hec  puer  bone  indolis  Brandanus,  flagrans  amore 
sacrarum  scripturarum,  ac  diuersorum  gliscens  uidere  exempla- 
sanctorum,  optenta  magistri  sui  licentia,  cogitauit  primo  ut  sanctum 
episcopum  Erlatheum  uisitaret';  ac  postea  alios  sanctos  terre. 
Set'  antequam  ad  sanctum  lerlatheum  peruenisset,  ad  sanctam  suam 
nutricem  nomine  Itam  perrexit,  ut  benedictionem  eius  hereditate 
possideret.  Que  ait  ei  :  'Vade,'  inquit,  'et  sanctorum  regulas,  qui 
f.  74  f"  eas  opere  compleuerunt,  addisce.  |  Noli  enim  discere  a  uirginibus,  ne 
scandalum  incurras  ab  hominibus.'  Sancta  igitur  Ita,  Spiritu  Sancto 
reuelante,  alumpnum  premuniuit,  quod  laycus  quidam  occurreret,  qui 
inter  sanctos  Dei  computandus  foret.  Cumque  Brandanus  in  uiam 
suam  pergeret,  ecce,  ut  predixit  sancta  sua  nutrix,  obuiam  habuit 
quendam  uirum  in  itinere,  qui  Colmanus  filius  Lenini  uocabatur. 
Cui  sanctus  Brandanus  ait :  '  Age,  homo,  penitentiam,  quia  Deus 
uocat  te  ad  salutem,  et  eris  ut  columba  innocens  in  conspectu  Dei  ^ ; ' 
et  ideo  uocauit  eum  Colmanum,  quasi  columbe  manum,  propter 
operis  innocentiam.  Erat  enim  hic  Colmanus  filius  Lenini  uita 
atque  doctrina  inter  sanctos  precipuus.  Ipse  enim  fijndauit  eccle- 
siam  Clonensem,  que  ^  cst  hodie  cathedralis  ecclesia,  et  famosa  in 
partibus  Momonie. 

ix.  Post'  hec  Sauctus  Brandanus  peruenit  ad  Sanctum  larlatheum 
in  Connacia  tunc  commorantem.  Cum  hoc  sancto  uiro  ad  tempus 
commorans,  doctrine  salutaris  pocula  sitibunde  hauriens,  permansit*. 
Cepit  autem  et  ipse  inter  cetera  dona  Dei  prophetie  spiritu  pollere. 
Aliquando  namque,  Spiritu  reuelante,  sancto  pontifici  lerlatheo  locum 
sue  sepulture  predixit  sic  :  '  Non  hic,'  inquit,  'resurges  pater;  set 
alibi "  erit  resurrectio  tua.'  Cui  senior  ait :  '  O  sancte  puer,  quare 
multa  archana  Dei  in  te  abscondis  ?  Scio  enim  quod  Spiritum  Sanctum 
habes,  et  multa  potentia  in  te  latet.  Tu  ad  me  uenisti  ut  addisceres; 
et  ex  hoc  nunc  meus  magister  eris.  Accipe  ergo  me  monachum  et 
discipulum  tibi  de  cetero.  Dic  ergo  locum  resurrectionis  mee.'  Cui 
Brandanus  ait :  '  Versus  orientem  proficiscere,  et  ubi  rote  currus  tui 
rupte  fuerint,  ibi  oratorium  construe  et  mane.  Illic  quoque  una 
tecum  multi  resurgent  in  gloriam '".'  Ascendit  pontifex  sanctus 
currum  ;  et  iter  aggrcdiens  non  longe  a  cella  sua  fracte  sunt  due  rote 
f.  74  "  currus  ;  et  ibi  constructum  est  monasterium,  cui  nomen  |  Tuaym  da 
Gualand. 


1   =  M  c.  8  ;  .S2  §  5  ;  L.  3449  ff.  ;  Capg.  i.  138.       ■  ext«  R» ;  ex'  R^.      3  R2  f. 
102'*.  "*  S-  and  Capg.  omit  the  rest  of  the  section.  ^  et  clara  columna  in 

templo  eius  M  nM.  «  MSS.  qui.  '  =  M  c.  9  ;  S^  §  6  ;  L.  3484  ft'.  ;  Capg.  u.  s. 
**  7  rosfoglaiinsium  na  huili  riagla  Eirennclia  aicisium  L.  a{{{/.,  i.  e.  and  learnt 
under  him  all  the  Irish  (monasticj  rules.  '  aliter  R".  '"  gloriosam  R^. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  103 

X.  Post'  hec  sanctus  Brandanus',  uelut  apis  argumentosa,  ex 
diuersis  sanctorum  exemplis  uirtutum  colligens  flores,  in  corde  suo, 
tanquam  in  alucari  quodam  mellifluo,  mel  caritatis  et  ceram  humili- 
tatis  recondebat^  Recedens  ^  quoque  a  sancto  pontifice  larlatheo, 
peruenit  ad  campum  Ae,  vbi  angelus  Domini  ei  apparens  dixit : 
"Sume*  cartam,  et  scribe  tibi  vivendi  secundum  uoluntatem  Dei 
normam.'  Scripsit  ibi  Brandanus,  angelo  dictante,  regulam  ecclesia- 
sticam  ad  custodiam  uite  religiose  necessariam,  que  usque  hodie  in 
nonnullis  locis  manet. 

xi.  Eodem  ^  tempore  uolens  Dominus  uirtutem  sancti  Brandani 
coram  multis  ostendere,  ecce  defunctus  eflferebatur  iuuenis  ad 
sepulcrum,  parentibus  et  cognatis  miserabihter  eum  plangentibus. 
Quorum  lamentis  compaciens,  uir  pietate  plenus  ait :  'Nolite  flere, 
set  pocius  in  Christum  confidite,  ut,  sicut  prius  dedit  spiritum 
uitalem,  ita  et  modo  dignetur  resuscitare  mortuum.'  Et  accedens  ad 
locum,  orauit;  et  statim  qui  mortuus  fuerat,  resurrexit.  Mirantur 
omnes  qui  aderant,  et  conuerso  in  gaudium  luctu,  uniuersi  qui 
aderant,  et  maxime  parentes  iuuenis,  exultant. 

P^st  hec  homo  Dei  ad  regem  terre  *  peruenit,  atque  honorifice  ab 
eo  susceptus,  optulit  ei  locum  quemcunque  in  terra  sua  ad  inhabitan- 
dum  preeligeret.  Set  uerus  mundi  contemptor,  huius  uite  fauoribus 
e.xtolli  non  appetens,  hoc  renuit ;  set  et  benedictionem  pro  oblato 
dono  refundens,  occidentalium  Conacteorum  regionem',  tanquam 
fame  nirtutum  suarum  occultator,  perrexit.  Decurso  autem  illic 
aliquarto  tempore,  plurimos  ad  Christum  uerbo  et  exemplo  conuertit, 
multisqae  cum  discipulis  ad  sanctum  episcopum  Ercum  est  reuersus. 
Exultat  nutritor  in  aduentu  alumpni ;  set  et  cognati  omnes  et  noti 
ineftabil)  repleti  *  sunt  gaudio.  Denique  a  sancto  pontifice  |  discipu-  f.  74  •* 
lus,  donis  uirtutum  ante  a  Christo  pontifice  promotus,  ad  sacerdotii ' 
gradum  est  sublimatus '". 

xii.  Illias"  uero  precepti  quod  dictum  est  Abrahe :  '  Exi  de  terra 
tua  et  ccgnatione  tua'^'  non  immemor  effectus,  peregre  proficisci 

1   =  M  c.  10  ;  S"-  5§  6,  7  ;  L.  3542  ff.  ;  Capg.  u.  s.       2  R"-  f.  103^       '   =Si  §  i- 

*  summe   Ri.  ^*   =  M  c.   11  ;    S'   §    i  ;    S=   §    7  ;   L.    3546  ff.  ;   Capg.   u.  s. 

*  in  loco  nonine  Cruachu  habitantem  S-  add.  '  sic  S*  ;  regiorum  R^  R-. 
'  om.  R-.  »  prebiterii  S-.  "  Here  M  adds  :  'accepitque  sanctus 
Brendanus,  cum  esset  sacerdos,  habitum  monasticum  sanctum.  Et  multi  relin- 
quentes  seculum  hinc  inde  venerunt  ad  eum,  et  fecit  eos  sanctus  Brendanus 
monachos.  Deinde  cellas  et  monasteria  fundauit  in  sua  propria  regione,  sed 
tunc  adhuc  non  plurima;  quod  cum  ueniret  de  nauigio  suo  querendo  terram 
repromissionis  sanctorum,  tunc  parrochia  eius  per  diuersas  regiones  Hybernie 
dilatata  est.'  Then  comes  a  new  rubric  :  'Hic  incipit  de  nauigio  sanctissimi 
patris  Brendani.'  After  which  the  ordinary  te.vt  of  the  Navigatio  Brendani  is 
inserted.         "   =S'  §  4 ;   S^  §  8  ;  L.  3556  ff. ;  Capg.  u.  s.         ■=  Gen.  xii.  i. 


104  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ardenti  uolebat  desiderio '.  Cuius  humilitatem  ex  alto  respiciens 
Dominus,  tale  ei  in  sompniis  dedit  responsum  :  '  Brandane,  exaudita 
cst  postulatio  tua ;  fiat  tibi  secundum  desiderium  cordis '^  tui.'  Quo 
letatus  oraculo  suos  seorsum  relinquens  ascendit  in  montem  longe 
a  mari  positum ' ;  directoque  in  equora  prospectu,  insulam  uidit 
amenissimam,  Christi  seruis  peraptam,  sibique  multum  placentem. 
Ibi  quoque  triduo  ad  certificandum  quod  uiderat  ieiunauit.  Iterumque 
illi  dormienti  uox  de  celo  insonuit  dicens :  '  Sicut  iBraelitico  populo 
terram  pollicitus  sum,  et  adiutor  affui,  ut  ad  eam  pertingeret ;  ita  tibi 
insolam,  quam  uidisti,  promitto,  et  opere  complebo.' 

xiii. '  De  ^  promissione  tanti  doni  gratias  Deo  egit ;  ac  fusis  diutis- 
sime  lacrimis,  ad  suos,  Spiritu  Sancto  consolante,  reuersus  est. 
dicens  :  '  Fratres  mei  amatissimi,  et  comilitones  mei,  consilium  auobis 
quero ;  quia  cor  meum  in  hoc  est  fixum,  ut  terram  promissionis 
mihi  celitus  ostensam  cum  sollicitudine  queram.  Ipsa  est  enin  * 
terra  sanctorum  de  qua  sanctus  Barrinthus '  locutus  est  nobis.'  Vt 
autem  fidem  de  historia  dictorum  a  sancto  Barintho  de  eadem  terra 
faciam  certiorem,  aduertendum  est  hic,  quod  idem  Barrinthus ',  in- 
stigante  eum  Spiritu  Sancto,  cum  ad  uisitandum  sanctum  Brandarum 
ad  locum,  qui  Saltus  uirtutum  Brandani  dicitur,  quadam  uice  adueniens 
dixerit.  Cum  enim.  in  colloquiis  mutuis  delectarentur,  sanctus  Bar- 
rinthus  in  terram  se  prostrauit,  ac  lacrimis  ubertim  faciem  irrigauit, 
atque  diu  orauit.  Sanctus  uero  Brandanus  eum  de  terra  eleuans  ait : 
'  Pater  sancte,  cur  tristiciam  habes  in  presentia  tuorum  fratrum ' .' 
Nonne  ad  consolationem  nostram  uenisti  ?  Debes  ergo  in  conspectu 
f-  75"  tuorum  I  letari  pocius  quam  tristari.  Refice  ergo  animas  nostras,  et 
de  diuersis  Dei  miraculis,  que  uidisti  et  audisti,  narra  nobis.' 
Expletis  exhortationibus  Brandani,  sanctus  Barri[n]t[h]us  cepit  nar- 
rare  de  quadam  occeani  ">  insula  dicens  :  '  Frater  meus  Temocus  ", 
pauperum  fugiens  laboris  sollicitudinem,  perrexit  in  sollitarium 
locum.    Ibi  quoque  inueniens  insulam  quandam  in  mari'-  coatempla- 

'  postulauit  a  Domino  ut  sibi  daret  terram  secretam  in  mari  ab  hominibus 
semotam  S' ;  and  practically  Capg.  '  R^  f.  103''.  ^  in  montcm  Aitche  S^ ; 
i  sliab  n-Aidche  L.  '  With  this  section  R  passes  to  the  text  of  the  Navigatio 
Brendani  in  a  recension  of  its  own,  which  extends  to  the  end  of  §  Ixvi.  infra. 
Capgrave  also  passes  to  the  N.  B.  about  this  point,  using  a  texl  somewhat 
diflercnt  from,  and  oilen  superior  to,  the  ordinary  recension.  S'  makes  the 
transition  to  the  N.  B.  at  a  shghtly  later  point.  For  the  ordinary  text  of  the 
N.  B.  I  refer  to  the  pages  of  Schrader's  Sanct  Brandaii,  1871  fSch.),  and 
Moran's  Acta  S.  Brendani,  1872  (M).  The  best  printed  text  of  the  N.  B.  is  that 
of  lubinal,  1836.  Unfortunately  it  is  a  very  scarce  book.  Where  there  is  no 
difference  in  the  te.\ts  of  the  N.  B.,  it  is  cited  as  N.  ^  Schr.  p.  3  ;  M  p.  85. 

«  enim  est  R^.  '  Barrinchus  R'.  *  locutus  est  .  .  .  idem  Barrinthus 

om.  R'  (homoiotel).  '  cur  in  presentia  tuorum  fratrum  tristiciara  habes  ?  R". 
>"  occenani  R' ;  occennani  R".  "  Mernoc  M  ;  Mernocatus  Sch.,  Capg. 

'*  iuxta  montem  Lapidis  N. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  105 

tioni  celestium  satis  aptam,  eam  ad  inhabitandum  preelegit.  Post 
multum  uero  temporis  ceperunt  multi  monachi  undequaque  ad 
illum  confluere.  Cunique  multos  in  Christo  fratres  ibi  acquisisset, 
et  Deus  per  illum  multa  miracula  ostendisset,  tandem  ego  illuc 
properaui,  ut  eosdem  uisitarem.  Cumque  a  loco  eorum  itineie 
trium  dierum  distassem,  in  occursum  meum,  Spiritu  reuelante, 
cum  suis  fratribus  ipse  properauit,  et  in  osculo  sancto  salutauit. 
Et  cum  ad  heremitorium  eorum  uenissemus,  ex  diuersis  cellulis 
occurrentes^  salutauerunt- nos  in  caritate  non  ficta.  Et  licet  multe 
essent  eorum  ibi  mansiones,  vnanimis '  tamen  erat  conuersatio  in 
fide,  spe  et  caritate ;  et  vna  ecclesia,  et  vna  refectio.  Nichil  enim 
aliud  in  cibo  uel  potu  ibi  ministrabatur,  nisi  radices  herbarum  et 
fructus  arborum,  et  potus  aque  ad  sitis  sedationem.  Fratres  uero  post 
recreationem  a  Deo  acceptam,  et  completorio  dicto,  secundum  eorum 
consuetudinem  ad  suas  cellulas  redierunt,  expectantes  ibi  gallorum 
cantum.  Et  cum  ceteri  se  sic  sopori  uel  contemplationi  j  dedissent,  f.  75* 
ego  et  frater  meus  Ternocus  perlustrantes  insulam,  ad  litus  maris 
versus  occidentem  peruenimus.  Et  cum  illuc  deuenissemus,  nauicu- 
lam  quandam  paratam  ibi  inuenimus.  Et  tum  dixit  Ternocus  ad  me : 
"  Pater,  ascendamus  nauiculam,  et  nauigabimus  contra  occidentem 
plagam  ad  insulam,  que  dicitur  terra  repromissionis  sanctorum  ;  quam 
daturus  est  Deus  successoribus  nostris  in  nouissimo  tempore." 
Ascendentibus  igitur  nobis  nauim  atque  nauigantibus,  nebule  nos 
cooperuerunt  undique,  ita  vt  uix  proram  aut  pu[p]pim  nauicule  potuis- 
semus  uidere.  Transacto  igitur  quasi  unius  hore  spatio,  circum- 
fulsit  nos  lux  ingens,  et  apparuit  nobis  terra  spaciosa,  herbis*,  floribus, 
et  fructibus  copiosa.  Exeuntibus  igitur  nobis  de  naui,  cepimus 
perambulare  insulam,  et  vsque  ad  quindecim  "^  dierum  spatium  sic 
laborantes,  non  potuimus  finem  illius  inuenire.  Nichil  ergo  her- 
barum  ibi  uidimus  sine  floribus  et  arborum  sine  fructu.  Lapides 
uero  insule  omnes  preciosi  sunt.  Porro  decimo  quinto  die  inuenimus 
fluuium  ab  oriente  versus  occidente[m]  tendentem.  Cumque  con- 
sideraremus  hec  omnia,  dubium  nobis  erat  quid  agere,  uel  quotendere 
debeamus.  Cum  uero  ad  tempus  nobiscum  deliberaremus,  placuit 
nobis  fluuium  transire ;  set  timentes  aliquid  sine  nutu  Altissimi 
incipere,  expectauimus  diuinum  responsum.  Et  quia  diuinum  con- 
silium  expectauimus,  |  ecce  subito  apparuit  quidam  uir  magni  splen-  f.  75  " 
doris  coram  nobis,  qui  nos  propriis  nominibus  appellans,  salutauit, 
dicens  :  "  Euge  boni  fratres  !  Dominus  reuelauit  uobis  "  istam  terram, 
quam  daturus  est  suis  sanctis  in  fine  temporum,  Est  enim  medietas 
istius  insule  usque  ad  istud  flumen.  Non  licet  ergo  uobis  transire 
ulterius.     Reuertimini  igitur 'ad'  locum' vnde  existis."     Et  cum  hoc 

'  sicut  examen  apum  N.  2    r:  f   jogc  3  .mus  R-.  <  et  adj.  K"-. 

'  XV  R' ;  decemquinque  R*.         «  nobis  R^.         '  R-  f.  103''. 


io6  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

dixisset,  ego  interrogavi  eum  vnde  esset,  aut  quo  nomine  uocaretur 
ipse.  Qui  ait :  "  Cur  me  interrogas  vnde  sum,  aut  quo  nomine  uocor  ? 
Quare  me  non  interrogas  de  ista  insula,  quam  uides  ?  Sicut  enim 
illam  modo  uides,  ita  ab  initio  mundi  permanet  ^  Vnus  annus  semper 
est  in  hac  insula,  et  vnus  dies,  dies  sine  obscuritate  tenebrarum,  quia 
Dominus  noster  lesus  Christus"  lux  ipsius '."  Et  postquam  hec 
omnia  perdixit,  confestim  reuersi  sumus  pariter  qua*  uenimus ;  et 
predictus  uir  nobiscum  usque  ad  litus  niaris,  vbi  erat  nostra  nauicula. 
Ascendentibus  uero  nobis  in  nauiculam,  disparuit  ille  uir  ab  oculis 
nostris.  Post  hec  nos  per  predictam  caliginem  transeuntes,  deue- 
nimus  ad  insulam  deliciosam,  ubi  fratres  nos  expectabant.  At  vbi 
fratres  nos  uiderunt,  cum  magna  letitia  exultabant  de  presentia 
nostra,  qui  ante  plorabant  de  absentia,  dicentes :  "  Cur,  patres,  oues 
uestras  dimisistis  ''  sine  pastore  errantes  in  hac  insula ".  Nouimus 
enim  abbatem  nostrum  a  nobis  frequenter  discedere,  set  nescimus  in 

f.  75''  quam  partem.  Aliquando  enim  sine  nobis  |  immoratur  per  unum 
mensem,aIiquando  per  duas  ebdomadas,  aliquando  per  unam."  Cum 
hec  ego  audissem,  cepi  illos  confortare,  dicens :  "  Nolite,  fratres, 
putare  aliquid  in  hac  mora  nisi  bonum  ;  quia  reuera '  vestra  conuer- 
satio  ante  portam  paradisi  est.  Huic  prope  adest  insula,  que  uocatur 
terra  repromissionis  sanctorum,  vbi  nec  nox  imminet,  nec  dies 
finitur.  IIIuc  enim  aliquando  properat  abbas  uester  Ternocus. 
Angeli  quoque  Domini  custodiunt  illam  terram.  Nonne ",  inquit, 
"  cognoscitis  ex  odore  uestim.entorum  nostrorum  quod  in  paradiso  Dei 
fuimus?"  Tunc  fratres  respondentes  dixerunt :  "  Abba,  nouimus  quia 
in  paradiso  Dei  fuistis  ;  set  nos,  ubi  sit,  ignoramus.  Nam  sepe 
flagrantiam  uestimentorum  abbatis  nostri  probauimus ;  frequenter 
enim  odorem  suauissimum  usque  ad  quadraginta  dies  uestes  eius 
retinebant."  Tunc  ego  ad  fratres  dixi :  "  Illic  ego  cum  fratre  meo 
Ternoco  per  tot  tempora  fui  sine  cibo  et  potu.''  In  tantum  autem 
eramus  repleti  gratia  spirituali,  ut  a  fratribus  reputaremur  musto  re- 
fecti  uel  madefacti.  Quadraginta  quoque  dierum  numero  commoratus 
[sum]  cum  fratribus*  ibidem.  Postea,  accepta  benedictione  abbatis 
et  collegi[i],  reuersus  sum  cum  sociis  meis '  ad  cellam,  ad  quam 
iturus  sum  cras^",  Domino  me  protegente.'  Hiis  auditis  sermonibus, 
sanctus  Brandanus  cum  omni  congregatione  fratrum  prostrauit  se  in 
terram,  Deum  glorificans,  ac  dicens  :   '  lustus  Dominus  in  omnibus 

f.  76"  uiis  suis,  I  et  sanctus  in  omnibus  operibus  suis",  qui  reuelauit  tanta 
mirabilia  seruis  suis.  Et  benedictus  Deus  in  donis  suis,  qui  nos 
hodie  refecit  spirituali  sic  refectione.'  Post  hec  dixit  sanctus  Bran- 
danus :    '  Eamus  ad  refectionem  corporis   et  ad  mandatum   nouum, 

1  -nebit  R'.  »  om.  Ri.  ^  ippius  Ri.  *  qui  Ri  R^.  5  ^ic  N  ; 

duxistis  Ri  R^  ^  silua  M.  '  recidencia  R''.  *  dierum  .  .  . 

fratribus  om.  R=.  »  R^  f.  104''.  ^»  tuas  R».         "  Ps.  cxlv.  8. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  107 

silicct  caritatis.'    Transacta  igitur  nocte  illa,  mane  cum  bcnedictionc 
fratrum  rcuersus  est  sanctus  Barrinthus  ad  cellam  suam '. 

xiv.  Tunc''  Brandanus  ait  ad  suos :  'Quid  uobis  uidetur?  aut  quod 
consilium  uultis  dare  ?  Terram  enini  promissionis  sanctorum,  de  qua 
locutus  cst  nobis  sanctus  Barrintlius,  in  corde  meo  proposui  querere.' 
Cognita  uero  patris  uoluntate,  quasi  ex  uno  ore  omnes  dixerunt : 
'  Abba  pater,  voluntas  tua  ipsa  est  et  nostra.  Nonne  parentes  nostros 
propter  te  et  Deum  dimisimus,  et  hereditates  despeximus,  et  uolun- 
tates  nostras  et  corpora  tradidimus  in  manus  tuas  ?  Itaque  parati 
sumus,  siue  ad  uitam,  siue  ad  mortem,  tecum  ire.  Vnum  tamen  est, 
ut  queramus  Dei  uoluntatem.'  Vnanimiter  igitur  consentiunt,  ut 
quadraginta  dierum  numerum  in  ieiunio  et  oratione  complerent  ^, 
et  sic  spiritualibus  armis  protecti  terram  promissionis  quererent. 
Transactis  igitur  quadraginta  diebus,  salutatis  fratribus,  atque  pre- 
posito  monasterii  recommendatis,  qui  postea  fuit  successor  suus  in 
eodem  loco,  profectus  est  homo  Dei  ad  occidentalem  plagam  cum 
quattuordecim  fratribus  ad  insulam  quandam  nomine  Aru,  vbi  tunc 
manebat  sanctus  Endeus  cum  suis  fratribus,  cum  quibus  moratus  est 
uir  Dei  Brandanus  tribus  diebus  et  tribus  noctibus. 

XV.  Post*  hec  accepta  benedictione  sancti  Endei  et  suorum  mona- 
chorum'  profectus  est  Brandanus  cum  suis  ad  partes  Kerrigie,  ubi 
parentes  eius  demorabantur  ;  non  tamen  ut  ex  carnali  affectione  eos 
salutaret,  set  ut  commodius  ibi^  nauem  prepararet.  Applicuit  igitur 
ibi  ad  pedem  montis,  I  in  loco  qui  modo  dicitur  sedes  Brandani,  vbi  f.  76  ^" 
figens'  tentorium  ad  tempus  inhabitauit.  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus 
cum  suis,  preparatis  ferramentis,  preparauerunt  nauiculam  leuis- 
simam  costatam  atque  columpnatam'  ex  pino  arbore",  sicut  mos 
est  in  illis  partibus,  et  cooperuerunt  eam  choriis  bouinis  rubricatis, 
et  hnierunt  omnes  iuncturas  pellium  exterius,  et  submiserunt  ex- 
pensas  quadraginta  dierum,  et  cetera  utensilia  ad  necessitatem  nauis 
pertinentia '".  Parata  ergo  sic  naui,  atque  uelo  posito,  sanctus  Bran- 
danus  fratribus  dixit :  '  In  nomine  Patris  et  Filii  et  Spiritus  Sancti 
intrate  nauim.'  Cum  fratres  confidenter  intrarent  nauim'',  et  solus 
Brandanus  staret  in  litore  benedicens  portum,  ecce  tres  fratres 
supei-uenerunt  de  monasterio  post  eos.  Qui  statim  proni  ante  pedes 
uiri  Dei  corruerunt,  dicentes :  '  Pater  reuerende,  concede  nobis  tecum 

'  i.  e.  Cell  Bairrfinn  (KilbarronV  ^  Sch.  p.  5  ;  M  p.  89  ;  here  some  MSS. 

of  N.  interpolate  an  account  of  Macutus  (S.  Malo^  as  one  of  Brendan's  com- 
panions.  ^  ieiunium  xl  dierum  semper  per  triduanas  agere  N.  *  Sch. 

p.  6  ;  M  p.  90.         5  et  sanctorum  suorum  R^.         «  sibi  R^.         '  fingens  R'  R^. 
*  R-  f.  104''.  '  ex  uimine  M  ;  ex  silua  Sch.  ^"  Here  S'  §  5  begins  to 

adopt  the  text  of  N.  B..  thougii  it  is  a   somevvhat  different    recension  from 
the  ordinary  one.  "  intrarent  nauim  confidenter  R-. 


io8  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ire,  alioquin  hic  moriemur  fame  et  siti.'  Cumque  uir  Dei  uidisset 
angustiam  cordis  illorum,  dixit  eis,  ut  nauim  intrarent.  Et  cum  esset 
prescius  futurorum  de  hiis  que  uentura  erant,  ilHs  prophetando 
[ait] :  '  Scio,  fratres,  quomodo  huc  uenistis.  Iste  frater  bonum  opus 
operatus  est  ueniendo  ;  quare  Deus  preparauit  sibi  altissimum  locum. 
Alter  uero  ueniam,  licet  Deum  grauiter  offenderit,  consequetur'. 
Set  tertius  pro  sua  obstinatione  dampnabitur''.' 

xvi.  Ascendens'  autem  Brandanus  in  nauim,  extensis  ueHs  cepe- 
runt  nauigare  contra  solstitium  estiuale ;  habebantque  prosperum 
uentum,  nec  fuit  eis  necesse  nisi  uela  tenere.  Post  quindecim*  uero 
dies  cessauit  uentus ;  et  tunc  fratres  ceperunt  nauigare  usque  duni 
uires^  deficerent.  Videns  autem  homo  Dei  eos  multum  sic  laborare", 
cepit  ipsos  confortare  dicens :  '  Fratres,  nolite  sic  labores  uestros 
expendere.  Dominus  enim  adiutor  noster  est,  atque  nauis  nostre 
f.  76"^  gubernator.  Mittite  |  ergo  remiges  et  gubernacula  intus ;  tantum 
dimittite  uela  extensa ;  et  faciat  Dominus  de  seruis  suis  et  de  naui 
que  uult.  Timete  ergo  Dominum,  quia  bene  placitum  est  Domino 
super  timentes  se'.'  Cumque  iussa  patris  discipuli  complerent, 
reficiebant  se  ad  uesperam.  Hec*  enim  erat  consuetudo  eorum  se 
semper  ad  uesperam  horam  reficere.  Cessantes  uero  a  labore  remi- 
gandi,  aliquando  habebant  uentum ;  set  ipsi  ignorabant  in  quam 
partem  eos  ducebat,  uel  ex  qua  plaga  ueniebat. 

xvii.  Consum[m]atis^  uero  quadraginta  diebus  sic,  et  consumptis 
uictualibus,  et  de  nullo  alio'"  nisi  de  Dei  adiutorio  sperantibus,  ap- 
paruit  illis  quedam  insula  ex  parte  septentrionali"  ualde  saxosa  et 
alta.  Cum  uero  appropinquarent  ad  litus,  uiderunt  ripam  altissimam 
sicut  murum,  et  diuersos  riuulos  descendentes  de  summitate  insule 
fluentes  in  mare.  Cumque  fratres  pre  altitudine  rupis  non  possent 
inuenire  portum,  ubi  commode  applicarent,  tunc  fame  et  siti  uexati, 
acceperunt  uassa  sua,  ut  de  aqua  preterfluente  ad  refrigerationem 
sitis  sumerent.  Quod  cum  uidisset  sanctus  Brandanus,  aquam  eis 
interdixit,  dicens  :  '  Stultum  est  que  agitis,  fratres  !  Quia  enim  Deus 
noster  non  uult  nobis  ostendere  portum  intrandi  insulam,  ideo  non 
faciatis  de  eius  aqua  tanquam  de  aliena  re  rapinam.  Habete  ergo 
patientiam  ;  quia  Dominus  noster  lesus  Christus,  qui  sperantes  in 
se  non  delinquit,  post  tres  dies  ostendet  seruis  suis  portum,  et  locum 
aptum  ad  tempus  manendi,  ut  reficiantur  corpora  nostra.'      Cum 

'  -quitur  R'  R'.  -  aptissimum  locum  ;  uobis  autem  preparauit  detrimentuni 
et  iudicium  M  ;  teterrimum  iudicium  Sch.  ^  Sch.  p.  6  ;  M  p.  91  ;  S'  §  6. 

*  X.   S' ;  Br.  ^  uenientes  R-,  probably  a  wrong  extensipn   of  the  criginal 

reading  in  R^,  whicli  is  now  iHegible,  having  beeii  tampered  with  by  a  later 
hand.  ^  -rantes  R^.  '  Ps.  cxh.  11.  *  hoc  R^.  "  Sch.  p.  7  ; 

M  p.  92  ;  S'  §  7.         "*  oin.  R\  "  septembrionali  R=. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  109 

autem  circuissent  per  tres  dies  insulam,  tertia  die  circa  horam  nonam 
inuenerunt  portum,  ubi  erat  aditus  unius  nauis.  Et  uidens  sanctus 
uir  portum  oplatum,  surrexit,  ac  bcnedixit  introitum.  Erat  nam- 
que  I  petra  inscisa  cx  utraque  parte  mire  altitudinis,  sicut  murus.  f-  76' 
Asccndentibus  uero  fratribus  de  naui  in  terram,  premonuit  eos  pius 
pastor  ne  quid  de  suppeilecti[li]  nauis  secum  ferrent. 

xviii.  Porro'  ambulantibus  eis  per  ripas  maris,  occurrit  illis  quidam 
canis,  qui  ad  pedes  sancti  Brandani  deueniens,  signa,  que  solent 
canes  in  aduentu  dominorum  suoruin,  motuacgestucorporis  ostendit. 
Videns  uero  honio  Dei,  tanquam  alter  Thobias,  canem  signa  pacis 
pretendentem,  ait  suis:  '  Nonne  bonum  nuntium  donauit  nobis  Deus 
noster.'  Sequamur  ergo  eum.'  Secuti  sunt  autem  canem,  qui  pre- 
cesserat  eos  usque  ad  opidum  quoddam  quod  erat  [in]  insula. 
Intrantibus  ergo  illis  opidum,  uiderunt  aulam  raagnam  et  spatiosam, 
stratam  lectulis  et  sedibus,  aquam  etiam  ad  pedes  lauandos  paratam. 
Cum  uero  sedissent,  precepit  uir  Dei  fratribus,  ne  quicquid  de 
suppellecti[li]  domus  sibi  toUere  usurparent.  Et  ait:  'Cauete,  fratres, 
ne  Sathanas  uos"  in  temptationem'  deducat.  Video  enim,  quod 
suadet  uni  ex  tribus,  qui  post  nos  de  monasterio  venerunt,  de  furto 
pessimo.  Orate  *  igitur  pro  anima  eius ;  quia  caro  tradita  est  in 
potestatem  Sathane.'  Porro  domus  illa,  in  qua  residebant,  erat  quasi 
inserta  per  parietes  in  circuitu  de  uasculis  diuersi  generis  metalli 
appendentibus,  frenis,  et  cornibus  circumdatis  argento. 

xix.  Tunc  Brandanus  ait  ministro,  qui  sollebat  apponere  panem 
coram  eo  :  '  Fer  prandium  quod  nobis  misit  Deus,  vere  pius,  vere 
bonus.'  Surgens  quoque  frater  ad  ministrandum,  inuenit  mensam 
positam,  et  mapam  desupcr  extentam,  et  panes  miri  candoris 
secundum  exigentiam  esurientium  ^  et  pisces  similiter.  Cumque 
omnia  essent  para|ta,  benedixit  sanctus  pater  prandium "  celitus  f- 77* 
missum,  dicens  :  '  Qui  dat  escam  omni  carni,  confitemini  Deo  celi'.' 
Residebant  ergo  fratres,  atque  cum  Dei  timore  ac  amore  panem  suum 
commedebant.  Sic  et  de  potu,  quod  opus  erat,  bibebant.  Finita 
uero  cena  cum  gratiarum  actionibus  atque  diuinis  laudibus,  dixit 
pius  pastor  fratribus  :  '  Requiescite  nunc  ;  ecce  enim  singuli  lecti 
bene  strati  pro  singulis.  Opus  est  uobis  ut  membra  uestra  repau- 
sentur  post  magnos  labores.'  Cum  autem  fratres  obdormissent,  uidit 
sanctus  Brandanus  Sathanam  in  specie  cuiusdam  Ethiopis  nigri 
ferentem  frenum  in  manu,  et  uocantem  predictum  fratrem  ut  tolleret; 
quod  et  fecit ;   nam  frenum  rapuit,  et  suadenti  locum  temptationis 

>  Sch.,  M  u.  s. ;  Si  §  8.  »  nos  R^.  3  jji  f  jg^J  «  orante  Ri  m.  pr.  R^. 
'  -ensium  R',  -encium  R^.  ^  brandium  R^ ;  the  scribe  was  beginning  to  write 
'  Brandanus'.  '  Ps.  cxxxv.  35,  26. 


iio  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

dedit.  Quod  cum  homo  Dei  cognosceret,  de  lecto  surrexit,  et  usque 
in  sequentem  diem  orationem  protelauit.  Mane  autem  facto,  cum 
opus  Dei  in  laudibus  peregissent,  festinabant  ad  nauim.  Ecce  mensa 
apparuit,  sicut  prima  die,  per  omnia  parata  ;  et  ita  per  tres  dies  et 
totidem  noctes  preparauit  Deus  prandium  seruis  suis. 

XX.  Post '  hec  sanctus  Brandanus  cum  suis  cepit  iter  uersus  nauem 
agere.  Dixitque  suis:  'Videte,  ne  quis  ex  uobis  aliquid  de  substantia 
huius  insule  secum  tollat.'  At  omnes  dixerunt :  'Absit,  pater,  ut 
aliquid  furtiue  ablatum  uiolet  iter  nostrum.'  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus 
subiunxit :  '  Ecce  frater  noster,  quem  predixi  uobis  heri,  habet 
frenum  argenteum'^  in  sinu  suo,  quod  hac  nocte  per  suggestionem 
diaboli  incaute  furatus  est.'  Et  cum  hec  frater  ille  audisset,  proiecit 
frenum  de  sinu  suo,  et  prostrauit  se  ad  pedes  uiri  .Dei,  dicens : 
'  Pater,  peccaui ;  ignosce  mihi,  et  ora  pro  anima  mea  ne  pereat.' 
Quod  uidentes  fratres,  confestim  prostrauerunt  se  in  terram,  de- 
precantes  pro  anima  illius.  Et  eleuans  eos  pastor  pius  de  terra,  ecce 
f-  77  uiderunt  Ethiopem  paruum  saltare  de  sinu  fratris  illius,  qui  |  uoce 
magna  ac  lugubri  dixit :  '  Cur  me,  uir  Dei,  de  habitatione  mea  expellis, 
in  qua  per  septem  annos  habitaui  ?  et  modo  alienum  me  facis  ab 
hereditate  mea.'  Audiens  hanc  uocem,  preco  ueritatis,  Brandanus, 
ait :  '  Precipio  tibi  ex  parte  Christi,  Cui  ego  seruio,  ut  nullum  hominem 
leseris  usque  in  diem  iudicii.'  Et  post  hec  conuersus  ad  fratrem 
predictum,  ait:  'Sume  corpus  et  sanguinem  Domini,  quia  anima 
tua  modo  egredietur  de  corpore  tuo,  et  hic  habes  locum  sepulture 
tue.  Propter  enim  contritionem  tuam  et  precum  nostrarum  in- 
stantiam  remissa  est  iniquitas  tua.  Frater  quoque  tuus,  qui  tecum 
uenit  de  monasterio  nostro,  in  inferno  habet  locum  sepulture.'  Itaque, 
accepta  eucharistia,  tanquam  itineris  tuto  uiatico,  egressa  est  anima 
fratris  de  corpore,  susceptaque  est  ab  angelis  lucis,  uidentibus  fra- 
tribus.     Corpus  uero  eius  sepulture  ibidem  traditum  est  a  fratribus. 

xxi.  Post '  hec  uenerunt  ad  locum  ubi  nauim  suam  dimise- 
runt.  Ascendentibus  igitur  illis  nauim,  occurrit  eis  iuuenis  quidam, 
portans  cophinum  plenum  de  panibus,  et  amphoram  aque  dulcis. 
Qui  dixit  eis  :  '  Sumite  benedictionem  de  manu  serui  uestri.  Restat 
enim  uobis  adhuc  longum  itcr,  usque  dum  inueneritis  consolationem. 
Ab  isto  enim  die  usque  ad  pascha  non  deficiet  hec  panis  et  aque 
annona.'  Accepta  igitur  boni  nuntii  benedictione,  nauigabant  per 
oceanum,  quo  Deus  uolebat  eos  duci.  Post  biduum  uero  se  semper 
reficiebant. 


•  Sch.  p.  8 ;  M  p.  94  ;  S'  5  lo.  «  r2  f,  jo^o,  3  Sch.  p.  g ;  M  p.  94  ; 

Si  5  II. 


I 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI   BRENDANI  m 

xxii.  Et '  cum  sic  ^  per  diuersa  occeani  loca  ducerentur,  quadam  die 
uiderunt  insulam  quandam  non  longe  a  se  distantem.  Et  cum  cepis- 
sent  remigando  laborare,  ut  ad  insulam  attingerent,  immisit  Deus 
uentum  cis  optatum,  ut  non  esset  necesse  eis  sic  laborare.  Cumque 
prospere  in  portu  insule  applicuissent,  precepit  homo  Dei  fratribus  ut 
exirent,  |  ipse  uero^  post  eos.  Et  cum  cepissent  circuire  insulam,  f.  77° 
iiiderunt  aquas  largissimas  manare  ex  diuersis  fontibus  plenas  pisci- 
bus.  Dixitque  tunc  Brandanus  fratribus  :  '  Faciamus  hic  opus  Dei, 
sacrificantes  Deo  agnum  immaculatum  ;  quia  hodie  cena  Domini  est.' 
Quod  cum  fecissent,  manserunt  ibi  usque  in  sabbatum  sanctum. 
Perambulantes  quoque  insulam  illam,  uiderunt  diuersos  greges  ouium 
albi  coloris  in  tanta  multitudine,  ita  ut*  uix  possint  pre  densitate 
gregum  terram  conspicere.  Tunc  Brandanus  dixit  fratribus :  '  Acci- 
pite  de  hiis  gregibus  ad  diem  festum,  quod  ^  necesse  est.  Domini 
enim  terra  et  plenitudo  eius^.'  Qui,  iussa  conplentes,  acceperunt 
vnam  de  grege  ouem,  et  hgantes  per  cornua,  quasi  domestica  ouis 
sequebatur  eos,  donec  ad  locum  ubi  uir  Dei  erat  uenirent.  Iterum 
mandauit  pius  pastor  vni  ex  fratribus,  ut  ad  gregem  accederet,  et 
agnum  immaculatum  de  eo  afferret.  Festinauit  frater  iussa  complere, 
ducens  silicet  secum  agnum  immaculatum. 

xxiii.  Et'  cum  parassent  omnia  hec  '  ad  opus  crastine  diei,  ecce  ap- 
paruit  illis  uir  predictus, habens  in  manibus  sportam  plenam  de  panibus 
subcinericiis,  et  cetera  que  erant  necessaria.  Et  cum  hec  possuisset 
ante  conspectu[m]  uiri  Dei,  cecidit  pronus  super  faciem  suam  tribus 
uicibus,  dicens  :  '  Vnde  mihi  est,  O  margarita  Dei,  ut  pascharis  in  istis 
diebus  sanctis  de  labore  manuum  mearum  ? '  Sanctus  uero  Bran- 
danus,  eleuato  illo  de  terra,  et  dato  osculo,  dixit :  '  Fili,  dic  nobis,  ubi 
uult  Dominus  noster  lesus  Christus  ut  celebremus  sanctam  suam ' 
resurrectionem.'  Cui  respondit  predictus  uir :  '  Pater,  hic  celebra- 
bitis  istud  sanctum  sabbatum  ;  uigilias  uero  et  missas  uestras  cras 
in  illa  insula,  quam  uidetis,  |  celebrare  debetis.  Sic  enim  uultf.  77"* 
Dominus,  qui  disponit  omnia  suauiter.'  Et  dum  hec  dixisset,  cepit 
obsequium  famulorum  Dei  humiliter  facere,  et  omnia,  que  necessaria 
erant,  in  crastinum  preparare.  Paratis  ergo  omnibus,  et  in  nauim 
allatis,  dixit  ille  fidelis  procurator  ad  sanctum  Brandanum  :  '  Vestra 
nauicula  non  potest  modo  amplius  portare ;  set  ego  transmittam 
uobis  post  octo  dies  que  necessaria  erunt  usque  penthecosten.' 
Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus  dixit:  'Vnde  tu  nosti  vbi  manere  possimus 
post  octo  dies?'  Et  ait :  '  Hac  nocte  eritis  in  illa  [insula]  quam 
uidetis  prope,  et  ibi  cras,  usque  in  sextam  horam  ;  et  postea  nauiga- 

'  Sch.  p.  9  ;  M  p.  95  ;  S'  §  13.       2  et  sic  cum  R=.       '  R-  f.  105''.       <  om.  R". 
6  quem  Ri  R".  6  pj.  xxiii.  i.  '  Sch.,  M  u.  s. ;  S'  §  13.  8  hoc  R-. 

9  bis  R". 


112  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

bitis  ad  insulam,  que  non  est  longe  ab  illa  contra  occidentalem 
plagam,  que  uocatur  paradisus  auium ;  in  qua  manebitis  usque  ad 
octabas  pentecostes.'  Iterum  interrogauit  eum  sanctus  Brandanus  de 
ouibus  illis,  quas  uiderunt  in  insula,  quomodo  potuissent  tam  grandes 
esse.  Erant  enim  ita  magne  sicut  boues.  Cui  ille  respondit :  '  Nemo 
colligit  lac  de  ouibus  in  hac  insula,  nec  hyemis  tempestas  eas  molestat, 
et  in  pascuis  semper  die  noctuque  morantur  ;  et  ideo  maiores  sunt 
quam  in  uestris  regionibus.'  Post  hanc  niutuam  collationem,  atque 
benedictionem  acceptam,  profecti  sunt  ipsi  ad  nauim,  et  ceperunt 
nauigare  ad  insulam  eis  preostensam. 

xxiv.  Cumque'  ad  eam  uenissent,  cepit  nauis  stare,  antequam 
portum  potuissent  tenere.  Tunc  Brandanus  precepit  fratribus  in 
mare  descendere,  et  nauim  cum  funibus  usque  ad  portum  optatum 
ducere.  Quod  et  factum  est.  Illa  uero  insula  erat  multum  setosa-, 
absque  ulla  herba,  et  in  litore  eius  nil  harene  inueniebatur.  Porro 
pernoctantibus  fratribus  in  oratione  et  uigiliis  in  insula,  solus 
f.  78"  Brandanus  remansit  in  naui.  Ipse  |  enim  sciebat,  que  et  qualis  esset 
insola.  Non  enim  in  ueritate  erat  insula  ;  set  Deus  omnipotens,  cui 
omnis  creaturaad  nutum  obedit^,  fecit  cete  grande  dorsum  suumsuper 
mare  eleuare,  ut  esset  locus  aptus'  seruis  suis  nocte  resurrectionis 
sue  ad  inhabitandum  ^  Ideo  ergo  homo  Dei  noluit  fratribus  indicare 
qualis  locus  'erat',  ubi  nocte  illa  permansissent,  ne  perterriti  in  fide 
hesitassent.  Mane  igitur  facto,  precepit  pius  pastor  sacerdotibus 
omnibus,  ut  singuli  missas  cantarent,  quod  et  fecerunt.  Cum  uero 
pater  reuerendus  in  ipsa  naui  missam  celebrasset ",  interim  fratres 
ceperunt  carnes  et  pisces  quos  secum  duxerant  de''  alia*  insula 
extra  nauim  portare,  ut  sale  condirent,  et  etiam  in  parte  decoquerent. 
Quod  cum  fecissent,  posuerunt  cacabum  super  ignem  ;  cumque  ince- 
pisset  cacabus  super  ignem'  bullire,  cepit  illa  insula  moueri.  Fratres 
uero  motum  insule  percipientes,  ceperunt  currere  ad  nauim,  implor- 
antes  auxilium  patroni  sui.  At  uir  Dei  singulos  per  manus  trahebat 
intus ;  et  sic,  relictis  omnibus  que  parauerant  in  insula,  ceperunt 
nauigare.  Porro  insula  illa  ferebatur  in  occeanum,  et  ipsi  poterant 
uidere  ignem  ardentem  per  duo  miliaria  in  mari.  Tunc  sanctus  uir 
aperuif  eis  secretum  suum,  [et]  quid"  esset  illa  insula  indicauit, 
dicens :  '  Fratres,  an  uos  admiramini,  quod  fecerit  hec  insula,  silicet 
mouendo  se  sic  per  mare  ?'  Et  dicunt  fratres  :  '  Valde  enim  admira- 
mur,  necnon  et  ingens  pauor  inuasit  nos  de  motu  eius.'  Et  dixit  eis  : 
'  Filioli,  nolite  expauescere.     Deus  enim  in  hac  nocte  reuelauit  mihi 

'  Sch.  p.  10  ;  M  p.  96  ;  S'  §  14.  «  fetosa  R^.         '  -diuit  R=.         *  apertus 

R^  R2.  ^  habit-  R^.  *  Here  there  is  a  long:  lacuna  in  S'  extending  to  the 

middle  of  §  xxxii  infra  ;  therc  is  no  indication  in  the  MS.  of  anything  being 
wanting.  '  R^  f.  105''.  "  aliqua  R^  '■•  om.  R".  '»  apparuit  R'. 

"  inquid  R' ;  and  prob.  R'  m.  pr. 


l 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  113 

per  uisionem  sacramentum  huius  rci.     Insula  enim  non  fuit  in  qua 
permansistis,  set  prior  omnium  natantium  piscis,  qui  querit  caiidam 
suam  scmper  iungerc  capiti,  et   pre  |  longitudine   sua    non    potest.  f-  78  ^ 
Nomen  quoque  eius  Casconius  '.' 

XXV.  Post''  hec  inucnerunt  quandam  insulam  ualde  deliciosam, 
herbis  floribus  et  fructuosis  arboribus  plenam.  Cum  uero  portum  ad 
intrandum  quererent,  inuenerunt  a  parte  meridionali  insule  riuulum 
dulcis  aque  uergentem  in  mare,  ibique  nauim  ad  terram  miserunt. 
Descendentibus  ueroillis  de  naui,precepit  fratribus  sanctus  Brandanus, 
ut  nauim  per  funes  contra  impetum  aquarum  traxissent,  quantum 
plus  potuissent.  Erat  autem  flumen  illud  tam  latum  sicut  longitudo 
vnius  nauis.  Fecerunt  igitur  fratres  sicut  mandauerat  eis  pater, 
tralientes  nauim  usque  ad  fontem  uiuum,  vnde  flumen  descenderat. 
Tunc  Brandanus  ait  fratribus  :  '  Ecce  Dominus  noster  lesus  Christus 
dedit  nobis  locum  ad  manendum  in  sua  sancta  resurrectione,  vere 
bonus,  uere  misericors.  Fratres  mei,  si  non  habuissemus  alia,  que 
nos  corporaliter  recrearent,  solus  iste  fons  sufficeret  nobis  in  cibum 
et  potum.' 

xxvi.  Erat '  autem  super  illum  fontem  arbor  mire  altitudinis, 
cooperta  auibus  candidissimis*,  que  tantum  cooperuerunt  arborem, 
ut  uix  humanis  oculis  possit  ad  plenum  conspici.  Cumque  hec  uir 
Dei  conspiceret,  cepit  intra  se  cogitare,  que  causa  esset,  ut  tanta 
auium  multitudo  foret  in  una  arbore  congregata.  Et  in  tantum  sibi 
sua  cogitatio  tedium  generauit,  ut  etiam  lacrimas  pro  reuelande  sue 
dubitationis  ministerio  effunderet,  dicens  :  '  Deus,  qui  renes  et  corda 
scrutaris^,  et  absconditorum  es  reuelator,  tu  scis  angustiam  cordis 
mei.  Deprecor  ergo  tuam  maiestatem,  ut  mihi  digneris  per  tuam 
magnam  misericordiam  reuelare  tuum  secretum,  quod  me  latet  de 
auibus  hiis.  Non,'  inquit,  '  Pater,  de  dignitate  mea  aut  merito  in  hac 
parte  confido ;  set  clementie  °  tue  |  enodationem  scriptuli  huius  f.  78 " 
dubitationis  committo.'  Hec  cum  apud  se  uir  celestium  desideriorum 
loqueretur,  ecce  una  ex  auibus  illis  uolabat  de  arbore,  cuius  ale 
rcsonabant  contra  nauim,  sicut  tintinabula  quaedam ;  que  sedens 
in  summitate  prore  nauis,  cepit  expandere  alas  in  signum  letitie 
interioris,  et  placido'  uultu  aspicere  in  uirum  Dei.  Statimque 
agnouit  uir  Dei,  quia  recordatus  est  Dominus  deprecationum  suarum, 
et  ait  ad  auem  :  '  Quia,'  inquit,  '  seruus  Dei  es  et  nuntius,  ideo  narra 
nobis,  vnde  uenistis  huc,  aut  per  quem  multitudo  illa  permaxima 
avium  coUecta  sit  in  unum  ibi.'     Et  ait  ad  eum  auis  :  '  Nos  sumus,' 

'  lasconius   N  (recte  ;   from   Ir.  iasc,  a  fish).        '     ^  Sch.   p.   ii  ;    M   p.  gi. 
»  Sch.  u.s. ;  M  p.  98.  *  R^  f.  io6'.  '  pg.  vii.  lo.         «  -sie  R' ;  -cie  R\ 

'  placito  Ri  R2. 


114  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

inquit,  'de  illa  magna  ruina  antiqui  hostis,  qui  ad  plenum  ei  non 
consensimus.  Et  quia  ex  parte  peccato  eius  consensimus,  contigit  et ' 
nostra  ruina.  Deus  enim  iustus  est  et  uerax  et  misericors.  Ideo 
per  suum  iudicium  misit  nos  in  hunc  locum,  vbi  penas  alias  non 
sustinemus,  nisi  quod  presentiam  Dei  uidere  non  possumus.  Tantum- 
modo  enim  alienauit  nos  a  consortio  aliorum,  qui  firmiter  steterunt. 
In  sollempnibus  quoque  diebus  et  dominicis  accipimus  corpora  tfilia 
qualia  tu  uides,  et  commoramur  hic,  laudantes  Creatorem  nostrum. 
Et  sicut  ceteri  spiritus,  qui  mittuntur  per  diuersas  aeris  partes  atque 
terrarum,  ita  et  nos  discurrere  possumus.  Tu  autem  cum  tuis 
fratribus  habes  unum  annum  in  tuo  itinere.  Adhuc  restant  sex  anni. 
Vbi  enini  hodie  celebrasti  Pascha,  ibi  onini  anno  peregrinationis  tue 
similiter  celebrabis  ^* ;  et  postea  inuenies  que  posuisti  in  corde  tuo, 
silicet  terram  repromissionis  sanctorum.'  Et  cum  hec  dixisset  auis 
illa,  leuauit  se  a'  prora,  et  cepit  uolare  ad  alias. 

xxvii.  Cum'  uero  uespertina  hora  appropinquasset,  ceperunt  omnes 
aues,  que  erant  in  arbore,  quasi  una  uoce  cantare,  percutientes  latera 
f.  78''  sua  cum  alis,  atque  |  dicentes  :  'Te  decet  ympnus  in  Syon,  et  tibi 
reddetur  uotum  in  lerusalem  ^'  Et  semper  repetebant "  predictum 
versiculum,  quasi  per  spatium  unius  hore.  Videbatur  quoque  fratri- 
bus,  quod  modulatio  illa  et  sonus  alarum  esset  quasi  planctus  quidani 
cum  suauitate.  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus  ait  fratribus :  '  Reficite 
corpora  uestra,  quia  hodie  anime  uestre  diuina  refectione  satiate  sunt.' 
Finita  uero  cena,  ceperunt  fratres  opus  Dei  peragere  ;  et  postea 
quieuerunt  usque  ad  tertiam  noctis  uigiliam.  Euigilans  uero  uir  Dei, 
cepit  fratres  ad  uigilias  noctis  sancte'  excitare.  Et  cumipseinciperet 
uersiculum  :  '  Domine,  labia  mea  aperies,  et  os  meum  annuntiabit 
laudem  tuam ','  tunc  aues  unanimiter  alis  et  ore  sonabant,  dicentes  : 
'  Laudate  Dominum,  omnes  angeli  eius,  laudate  eum,  omnes  uirtutes 
eius*.'  Similiter  ad  vesperas  per  spatium  hore  cantabant.  Cum 
autem  aurora  nocti  finem  daret,  ceperunt  omnes  cantare :  '  Et  sit 
splendor  Domini  Dei  super  nos'",'  equali  modulatione  et  longitudine 
psallendi",  sicut  in  matutinis  laudibus.  Ad  tcrtiam  quoque  horam 
cantabant  hunc  versiculum  :  '  Psallite  Deo  nostro,  psallite  regi  nostro, 
psallite  sapienter'^.'  Ad  sextani  uero  horam  canebant :  '  Illumina, 
Domine,  uultum  tuum  super  nos,  et  miserere^l'  Ad  nonam  dicebant : 
'  Ecce  quam  bonum,  et  quam  iocundum,  habitare  fratres  in  unum".' 
Ita  quoque  reddebant  aues  die  et  nocte  laudes  Deo.  Ibi  uero  per 
octauas  festi  ipsi  in  laudibus  Dei  remanserunt. 

'  et  contigit  R^.  ^  r2  f.  ,o6\  3  ad  R'  R'.  *  Sch.  p.  12 ;  M  p.  99. 

^  Ps.  Ixiv.  I.  «  reciproca&ant  N.  '  o/«.  R'.  *  Ps.  1.  17.  *  Ps.  cxlviii.  z. 
"  Ps.  Ixxxix.  17.  "  -ti  R'  R'.  "  Ps.  .\lvi.  7-8.  '»  Ps.  Ixvi.  3. 

'*  Ps.  cxxxii.  I. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  115 

xxviii.  Peracta'  autem  festiiiitate  pascliali  dixit  sanctus  Brandanus 
suis :  '  Accipite  de  aqua  fontis  istius  uobiscuni.'  Ouod  cuni  fratres 
complessent,  ecce  predictus  uir,  cum  quo  triduo  fuerunt  ante  pasclia, 
aduenit,  ferrens  secum  in  nauicula  sua  cibum  et  potum  sufficienter 
pro  eis.  Allatis  quoque  omnibus  de  naui,  coram  uiro  Dei  locutus  est 
ad  eos  sic :  '  Fratres  mei,  habetis  hic  sufRcienter  usque  ad  diem 
sanctum  pentecostcs.  Et  nolite-  bibere  de  |  hoc  fonte,  fortis  namque  f.  79'' 
est  ad  bibcndum.  Dicam  enim  uobis  naturam  eius.  Quisquis  bibcrit 
ex  eo  statim  irruet  super  eum  sopor  ;  et  non  euigilabit  usque  dum 
compleantur  viginti  quatuor  hore.  Dum  enim  manat'  de  fonte,  habct 
saporem*  et  naturam  aque.'  Hiis  dictis,  accepta  benedictione  sancti 
patris,  reuersus  est  ad  locum  suum.  Ibi  uero  manserunt  usque  ad 
festum  pentecostes.  Erat  enim  eis  delectatio  atque  refocillatio  suauis 
cantus  auium.  Die  uero  sancto  pentecostes  uenit  procurator  pre- 
dictus  ad  illos,  ducens  secum  que  necessaria  erant  ad  diem  festum. 
Cum  autem  simul  discubuissent  ad  prandium,  locutus  est  idem  pro- 
curator  dicens:  '  Et  quia,'  inquit,  'restat  uobis  adhuc  magnum  iter, 
ideo  accipite  de  hac  aqua  in  uasis  uestris,  et  de  pane  quem  potestis 
obseruare  •'■'.  Alio  uero  anno  ego  uisitabo  uos,  Deo  concedente.'  Et 
cuni  hec  dixisset,  accepta  benedictione  a  uiro  sancto,  reuersus  est  ad 
suum  locum.  Finitis  uero  festi  octauis,  iussit  uir  sanctus  suis,  ut 
nauem  pararent,  ac  de  fonte  uassa  sua  implerent.  Et  cum  omnia, 
[que]  precepit  procurator,  parata  essent,  tunc  predicta  auis  concito 
uolatu  *  uenit,  et  resedit  super  proram  nauis,  et  ait,  quasi  confortando 
eos  contra  maris  pericula  :  '  Noueritis  quod  vbi  anno  preterito  in  cena 
Domini  fuistis,  ibi  similiter  hoc  anno  eadem  nocte  eritis.  Et  sicut 
nocte  dominice  pascalis  fuisti  super  dorsum  Casconii ',  ita  hoc  anno 
tali  nocte  eritis.  Inuenietis  quoque  insolam  post  octo  menses  que 
vocatur  insula  familie  Heluei",  in  qua  celebrabitis  natiuitatem  Domini.' 
Et  cum  [hec]  predixisset  auis,  reuersa  est  in  locum  suum. 

xxix.  Tunc'  fratres  ceperunt  uela  extendere  et  nauigare.  Aues 
quoque  predicte  cantabant,  quasi  una  uoce,  dicentes :  '  Exaudi  nos, 
Deus  salutaris  noster,  spes  omnium  finium  terre,  et  in  mari  longe '".' 
Igitur  per  latitudinem  |  magni  maris  ferrebantur  per  tres  menses ;  f.  79'' 
nihilque  poterant  uidere,  nisi  celum  et  mare.  Quadam  uero  die 
apparuit  eis  insula  non  longe  distans  ;  et  cum  appropinquassent  ad 
litus,  traxit  eos  impetus  uenti  a  portu  ;  et  ita  quadraginta  dies  nauiga- 
bant  in  circuitu  insule,  nec  poterant  portum  inuenire.  Cumque 
fratres  pene  deficerent  uiribus,  ceperunt  Dominum  deprecari  cum 

'  Sch.  p.  13  ;  M  p.  100.  2  R-  f.  io6'.         '  manant  R'  R-.         ■*  soporem 

R'  R^.  ^  et   panes   siccos  quos  potestis   obseruare  in   annum   alium    N  ; 

et  pains  ses,  cest  bescuit  Jubinal  p.  73.  *  ueiatu  R'  R-.  "  lasconii  N  ; 

see  p.  113  note  i.  '  Ailbei,  Albei  N;  see  p.  46  note  i.  '  Sch.  p.  14  ; 

M  p.  102.         '"  Ps.  Ixiv.  6. 

I  2 


ii6  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

lacrimis,  ut  adesset  clementie  sue  pietas  sibi'  in  adiutorium.  Et 
cum  per  triduum  in  orationibus  et  abstinentia  sic  permansissent, 
apparuit  illis  portus-  angustus^  vbi  quasi  nauis*  unius  erat  locus. 
Ibi  quoque  apparuerunt  duo  fontes,  quorum  vnus  erat  turbidus,  et 
alter  clarus.  Porro  fratres  festinabant  cum  uasculis,  ut  haurirent 
aquam.  Quod  uidens  pius  pastor  Brandanus  ait  illis  :  '  Filioli,  nolite 
talem  rem  hic  agere  sine  Hcentia  seniorum,  qui  in  hac  ^  insula  com- 
morantur.  Aquas  enim  quas  sine  consensu  senioruni  uultis  surripere, 
cum  eorum  licentia  poteritis  optinere.'  Et  sic  aquam  concupitam 
fratres  per  imperium  patris  dimiserunt. 

XXX.  Cumque  '^  de  naui  exissent,  occurrit  eis  unus  senex  mire 
grauitatis,  cuius  facies  erat  magne  claritatis,  et  capilli  niuei  coloris. 
Hic  tribus  uicibus  in  terram  se  prostrauit,  ante  quam  uirum  Dei 
osculatus  fuit.  Sanctus  uero  Brandanus  eleuauit  eum  de  terra.  Et 
osculantibus'  se  inuicem,  tenuit  senex  manum  sancti  Brandani,  et 
sic  euntes,  ibant  ad  monasterium.  Et  cum  essent  ante  portam 
nionasterii,  stetit  sanctus  Brandanus  cum  suis  et  dixit  seni :  '  Cuius 
est  istud  monasterium  ?  et  quis  preest  illi .'  aut  unde  sint  qui  moran- 
tur  ibi  ?'  Et  cum  sic  diuersis  sermonibus  senem  interrogaret,  nullum. 
tamen  responsum  ab  eo  optinuit,  set  tantum  manu  silentium  insinua- 
bat.  Vt  ergo  homo  Dei  secretum  silentii*  per  signa  agnouit,  fratres 
,79=  amonuit,  dicens  :  '  Custodite  |  ora  uestra  a  silentii  fractione,  ne  isti 
in  alico  molestentur  per  multiloquium  uestrum.'  Et,  hiis^  dictis, 
ecce  undecim  fratres  de  monasterio  occurrunt  eis  cum  crvcibus  et 
ymnis,  dicentes  :  '  Surgite,  sancti,  de  mansionibus  uestris,  et  profi- 
ciscimini  obuiam  ueritati.  Locum  sancti'fi'cate,  plebem  benedicite, 
ut  nos,  famulos  uestros,  dignetur  Dominus  in  pace  custodire.'  Finito 
uero  uersiculo,  osculati  sunt  mutuo  se  in  osculo  pacis.  Deinde  fratres 
de  monasterio  duxerunt  eos  ad  locum  orationis '",  ut  primum  omnium 
regnum  Dei  quererent  >'  ibi.  Post  hec  abbas  monasterii  cum  suis 
monachis  ceperunt  lauare  pedes  hospitum,  cantantes  :  '  Mandatum 
nouum  do  uobis'','  et  cetera. 

xxxi.  Hiis"  finitis,  ducti  sunt  hospites  ad  refectorium,  ubi  in  uisce- 
ribus  caritatis  cum  magna  maturitate  ac  silentio  "  recreati  sunt  ex 
panibus  miri  candoris,  et  quibusdam  radicibus  incredibilis  saporis. 
Inter  duos  enim  vnus  intiger  ponebatur  panis  a  seruitore,  qui  mini- 
strabat  in   mensa ;  similiter  et  potum  de  aqua  fontis.    Tunc  quoque 

'  R2  f.  106''.  2  portum  Ri  Rl  s  angustum  R^  (not  R').  <  auis 

R'  m.  pr.  R-.  ■''  in  hac  oin.  R^.  "  Sch. ;  M  u.s.  '  -labantibus  R'  m.  pr.  R^. 
'  decretum  loci  illius  N.  ^  om.  R^.  '**  sicut  mos  est  in  occidentalibus 

partibus  add.  N.  "  Matt.  vi.  33.  "*  John  ^iii.  34  ;  cf.  the  service  for  iVIaundy 
Thursday  in  the  Roman  MissaU         "  Sch.  p.  15  ;  M  p.  103.         '*  R*  f.  107". 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  117 

abbas  monasterii  cum  magna  maturitate'  ait :  '  Ex  hoc  fonte  modo 
euni  bona  uoluntate  potestis  bibcrc,  cx  quo  ante  sine  liccntia  uoluistis 
haurire.  Ex  alio  enim  fonte,  silicet  turbido,  quem  uidistis,  lauantur 
pedes  fratrum,  quando  indigent ;  omni  vero  tempore  calidus  cst. 
Panes  uero,  quos  in  mensa  nostra  uidetis,  nobis  ignotum  est  vbi 
parantur,  aut  quis  ad  cellarium  nosirum  portat.  Certum  tamen  est 
nobis,  quod  ex  affluentia  bonitatis  Dei-  nobis  ministrantur  per  ali- 
quani  subiectam  sibi  creaturam.  Nos  quoque,  qui  sumus  hic,  uiginti 
quatuor  fratres  dc  conuentu,  cotidie  habemus  duodecim  panes  quales 
uos  uidetis  ;  ita  quod  inter  duos  semper  unus  ad  refectionem  sufficit. 
In  magnis  uero  festiuitatibus  et  dominicis  dupplicatur  annona  panis, 
ut  ex  residuo  suo  possit  quisque  cenare.  Modo  quoque  in  aduentu 
uestro  dupplicata  est  pa]nis  annona.  Et  ita  per  octoginta  annos  f. 
nutrit  nos  Deus,  a  tempore  silicet  Patricii,  et  sancti  Eluei  '  patris 
nostri  usque  modo.  NuIIa  uero  senectutis  signa  aut  languoris  inertia 
nos  molestat ;  set,  ut  uidetis,  sine  alico  impedimento  die  noctuque 
Deo  seruimus.  In  hac  etiam  insula,  in  qua  sumus,  non  indigemus 
igne  ad  preparandum  cibum  nostrum,  nec  ad  nos  calefaciendum ; 
nullum  enim  frigus  aut  estus  nos  hic  contristat.  Cum  uero  tempus 
uigiliarum  matutinalium  uenerit,  lampades  nostre,  quas  nobiscum 
duximus  de  terra  nostra,  diuina  insufflatione  accenduntur,  nilque 
minuitur  usque  in  diem''.' 

xxxii.  Post  ^  hanc  uero  dulcem  collationem  tribus  uicibus  biberunt, 
pulsauitque  abbas  signum  ;  et  fratres  cum  silentio  atque  grauitate 
a  mensa  surgentes,  ad  ecclesiam  cum  laude  diuina  properant".  Post 
alios  uero  duo  sancti  uiri  incedebant.  Cum  igitur  intrassent  in  eccle- 
siam,  ecce  alii  duodecim  fratres  exierunt  de  ecclesia  obuiam  eis, 
flectentes  genua  coram  sanctis  patribus.  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus 
ait  ad  abbatem  monasterii :  'Abba  pater,  cur  isti  non  fuerunt  refecti 
simul  nobiscum  '  ?'  Et  respondit  abbas  :  '  Ideo  non  fuerunt  nobiscum 
recreati,  quia  non  potuit  nos  simul  mensa  nostra  accipere  in  vnum. 
Modo  uero  hii  reficientur,  et  nihil  eis  deerit.  Nos  autem  intrantes 
ecclesiam  dicemus  uesperas,  ut  et  fratres  nostri  post  nos  similiter 
possint  cantare.' 

Cum  officium  vesperarum  terminassent,  cepit  sanctus  Brandanus 
considerare,  quomodo  ecclesia  illa  esset  edificata.  Erat*  enim  qua- 
drata,  et  tante  longitudinis  quante  et  latitudinis,  habens  septem 
luminaria  ;  id  est,  tria  coram_altari  quod  erat  in  medio,  et  bina  ante 
alia  duo  altaria.  Altaria  uero  erant  de  cristalio,  et  eorum  uascula 
simihter  ;    silicet  patene  et   calices,  et  urceoli,  et  cetera  uassa,  que 

1  hylaritate  N.  '  diem  R'  R=.  '  AUbei  N.  ••  hanc  add.  Ri  m.  sec. 

(wrongly).         5  Sch.  p.  i6  ;  M  p.  104.  ^  proparant  Ri  R^.         ■'  R^  t.  107". 

'  Here  S'  §  15  resumes  after  the  lacuna. 


ii8  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

pertinebant  ad  cultum  diuinum  ;  tt  sedilia  uiginti  quatuor  similiter  | 
f.  80"  in  circuitu.  Locus  quoque  ubi  abbas  sedebat  erat  inter  duos  clioros, 
et  ipse  semper  incipiebat  sanctum  officium.  In  monasterio  uero  illo 
nulla  uox  aut  strepitus '  audiebatur,  nec  aliquis  sine  consensu  senioris 
aliquid  attemptare  presumebat.  Siquis  uero  ex  fratribus  aliquod 
opus  necessarium  faciendum  haberet,  coram  abbate  humiliter  genu- 
flectebat -,  affectiones  cordis  per  signa  conuenientia  demonstrans;  et 
tunc  pater  abbas,  accepta  tabula  et  graphio,  scribens  ibi  uoluntatem 
suam,  fratri  postulanti  ad  legendum  communicabat.  Cumque  hec 
omnia  sanctus  Brandanus  diligenter  considerasset,  ait  ad  eum  pater 
abbas  :  '  Pater  mi,  iam  tempus  est,  ut  reuertamur  ad  refectorium,  ut 
omnia  fiant  cum  luce.'  Et  ita  fecerunt,  reuertentes  ad  refectorium. 
Finitis  uero  omnibus  ^  ibi,  que  necessaria  erant  pro  refectione  cor- 
porum,  omnes  cum  magna  maturitate  ad  completorium  properabant. 
Cum  uero  pater  abbas  inchoasset  uersiculum :  '  Deus  in  adiutorium 
meum  intende*',  et  dedissent  omnes  similiter  honorem  Trinitati 
semper  benedicte  °,  et  totum  officiuni  completorii  in  feruore  spiritus 
cantassent,  fratres  omnes  egrediebantur  ad  cellas  suas,  ducentes 
secum  cum  reuerentia  hospites,  in  quibus  Christum  credebant  se 
hospitio  collocare. 

xxxiii.  Abbas "  uero  monasterii  cum  sancto  Brandano  remanserunt 
in  ecclesia,  expectantes  aduentum  luminis.  Sanctus  uero  Brandanus 
interrogauit  patrem  abbatem  de  silentio 'et' conuersatione  fratrum ; 
quomodo  silicet  tam  districte  silentium  tenerent,  et  in  humana  carne 
uiuendo '  tam  arctam  uitam  tenerent.  Et  respondit  pater  abbas  cum 
magna  humilitate  ac  reuerentia :  '  Pater  mi,  coram  Christo  meo  con- 
fiteor,  quod  octoginta  anni  sunt,  postquam  uenimus  in  hanc  insula[m], 
et  nullam  humanam  uocem  audiuimus,  excepto  quando  Deo  nostro 
cantamus  laudes.  Inter  nos  enim  nulla  uox  excitatur;  set  tantum 
f.  80*  per  signum  digiti  aut  oculorum  |  quod  necesse  est  exprimitur,  et  hoc 
fit  solum  a  maioribus  natu.  Nullus  uero  nostrum  sustinuit  alicam 
infirmitatem  corporalem  aut  spiritualem,  postquam  uenimus  ad  lociim 
istum.'  Audiens  quoque  sanctus  Brandanus  talem  uiuendi  inter 
homines  niodum,  cum  cordis  deuotione  in  hec  uerba  prorupit,  dicens  : 
'  Mi  pater,  an  licet  nobis  hic  uobiscum  cohabitare  ? '  Et  respondit 
abbas  :  '  Non  licet ;  quia  non  est  Dei*  uoluntas.'  Et  addidit  dicens  : 
'  Et  cur  me,  pater  Brandane,  de  hac  re  interrogas  ?  Nonne  reuelauit 
tibi  Deus,  antequam  huc  uenisses,  qui(J  te  oporteat  facere  ?    Te  enim 

1  -dus  Ri  R=.  '^  -bant  R'  R^.  ^  orationibus  R*.  ■■  Ps.  xxxvii.  23. 

5  subiungunt  [incipiebant]  istum  uersiculum  :  '  Peccauimus,  iniuste  egimus, 
iniquitatem  fecimus.  Tu,  qui  pius  es-pater,  parce  nobis,  Domine  [es,  miserere 
nobis,  Christe].  In  pace  in  idipsum  dormiam  '  &c.  N  ;  Ps.  iv.  9,  10  (one  ot  the 
Psalms  for  Complinej.        .     «  Sch.  p.  17  ;  M  p.  106;  S»  §  16.  '  R'^  f.  107^ 

»  om.  R2. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  rig 

oportet  ad  patriam  tuam  reuerti  cum  quatuordecim  fratribus  tuis,  quia 
ibi  in  monasterio  tuo  preparauit  Deus  locum  sepulture  tue.  Duo 
uero  alii  qui  supersunt,  vnus  peregrinabitur  in  insula  anachoritarum ; 
altcr  uero  morte  turpissima  apud  inferos  condempnabitur.' 

x.x.xiv.  Cumque*  hec  inter  se  loquerentur,  ecce,  uidentibus  illis, 
quasi  sagitta  ignea  dimissa  est  per  fenestram,  que  omnes  lampades 
ecclesie  illuminauit.  Cum  uero  luminaria^  illa  accenderentur',  pre- 
dicta  sagitta  confestim  reuersa  est  per  eandem  uiam.  Iterum  quesiuit 
sanctus  Brandanus.  a  quo  extinguebantur  illa  luminaria*  mane.  Et 
ait  ad  eum  abbas  :  'Veni,  et  uide  sacramentum  Imius  rei,  de  qua 
queris.  Ecce  tu  uides  candelas  ardentes  in  medio  uasculorum.  Ex 
eis  tamen  nil  exuritur,  nec  diminuitur,  nec  mane  ulla  ignis  fauilla 
remanebit;  quia  spirituale  lumen  est.'  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus  ait : 
•  Quomodo,'  inquit,  '  in  corporali  terra  potest  ardere  lumen  spirituale 
ucl  incorporale  ? '  Respondit  senex  :  '  Nonne  uidisti^  rubum  ardentem 
in  monte  Sjmay  ?  et  tamen  remansit  rubus  illesus  ab  igne''.' 

xxxv.  Vigilantibus'  uero  sic  sanctis  per  totam  noctem  usque  mane, 
sanctus  Brandanus  licentiam  proficiscendi  petiit.  Cui  ait  senior: 
'  Mi  pater  Brandane,  tu  debes  nobiscum  natiuitatem  |  Domini  cele-  f.  80  ■= 
brare,  et  usque  ad  octauas  Epiphanie  remanere.'  Acquieuit  tunc 
Brandanus  precibus  supplicantis,  mansitque  usque  ad  tempus  as- 
signatum  a  patre.  Transactis  ergo  festiuitatibus  preassignatis,  beatus 
Brandanus  cum  suis,  accepta  annona  de  monasterio",  ac  benedictione 
sanctorum  illorum,  Deo  gubernatori  se  suumque  iter  committens, 
nauiculam  suam  ascendit.  Ferebatur  quoque  sic  per  occeani  deuia 
queque  usque  ad  initium  quadragesime. 

xxxvi.  Quadam  °  uero  tunc  die  uiderunt  quandam  insulam  non 
longe  ab  eis  distantem.  Ouam  cum  fratres  uidissent,  ceperunt  acriter 
nauigare.  lam  enim  fame  et  siti  pene  defecerant,  quia  ante  triduum 
uictus  et  potus  eorum  consum[m]atus  esL  Cum  uero  ad  insulam 
peruenissent,  sanctus  Brandanus  portum  benedixit,  ut  sic  securius 
insulam  ualerent  intrare.  Transeuntes  autem  per'"  insulam,  inue- 
nerunt  fontem  lucidissimum,  ex  quo  diuersi  generis  pisces  discur- 
rebant  in  mare.  Tunc  pius  pastor  ait  fratribus :  '  Animaduertite, 
filii,  [et]  intelligite,  qualiter  consolator  noster,  Deus,  dedit  nobis  hic 
post  magnos  labores  consolationem,  atque  quieti  locum.  Accipite 
ergo  de  piscibus  quantum  sufficit  ad  nostram'"  cenam,  et  coUigite 

'  Sch. ;  M.  u.s. ;  S^  §  17.  '  illuminaria  R-.  '  -derent  R-.  *  illuminaria  R-. 
^  lcgisti  N.  *  At  senex  ait  :  'Legi.'     Et  ille  dixit  :  '  Si  sic,  habe  fidem  Dei 

semper,  quoniam  uigilantibus  usque  mane  datur  corona  ^  add.  S'.  '  Sch.  p.  i8  ; 
M  p.  107  ;  S'  §  18.         s  R2  f.  107'*.  «  Sch.  ;  M  u  s. ;  S'  §  19.         "  om.  K-. 


120  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

de  herbis  et  radicibus  fontis  quas  Dominus  seruis  suis '  preparauit.' 
Et  cum  discipuli  secundum  mandatum  magistri  omnia  complessent, 
ait  iterum  eis  :  'Cauete,  fratres,  ne  supra  modum  utamini  liiis  aquis, 
ne  grauius  corpora  uestra  uexentur.'  Cumque  fratres  uim  precepti 
patris  in  aqua  bibenda  non  aduertissent,  set  quidam  ex  eis  singulos 
calices,  alii  binos,  aliqui  uero  ternos  bibissent,  mox  in  eos,  qui  tres 
biberunt  calices,  irruit  sopor^  trium  dierum,  et  in  eos  qui  duos, 
duorum,  et  in  illos  qui  unum,  unius  noctis  ac  diei.  Sanctus  uero 
Brandanus  sine  intermissione  deprecabatur  Deum  pro  fratribus,  | 
f.  80^  quia  per  ignorantiam  contigisset  eis  incidere  in  tale  periculum. 

xxxvii.  Transactis '  autem  hiis  tribus  diebus,  dixit  pater  ad  filios : 
'  Fugiamus,  karissimi,  istam  mortem,  ne  deterius  nobis  adueniat. 
Deus  enim  dedit  pastum  pro  necessitatibus  nostris,  et  uos  fecistis 
inde  detrimentum  uobis.  Egrediamur  ergo  de  hac  insula,  accipientes 
de  piscibus  quantum  necesse  est  per  triduum  usque  in  cenam 
Domini ;  similiter  et  de  radicibus  quantum  sufficit  per  hoc  triduum, 
et  non  plus.'  Onerantes  uero  nauem  de  omnibus,  secundum  quod 
iusserat  eis  pater  Brandanus,  ceperunt  nauigare  in  occeanum  contra 
plagam  septemtrionalem'.  Post  tres  dies  et  noctes,  cessante  uento, 
factum  est  [mare]  pro  nimia  tranquillitate  quasi  coagulatum.  Tunc 
Brandanus  iussit  suis  ut  remigare  cessarent,  et  Deo  gubernare^ 
nauim  permitterent.  Cumque  fratres  hoc  facerent,  ferebatur  nauis 
per  diuersa  loca  occeani  circiter  uiginti  dies.  Reficiebantur  uero 
semper  post  triduum. 

xxxviii.  Quadam"  autem  die  apparuit  illis  quedam  insulaa  remotis' 
ualde,  ita  quod  quasi  nubes  quedam  uideretur  eis.  Dixitque  Bran- 
danus  ad  suos  :  '  Filioli,  cognoscitis  uos  insulam  illam  ? '  At  illi : 
'  Non  cognoscimus,  pater.'  Tunc  ipse  ait :  '  Ego  eam' cognosco. 
Ipsa  est  enim  illa  insula,  in  qua  altero  anno  in  cena  Domini  fuimus, 
vbi  bonus  procurator  com[m]oratur.'  Ouo  audito  /ratres  ceperunt 
laboriosius  remigare,  ut  citius  possint  ad  locum  quietis  peruenire. 
Quod  cum  pius  pater  uidisset,  ait :  '  Nolite,  fratres,  sic  membra  uestra 
laboribus  inordinatis  uexare,  set  Deo  gubernatori  nauim  permittite 
dirigcre.  Dimittite  ergo  sibi  nauim  gubernare,  quia  nuncquam  deserit, 
nisi  prius  deseratur,  nuncquam  deficit,  nisi  homo  sibi  seruiendo 
deficiat.'  Cum  hiis  monitis  acquiescerent  fratres,  appropinquantes 
f.  8j  ■"  ad  litus  insule,  occurrit  eis  in  nauicula  \  idem  procurator,  et  duxit 
illos  ad  portum,  vbi  preterito  anno  descenderunt  de  naui,  magnifi- 
cans'  Deum,  et  osculans  pedes  singulorum,  incipiens  a  sancto  Brandano 

1  otu.  R^.  -  b:s  R'.  '  Sch.  p.  19  ;  M  p.  108  ;  S'  §  20.  *  septrionalem 
R2  51.  i^  R»  f.  108";  gubernante  R2.  «  Sch.  p.  19;  M  p.  109;  S' 3  21. 

'  a  longe  N.  "  eum  R'  R^.  s  .ficens  R'  R^. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  121 

usque  ad  ultimum,  diccns:  'Mirabilis  Deus  in  sanctis  suis,  Deus 
Israel,  ipse  dabit  uirtutem  et  fortitudinem  plebi  sue,  benedictus 
Deus'.'  Et  finito  versiculo,  et  ablatis  de  naui  utensilibus  fratrum, 
extendit  tentorium,  et  parauit  balneum ;  erat  enim  cena  Domini. 
Post  hec  induit  omnes  fratres  nouis  uestimentis,  et  sic  fecit  obsequium 
per  triduum.  Fratres  uero  ibidem  passionem  Domini  cum  magna 
diligentia  cclebrabant,  c.xpectantes  ibi  usque  in  sabbatum  sanctum. 

x.\.\ix.  Finitis'  autcm  officiis  diei  sabbati,  immolatisque  hostiis 
salutaribus  Deo,  atque  cena  consum[m]ata,  dixit  idem  procurator  ad 
eos :  '  Ite,  et  ascendite  nauem  uestram,  ut  ualeatis  celebrare  domi- 
nicam  resurrectionem,  ubi  anno  altero '  celebrastis,  ibidem  usque  in 
sextam  horam  commorantes,  et  postea  ad  insulam,  que  uocatur 
paradisus  auium,  peruenietis,  ubi  anno  preterito  tali  tempore  fuistis 
usque  ad  octauas  pentecostes.  Asportate  quoque  uobiscum  omnia 
que  necessaria  sunt  de  cibo  et  potu  interim.  Ego  enim  cum  Dei 
adiutorio  uisitabo  uos  altera  die  dominica.'  Onerauit  uero  ipse  nauim 
cibo  et  potu,  prout  potuit  capere.  Post  hec,  data  mutua  benedictione, 
ascendunt  nauim,  et  ceperunt  nauigare'  usque  ad  aliam  insulam. 
Cum  appropinquassent  ad  locum  ubi  ascendere  debuissent,  apparuit 
illis^  cacabus,  quem  altero  anno  ibi  dimisserant.  Tunc  sanctus"' 
Brandanus,  descendens '  cum  suis  de  naui,  cepit  cantare  ympnum 
trium  puerorum  usque  in  finem.  Finito  autem  ympno,  uir  Dei 
amonuit  fratres,  dicens :  '  O  filioli,  uigilate  et  orate,  ut  non  intretis 
in  temptationem'.  \  Considerate  enim,  quomodo  Deus  subiugat  im-  f.  81  ^» 
manissimam  bestiam  subtus  nos  sine  ullo  impedimento.'  Cumque 
ex  uerbis  patris  essent  filii  in  fide  confirmati,  ita  [ut]  non  timerent' 
tante  bestie  motum,  in  laudibus  Dei  noctem  illam  usque  ad  matutinas, 
sparsim  per  insulam  orantes,  continuauerunt.  Mane  quoque  in  unum 
conuenientes  fratres,  singuli  sacerdotes  hostiam  salutarem  Deo  usque 
ad  tertiam  horam  offerebant.  Tunc  uir  Dei  Brandanus  agnum  im- 
maculatum  Deo  optulit,  dicens  :  '  In  altero  anno  hic  resurrectionem 
Domini  celebraui ;  ita  et  hoc  anno  propono  celebrare.'  Postquam 
uero  omnia,  que  ad  reuerentiam  dominice  resurrectionis  cedebant, 
ibi  consum[m]assent,  profecti  sunt  ad  insulam  auium,  sicut  in  alio 
anno  fecerunt. 

xl.  Appropinquantibus"  quoque"  ad  portum  insule  omnes  aues 
de  insula  humanis  uocibus  concorditer  uociferantes  dicebant :  'Salus 
Deo  nostro  sedcnti  super  tronum,  et  agno'-.'    Et  iterum  :  '  Dominus 

'  Ps.  Ixvii.  36.  2  Sch. ;  M  u.s. ;  S'  §  22.  '  altero  anno  R'.  *  R^  f.  108*. 
s  illius  R2.  6  g„   R2_  7  .(Jes  R*.  «  Matt.  xxvi.  41  ;   Mark  xiv.  38. 

'  limuenint  R^  "     Sch.  p.  20;  M  p.  iio;  S'  §  23.  "  iliis  add.  M. 

'^  Rev.  vii.  10. 


122  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

Deus  illuxit  nobis  ;  constituite  diem  sollempnem  in  condensis  usque 
ad  cornu  altaris^'  Et  hec  uerba  repetebant  quasi  per  dimediam 
horam,  usque  quo  uir  sanctus  cum  suis  resedissent  in  suo  tentorio. 
Cumque  ibi  festa  paschaha  usque  in  octauas  pasce  peregissent,  ecce 
predictus  procurator  aduenit  die  dominico  in  albis,  sicut  promiserat, 
portans  secum  que  ad  usum  pauperum  Christi  erant  necessaria. 

xli.  Et'^  cum  ad  mensam  sedissent,  predicta  auis  sedit  in  prora 
nauicule,  sonitum  faciens  expansis  alis  sicut  sonitum  organi  magni. 
Et  tunc  uir  Dei  agnouit,  quod  aliquid  sibi  indicare  uoluit.  Fratribus 
uero  aurem  intente  ad  uocem  auis  prebentibus,  ait  eis :  '  Deus  dis- 
posuit  uobis'  quatuor  tempora,  usque  dum  finiantur  septem  anni 
peregrinationis  vestre.  In  cena  enim  omni  anno  debetis  esse  cum 
uestro  procuratore,  |  qui  presens  est ;  in  dorso  uero  belue  pasca 
celebrabitis;  set  in  hac  insula  nobiscum  usque  in  octauas  pentecostes 
remanere*  debetis.  Apud  uero  familiam  sancti  Helbey''  natiuitatem 
Domini  celebrabitis.  Completis  quoque  septem  annis  peregrinationis 
uestre,  periculis  multis  antecedentibus,  inuenietis  terram  repromis- 
sionis  sanctorum,  quam  sollicite  queritis  ;  et  ibi  habitabitis  quadraginta 
diebus ;  et  postea  educet  uos  Deus  ad  terram  natiuitatis  vestre.' 
Sanctus  Brandanus,  ut  hec  audiuit,  in  terram  se  prostrauit,  gratiarum 
referens  suo  Saluatori  actiones.  Hiis  peractis,  reuersa  est  auis  in 
locum  suum. 

xlii.  Porro*  procurator,  finita  fratrum  refectione,  ait  ad  eos  :  '  Deo 
concedente  atque  adiuuante,  reuertar  ad  uos  in  die  aduentus  Spiritus 
Sancti  super  apostolos  cum  expensis  pro  uestris  necessitatibus 
oportunis.'  Accepta  igitur  benedictione  sancti  patris  Brandani  et  cete- 
rorum  fratrum,  regressus  est  in  locum  suum  idem  procurator.  Porro 
ipsi  ibidem  manserunt  ad  tempus  prefinitum  eis  ab  eo.'  Consum- 
[m]atis  itaque  diebus  festis,  precepit  uir  Dei  suis,  ut  se  ad  iter 
prepararent,  ac  uascula  sua  de  fonte  implerent.  Cumque  omnia,  que 
necessaria  erant  ad  nauigandum,  pararent,  ecce  aduenit  predictus 
procurator  cum  naui  sua  onerata  cibo  et  potu  ad  eos.  Et  mittens, 
que  attulerat,  in  nauim,  osculatis  singulis  fratribus*,  reuersus  est  ad 
insulam  suam.  Post  hec  nauigantes  per  incerta  occeani  loca  per 
quadraginta  dies,  uitam  duxerunt  in  laboribus. 

xliii.  Quadam'  die,  cum  sic  nauigarent,  ecce  apparuit  post  illos 
bellua  marina"'  mire  magnitudinis,  de  naribus  suis  undas  expuens,  ac 

•  Ps.  cxvii.  27.  2  Sch.;  M  u.s. ;  S'  §  24.  '  quatuor  loca  per  N  add., 

probably  rightly.         "  R2  f.  108-.         ^  Heluey  R' ;  Ailbei  N.  «  Sch.  p.  21  ; 

M.  p.  III ;  S'  §  25.  '  procuratore  add.  R'  m.  sec.  (wrongly).  *  il  eut 

pris  pais  k  tous  Jubinal  p.  83.         '  Sch.  ;  M  u.s.  ;  S'  §  26.         "  maxima  R'. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  123 

inarc  sicut  seua  tempestas  commouens,  que  uelocissimo  cursu  ad  eos 
deuorandos  properabat.  Et  cum,  uisa  hac  terribili  maris  turba|tione,  f.  81  '^ 
fratres  in  se  turbarentur,  sanctus  Brandanus  in  Domino  suo  semper 
confidens,  ait :  '  Nolite  e.xpauescere,  uos  qui  estis  modice  fidei. 
Nonne  Petrus  apostolus  super  undas  ambulauit,  quandiu  non  dubi- 
tauit  ?  Mox  uero,  ut  in  fide  titubauit,  submergi  incepit.  Deus  ergo, 
qui  defensor  noster  est  semper,  ipse  liberabit  nos  de  faucibus  huius 
bestie.  Et  non  solum  a  conatu  huius  belue  nos  defendet',  set  de 
omnibus  periculis  huius  maris.' 

xliv.  Et"  cum  bestia  appropinquaret  eis,  antecedebant '  unde  mire 
altitudinis  eam  ad  nauim,  ita  ut  ex  hoc  esset  fratribus  pauoris  maior 
occasio.  Tunc  uenerabilis  senex*,  extendens  manus  in  celum,  ait: 
'  Domine,  libera  nos,  sicut  liberasti  Dauid  de  manu^  GoUe  gigantis. 
Domine,  libera  nos,  sicut  liberasti  Danielem  de  faucibus  leonum  in 
lacu.  Domine,  libera  nos,  sicut  liberasti  lonam  prophetam  de  uentre 
ceti  magni,  cum  esset  ibi  tribus  diebus  et  totidem  noctibus.'  Finita 
uero  oratione,  ecce  alia  belua  ab  occidente  ueniens,  ignemque  ex  ore 
euomens,  ferocissimum  iniit  contra  aliam  conflictum.  Tunc  sanctus 
Brandanus  fratribus  ait :  '  Uidete,  fihoU,  magnalia  Dei  omnipotentis, 
et  attendite  obedientiam  quam  Creatori  exhibet  creatura.  Modo, 
karissimi,  expectate  finem  huius  belli,  quod  bestia  pro  nobis  contra 
bestiam  pugnat,  et  nil  nobis  nocebit,  set  et  materiam  laudis  Dei  nostri  ' 
ministrabit.'  Et  hiis  dictis,  bestia  persequens  dirupta  est  in  tres  partes 
coram  eis.et  altera  reuersa  est  post  uictoriam  ad  locum  unde  uenerat. 

xlv.  Altera*  die  uiderunt  quandam  insulam  ualde  amenam  ar- 
boribus  plenam.  Appropinquantibus  autem  ad  eam,  uiderunt 
partem  illius  bestie  occise  in  litore  maris.  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus 
ait  fratribus  :  '  Ecce,'  inquit,  '  pars  illius  bestie,  que  nos  deuorare 
cu|piebat ;  modo  uero  eam  deuorate,  et  de  eius  carnibus  reficia-f.  82» 
mini.  Longo  enim  tempore  in  hac  insula  morabimini.  Leuate 
ergo  nauiculam  nostram  in  altum,  et  querite  tentorio  vestro  locum 
aptum.'  Cumque  fratres  hec  omnia  complessent,  ait  eis  pius  pater : 
■  Accipite  nunc,  karissimi,  de  carnibus  huius  belue,  quantum 
sufficiat  uobis  per  tres  menses.  Hac  enim  nocte  cadauer  huius  belue 
deuorabitur  ab  aliis  bestiis.'  Peractis  uero  omnibus,  dixerunt  discipuli 
ad  Brandanum  :  '  Abba  pater,  quomodo  hic  possumus  uiuere  sine 
aqua  ? '  Ouibus  ille  ait :  '  Numquid  difficilius  est  Deo  dare  nobis 
aquam  quam  uictum  ?  Qui  enim  dedit  escam,  dabit  et  potum.'  Et 
iterum  ait  eis :  '  Ite  nunc  contra  plagam  meridionalem  insule,  et 
inuenietis  ibi  fontem  aque  uiue,  et  herbas  multas ;  et  de  hiis  omnibus 

'  -dat  Ri  R-.  2  Seh.  p.  21 ;  M  p.  iia;  S'  §  27.  «  -sed-  Ri  R«. 

*  R=  f.  108'^.         5  de  manu  bis    R'  m.  pr.         *  Sch.  p.  22  ;  M  p.  112;  S'  §  28. 


124  VITAE  SANCTORYM  HIBERNIAE 

sumite  cum  mensura.'    Fratres  uero  euntes,  inuenerunt  omnia,  sicut 
predixit  eis  homo  Dei. 

xlvi.  Manserunt'  igitur  in  illa  insula  per  tres  menses,  eo  quod 
tempestas  magna  per  tantum  tempus  erat  in  mari.  Et,  sicut 
predixerat  eis  "^  uir  Dei,  nil  inuenerunt  de  carnibus  belue  mane 
sequentis  diei.  Reuersi  uero  ^  fratres  ad  Brandanum,  dixerunt  ad 
eum:  'Abba  pater,  sicut  predixisti  nobis  de  belua  illa,  ita  factum  est.' 
Ait  iterum  ad  eos  pius  pater:  '  Aliud  uobis  dicam  adhuc  signum  ; 
piscis,  qui  iuit  de  sagena  piscatorum  hac  nocte,  cras  huc  ducetur,  et 
ex  eo  uos  reficiemini.'  Quod  et  factum  est.  Nam  sequenti  die, 
exeuntibus  fratribus  ad  htus  insule,  inuenerunt  piscem  ibi  magnuni, 
sicut  predixit  sanctus  Brandanus.  Tulerunt  ergo  de  carnibus  illius 
secum,  quantum  sibi  sufficere  ad  refectionem  credebant.  Et  ait  uir 
Dei  ad  eos  :  '  Istas  diligenter  condite  carnes  sale,  quia  usus  earum 
f.  82'  erit  uobis  pro  tempore  necessarius*.  |  Faciet  enim  Dominus  serenum 
tempus  cras,  et  cessabit  tempestas,  et  nauigare  poterimus  de  loco 
isto.  Precepit  quoque  eis  uassa  sua  de  aqua  fontis  implere  propter 
casuum  futurorum  euentum  ;  herbas  uero  atque  radices  ad  suum 
opus  colligere  precepit,  quia  uir  sanctus  postquam  sacerdotis  functus 
est  officio,  nil  commedit  in  quo  spiritus  uite  erat.  Onerata  igitur 
naui  ex  hiis  que  uir  Dei  mandauit,  profecti  sunt  contra  meredionalem  ^ 
■  plagam. 

xlvii.  Cumque"  sic  per  incerta  pelagi  deuia  transirent,  uiderunt 
vnam  longe  ab  eis  positani  insulam.  Tunc  uir  Dei  dixit  suis :  '  Tres 
populi,'  inquit,  '  in  illa  sunt  insula,  quorum  unus  est  puerorum,  alter 
uero  iuuenum,  tertius  autem  senum.'  Et  addidit,  dicens :  'Vnus 
quoque  ex  fratribus  nostris  peregrinabit  cuni  illis.'  Tunc  discipuli 
querebant  ab  eo,  quis  eorum  esset  cum  illis  permansurus.  Et  cum 
permansissent  interrogantes,  quisnam  esset,  qui  ibidem  nioraretur, 
respondit  uir  Dei :  '  Iste  est,'  inquit,  '  ille,  qui  cum  illis  permanebit.' 
Et  is  erat  vnus  ex  illis  tribus  fratribus,  qui  secuti  sunt  uirum  Dei  de 
monasterio,  cum  paratus  esset  nauem  intrare.  Post  hec  applicuerunt 
ad  litus  illius  amene  ualde  insule.  Erat  enim  illa  insula  tante 
planitiei,  quod  uidebatur  equalis  in  superficie  esse  mari.  Ibi  uero 
erant  tres  secte  uirorum,  ut  predixit  sanctus  Brandanus ;  silicet 
puerorum,  iuuenum,  et  senuni.  Et  sicut  etate  uidebantur  esse 
distincti,  ita  et  loco  ab  inuicem  disting[u]ebantur.  Erat  enim  quasi 
iactus  lapidis  inter  turmam  semper  et  turmam.  Et  cum  una  pars 
staret,   altera   sedebat  "^.     Et   qui   stabant,   hunc  versiculum,   silicet : 

'  Sch.  p.  22;  M  p.  113;  S' §  29-  =  ei  R2.  '  R^  f.  109"».  ••  -riis  R' R^. 
"  sic  Ri   R^   S^ ;  septentrionalera   N.  *  Sch.   p.  23;   M  p.  114;  S'  §  30. 

'  R2  f.  109''. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  125 

'  Ibunt  sancti  de   uirtute  in  uirtutem,   uidcbitur   Deus  deorum  in 
Syon ','   dccantabant.     Et    cum  ^    una    turma   stando  hunc  versum 
decantaret,  altera   surjgendo  eundem  incipiebat.    Et  ita  sine  inter-  f.  82 " 
missione  alica  semper  iaciebant. 

xlviii.  Turma^  quoque  prima,  silicet  puerorum,  uestiebatur  pannis 
candidis,  secunda  turma  uestibus  iacinctinis,  tertia  uero  dalmaticis 
quasi  purpureis.  Et  tunc  erat  hora  diei  quarta,  quando  ad  litus  insule 
peruenerunt.  Cum  autem  esset  hora  sexta,  ceperunt  tres  turme  simul 
decantare  hos  psalmos,  sihcet :  '  Deus  misereatur'  nostri ','  et,  '  Deus 
in  adiutorium  meum  intende^,'  et,  'Credidi,  propter  quod  locutus',' 
et  vnam  post  psalmos  orationem.  Similiter  ad  horam  nonam  dicebant 
tres  psahnos,  silicet :  '  De  profundis  *,'  et,  '  Ecce  quam  bonum  ",'  et, 
'  Lauda,  lerusalem,  Dominum '".'  Ad  vesperas  uero  canebant :  'Te 
decet  ympnus",'  et, '  Benedic,  anima  mea,  Dominum'^,'  et, '  Laudate, 
pueri,  Dominum  ".'  Et  post  hos  psalmos  dicebant  sedendo  quindecim 
graduum  psalmos".  Et  post  hec  omnia  ecce  nubes  candida  obum- 
brauit  insulam,  pre  cuius  spissitudine  non  poterant  ipsi  uidere 
insulam,  nec  habitantes  in  ea.  Audiebant  enim  uoces  canentium  ac 
Deum  laudantium  usque  ad  uigilias  matutinales,  et  tunc  inceperunt 
psalmum  :  '  Laudate  Dominum  de  celis '",'  usque  in  finem.  Et  post 
hec  omnia  cantabant  duodecim  primos  psalmos  per  ordinem  psalterii. 
Dum  uero  dies  illu[ce]sceret",  discoopcrta  est  insula  a  nube  ;  et  tunc 
cantabantalios  sex  psalmos,  silicet :  '  Miserere  mei,  Deus",'  et, '  Deus, 
Deus  meus,  ad  te  de  luce'",'  et,  '  Domine,  refugium",'  et,  '  Omnes 
gentes'",'  et,  '  Deus,  in  nomine  tuo-','  et,  'Dilexi^^V 

xhx.  Et"'  post  hec  omnia  immolabant  agnum  immaculatum  Deo 
omnipotenti ;  et  omnes  communicabant,  dicentes :  '  Hoc  sacrum 
corpus  Domini  ct  Saluatoris  nostri  sanguinemque  sumite  uobis  in 
uitam  eternam.' 

1.  Itaque  -'    cum   omnia    complessent,    ecce    duo    uiri    de    turma 
iuuenum    ueniunt    portantes    cophinum    plenum    de    fructibus    eis 
incognitis  colore  purpureis,  sapore  ualjde  suauibus,  dicentes   ei[s]:f.  83* 
'  Sumite  de  fructibus  insule  uirorum  fortium,  et  reddite  nobis  fratrem 
nostrum,  et   ite  in   pace.'     Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus   ad  se  uocauit 

»  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  8.  2  om.  R-.  ^  gch.  ;  M  u.s.  ;  S'  §  31.  *  -riatur  Ri  R». 
'  Ps.  Ixvi.  I.  "  Ps.  Ixix.  2.  '  Ps.  cxv.  I.  locutus  om.  R-.  '  Ps.  cxxix.  i. 
*  Ps.  cxxxii.  I.  '**  Ps.  cxlvii.  i.  ''  Ps.  Ixiv.  i.  '-  Pss.  cii.  i;  ciii.  i. 

"   Ps.  cxii.  1.  '*  Pss.  cxix-c.Nxxiii.         '^  Ps.  cxlviii.  i  ;  M  and  Sch.  (not  SM 

add :    deinde   '  Cantate    Domino  ',   et  tertium  :    '  Laudate  Dominum   in   sanctis 
eius.'     Pss.  cxlix.  i ;  cl.  i.  '"^  illusceret  R'  S' ;  illuceret  R^,  illucesceret  N. 

"  Ps.  1.  I.       '*  Ps.  Ixii.  I.       "  Ps.  Ixxxix.  i.         ™  Ps.  xlvi.  i.       ='  Ps.  liii.  i. 
--  Ps.  cxiv.  I ;  '  Dilexi,  quoniam  '  cum  Alleluia  N,  ^  Sch.  p.  24 ;  M  p.  115 ; 

S'  §  32.    •     "  Sch. ;  M  u.  s.  ;  S'  §  33. 


126  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

predictum  fratrem,  et  dixit  ei :  '  Osculare  fratres  tuos,  karissime,  et 
vade  cum  illis,  qui  inuitant  te.  Dico  tibi,  frater,  quia  bona  hora  te 
mater  tua  genuit,  quando  meruisti '  habitare  cum  tali  collegio.'  Et 
osculatis  fratribus  per  ordinem,  ait  illi  sanctus  Brandanus :  '  Fili, 
recordare^  quanta  beneficia  condonauit  tibi  Deus  in  hoc  seculo  ;  uade 
ergo  modo  cum  hiis,  et  ora  pro  nobis.'  Et  ualedicens  fratribus, 
secutus  est  duos  illos  iuuenes  ad  scolas  sanctorum  illorum.  Tunc  in 
aduentu  eius  illi  hunc  versum  psalmi  decantantes  dixerunt :  '  Ecce 
quam  bonum,  et  quam  iocundum,  habitare  fratres  in  unum  '.'  Et  post 
hec :  'Te  Deum  laudamus,'  alte  cantabant ;  et  osculantes  eum, 
sociatus  est  collegio  uirorum  illorum. 

li.  Post*  hec  omnia  ipsi  ab  insula  discesserunt,  nauigantes  per 
deuia  queque.  Et  cum  hora  prandii  adesset,  iussit  pius  pater  de 
fructibus  illis  dari  fratribus  pro  refectione.  Ipse  uero  sumens  vnum 
racemum  ex  fructibus,  admirans  eius  magnitudinem,ait :  '  Dico  uobis, 
fratres,  quod  nunquam  memini ''  me  uidisse  aut  legisse  alicuius 
fructus  racemos  tante  magnitudinis.'  Erant  enim  tam  magni  fructus 
sicut  pila  magna.  Tunc  precepit  uir  Dei  a[f]ferri  sibi  uas ;  et 
exprimens  succum  de  una  \aia  attulit  unam  libram ;  quam  diuidens 
in  duodecim  uncias,  dedit  vnicuique  vnciam  vnam.  Et  sic  fratres 
reficiebantur  duodecim  dies,  habentes  post  sumptionem  huius  fructus 
saporem  mellis  in  ore.  Postquam  hanc  mirabilem  annonam  finierunt, 
ius[s]it  sanctus  Brandanus  fratribus  per  triduum '  ieiunare. 

f.  83"  lii.  Quod'  cum  complessent,  ecce  auis  |  mire  magnitudinis  uolauit 
ad  eos*,  que  in  ore  ramum  arboris  eis  incognite  portans,  ante  con- 
spectu[m]  uiri  Dei  in  naui  posuit.  Ramus  uero  in  summitate  habuit 
botrum  magnum  rubicundum.  Auis  uero,  relicto  ibi  ramo,  recessit. 
Tunc  uir  Dei  dixit  fratribus  :'  '  Sumite,  karissimi,  prandium,  quod 
Deus  nobis  per  ministerium  huius  auis  transmisit.'  Erant  enim  uue 
illius  tam  magne  sicut  poma  silvestria.  Has  uuas  diuisit  uir  Dei 
fratribus  per  duodecim  dies  ;  et  ita  reficiebantur  ex  eis  per  tot  dies. 
Hiis  expletis,  remandauit  sanctus  suis  ieiunium  triduanum. 

liii.  Tertia'  post  hec  die  uiderunt  aliam  insulam  coopertam 
arboribus  densissimis  habentibus  fructum  predictarum  uuarum 
incredibili  fertilitate,  ita  ut  rami  arborum  ineuruarentur  deorsum. 
NuIIa  arbor  ibi  sine  fructu,  et  eiusdem"  speciei  erant  omnes  arbores. 
Et  cum  applicuissent  ibi,  uir  Dei  descendens  de  naui,  cepit  circuire 

■  R2  f.  I09<^.  '^  quia  ndd.  R^.  3  pg.  cxxxii.  i.  *  Sch.  p.  24  ;  M  p.  116; 
S'  5  34.  ^"  neii  R'  R- ;  memini  R^  m.  sec.  "  per  triduum  suis  fratribus  R^. 
'  Sch.  p.  25  ;  M  p.  ir6 ;  S'  §  35.  *  seditque  super  nauis  tentorium  arfrf.  S'. 
»  Sch.  ;  M  u.s. ;  S'  §  36.  ">  R^  f.  109«'. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  127 

insulam.  Erat  cnim  odor  iilius  sicut  odor  malorum  punicorum. 
Fratres  uero  adhuc  expectabant  in  naui,  donec  seruus  Dei  Brandanus 
rediret.  Interim  autem  flabat  illis  uentus  cum  suauissimo  odore  de 
fragrantia  arborum,  quo  multum  ipsi  recreabantur.  In  hac  insula 
reperit  pius  pater  Brandanus  sex  fontes  irriguos,  herbis  uirentibus 
habundantes^  Et  reuersus  ad  fratres,  portauit  secum  de  fructibus 
insule ;  dixitque  eis :  '  Ascendite^  de  naui  in  terram  et  figite  tentoria, 
et  sumite  de  fructibus  huius  insule ;  quoniam  opus  est  nobis  refici 
ex  eis.'  Et  hiis  fructibus  reficiebantur  per  quadraginta  dies,  quibus 
in  insula  morabantur.  Post  hec  ascenderunt  nauem,  portantes  secum 
de  fructibus  insule,  quantum  poterat  nauis  eorum  portare. 

liv.  Et'  cum  ab  insulla  illa  discederent,  apparuit  illis  bestia  una,  f.  83' 
que  griphes  uocatur.  Quam  cum  fratres  uiderent  ad  se  uolare, 
timuerunt  ualde,  eo  quod  magna  et  terribihs  esset.  Et  dixerunt  ad 
patrem  Brandanum  :  '  Succurre,  pater ;  quia  ad  deuorandum  nos 
bestia  ista  festinat.'  Quibus  ipse  ait :  '  Nolite  timere  eam,  quia 
Dominus  noster  defendet*  nos  ab  impetu  eius.'  Et  cum  bestia 
extenderet  ungulas  ad  rapiendum  seruos  Dei,  ecce  subito  occurrit 
ei  auis,  que  ante  eis  portauerat  ramum  cum  fructu ;  et  committens 
bellum  cum  griffe,  euuisis  primo  oculis  eius,  postea  occidit  eum. 
Erat  enim  bestia  sic  magna  sicut  bos ;  ungulos  tamen  habuit  [et] 
alas  sicut  aquila.  Et  cecidit  cadauer  eius  in  mare  coram  fratribus ; 
superius  enim  in  aere  belligerabant.  Post  hec  recessit  auis  cum 
uictoria  ad  locum  unde  uenerat.  Ipsi  uero  de  tanto  periculo  liberati, 
gratias  Deo  referebant^,  qui  tam  magnifice  eos  de  tam  horribili  .bestia 
defendit.  Post  hec  uenerunt  ad  insulam  monachorum  Heluei^,  ubi 
natiuitatem  Domini  celebrantes,  manserunt  ad  tempus.  Accepta 
igitur  benedictione  abbatis  illius  monasterii  ac  suorum  monachorum, 
circuibant  mare,  mirabiiia  Dei  in  profundo  maris  uidentes''. 

Iv.  Quodam '  uero  tempore,  cum  festiuitatem  sancti  Petri  apostoli 
deuote  celebrarent ',  ecce  mare  tam  clarum  eis  apparuit,  ut  limpide 
uiderent'"  omnia,  que  in  profundum  maris,  sicut  que  superius  erant. 
Aspiciebant  enim  ibi  diuersa  bestiarum  genera,  sicut  greges  ouium 
in  pascuis.  Cumque  ex  terribili  bestiarum  tantarum  apparitione 
fratres  multum  essent  perterriti,  rogabant  patrem  ut  cum  silentio 
missam  ipse  celebrasset,  ne  sono  uocis"  eius  belue  prouocate  im- 
petum  in  eos  facerent.  Quibus  |  pater  pius  respondit  dicens;  '  Miror  f.  83'' 
imprudentiam  uestram,  qui  timetis  nunc  bestias  istas.'  Et  addidit : 
'  Quare,'  inquit,  '  non  timuistis  omnium  bestiarum  deuoratricem,  in 

'  habitum  dantes  R-.  ^  desc-  Scli.  '  Sch.  p.  25  ;  M  p.  117  ;  S'  §  37. 

<  -dat  R'  R-.  '  offer-  R«m.pr.  «  Ailbei  N.  '  Ps.  cvi.  24.  8  Sch.  p.  26; 
M  p.  118;  S'  §  38.         3  -brassent  R^.         '"  R^  f.  iio".         »  uocis  bis  R'. 


128  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

cuius  dorso  frequenter  sedentes  atque  psallentes  fuistis,  insuper 
et  carnes  coxistis  ?  Et  qui  tunc  non  timuistis,  cur  modo  pauidi  estis  ? 
Nonne  Dominus'  omnium  est  Deus  noster  lesus  Cliristus,  qui  potest 
domare  naturam  omnium  bestiarum?'  Et  cum  hec  dixisset,  cepit 
missani  eo  modo  quo  altius  poterat,  celebrare''.  Cumque  bestie 
sonitum  uociferantis  audissent,  eleuantes  se  supra  mare,  natabant 
in  circuitu  nauis,  a  longe  tamen  a  naui.  Tanta  quoque  erat  bestiarum 
multitudo,  ut  ultra  eas  nequirent  ipsi  mare  uidere.  Sic  quoque  huc 
illucque  se  circa  nauem  niouebant,  ut'  corpori  Creatoris  sui  uiderentur 
exhibere  reuerentiam  *.  Cum  uero  uir  sanctus  missam  celebrasset, 
bestie  per  diuersas  maris  semitas  discurrendo  se  rapuerunt.  Post 
hec,  uento  prospero  eos  perducente,  uix  per  octo  dies  mare  illud 
clarum  potuerunt  pertransire. 

Ivi.  Quadam "  uero  die,  dum  missas  celebrarent  in  naui,  apparuit 
illis  columpna  quedam  mire  altitudinis,  ad  quam  ante  tres  'dies'* 
non  potuerunt  pertingere.  Cum  autem  ad  eam  appropinquassent, 
sum[m]itatem  eius  pre  altitudine  non  poterant  uidere.  Columpna 
uero  hec  erat  cooperta  a  summo  usque  deorsum  ex  tam  raro  canopeo, 
ut  nauis  posset  transire  per  foramina  canopei  illius.  Considerantes 
uero  subtilitatem  artis  in  ipso  canopeo,  non  poterant  scire  ex  qua 
materia  esset  factum.  Habebat'  quoque  canopeum  coloreni  argenti, 
et  durius  uidebatur  marmore.  Columpna  uero  illa  ex  cristallo  erat 
purissimo.  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus  ait  fratribus :  '  Quiescite  nunc 
1.  83'*  a  labore  remigandi,  et  tene|te  plagas  canopei  seu  fibulas,  et  sufificit 
uobis,'  Spatium  namque  magnum  tenebat  canopeum  ultra  columpnam 
in  mari,  quasi  per  unum'  miliare  ;  et  pendebat  a  sum[m]itate  eius 
usque  ad  j'nia  maris.  Tunc  dixit  Brandanus  ad  fratres :  '  Mittite 
nauem  per  aliquod  foramen  canopei,  et  uideamus  diligenter  magnalia 
Dei  nostri.'  Et  cum  hoc  fecissent,  mare  apparuit  eis  quasi  uitrum 
unum  valde  clarum,  ita  ut  uiderent  profunda  maris.  Bases  uero 
columpne  et  fymbrias  uidere  non  poterant.  Splendor  quoque  non 
minus  inferius  quam  superius  splendebat.  Tunc  uir  sanctus  men- 
surabat  foramen  vnum  canopei ;  et  erat  quattuor  cubitorum  in  omnem 
partem.  Nauigantibus'  igitur  illis  per  totum  diem  iuxta  unum  latus 
ipsius  columpne,  et  per  unibram  columpne,  non  poterant  sentire 
calorem  solis.  Uir  Dei  mcnsurabat  latus  columpne  mille  quadri[n]- 
gentis  cubitis,  et  erat  eadem  mensura  per  quattuor  latera  columpne. 
Sic  quoque  mensurabat  per  quadriduum.  Quarto  uero  die  inuenerunt 
calicem  de  genere  canopei,  et  patenam  de  colore  columpne,  in  quadam 
fenestra  in  latere  columpne  ad  australem  plagam.     Que  homo  Dei 

'   Deus  R^.  '  -brasse  R-.  ^  et  Ri  RK  «  Sic reuerentiam 

not  in  N.  ^  Sch.  p.  27  ;  M  p.  118 ;  Si  §  39.  6  om.  R^  m.  pr.  R'. 

'  -bant  R'  R^         8  R2  f.  i  iqI'.         9  -gatis  R'  m.  sec. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  129 

apprehendcns,  ait :  '  Dominus  noster  Icsiis  Christus  ostendit  nobis 
hec  mirabilia,  ut  intucntes  ea,  magnificemus  potentiam  Dei.'  Et 
dixit  tunc  fratribus  diuinum  peragere  officium,  et  postea  corpora 
sua  reficere.  Post  hec  omnia,  discedentes  hinc,  nauigauerunt  ad 
plagam  septentrionalem ;  et,  secundis  flantibus  uentis,  per  octo  dies 
ferebantur  per  mare. 

Ivii.  Et'  hoc  transacto  dierum  curriculo,  viderunt  unam  insulam 
terribilem  ualde,  sine  herbis  et  arboribus,  officinis  fabrorum  plenam. 
Tunc  sanctus  ait  ad  suos :  '  Vere,  fratres,  angustia  mihi  est  de  hac 
insula.  Nolo  enim  illam  intrare,  aut  |  ei  appropinquare ;  set  tamen  f.  84» 
uentus  trahit  nos  ad  illam.'  Pretereuntibus  uero  ipsis  insulam  ad 
iactum  lapidis,  audierunt  foliium  sufflantium  sonitum  quasi  tonitruum 
magnum,  ac  malleorum  circa  incudes  percussiones.  His  auditis, 
sanctus  uir  armauit  se  dominico  tropheo  per  totum  corpus,  dicens: 
'  Domine  lesu  Christe,  libera  nos  ab  hac  maligna  insula.'  Et  finita 
oratione,  ecce  unus  de  habitatoribus  insule  egrediebatur  foras,  quasi 
ad  aliquod  opus  peragendum,  horribilis  ualde  ac  hispidus.  Cumque 
uiderct  sanctos  Dei  pertransire  insulam,  reuersus  cum  festinatione" 
ad  locum  unde  exierat,  dixit :  '  Heu,  heu,  heu,  quam  male  nobis 
accidit ! '  Tunc  uir  Dei  iterum  se  muniuit  uexillo  dominice  crucis, 
dicens  fratribus  :  '  Filioli,  tendite  uelum  in  altum,  et  simul  cum  hoc 
remigate,  ut  citius  possitis  ab  hac  insula  recedere.' 

Iviii.  Post'  hec  exiuit  unus  de  fabris  illis  ad  litus,  portans*  forcipes 
in  manibus,  et  massam  ignitam  mire  magnitudinis  in  eis,  quam  super 
famulos  Christi  confestim  iactauit.  Protegente  Deo  omnipotente  suos, 
minime  conatus  eius  eis  nocere  potuit;  transiuit  uero  mas[s]a  iuxta 
eos  ad  spatium  unius  stadii,  cadens  in  mari ;  et  cepit  mare  feruere 
quasi  prune  ardentes  ;  et  ascendebat  fumus  de  mari,  sicut  de  fornace' 
ardenti.  Cum  autem  a  loco,  in  quo  massa  cecidit,  ipsi  processissent 
quasi  per  spatium  unius  miliaris,  tunc  fabri  illi  infernales  uenerunt 
cum  festinatione  ad  litus,  portantes  singuli  singulas  massas  ignitas. 
Horum  quidam  massas  suas  post  famulos  Dei  mittebant ;  alii  super 
suos  proiciebant  socios.  Filii  uero  tenebrarum  dolebant,  quod  serui 
Dei  euaserunt  manus  eorum.  Reuersi  sunt  igitur*  ad  officinas  suas', 
et  incendunt  eas  ;  et  tunc  tota  insula  ap|paruit  quas  unus  globusf.  S^*" 
igneus  ardens.  Mare  uero  feruebat,  sicut  cacabus  bulliens  super 
ignem.  Audiebant  quoque  ipsi  tota  die  illa  ululatum  et  clamorem 
magnum  de  insula,  et  ad  nares  eorum  intolerabilis  ueniebat  fetor. 
Tunc  homo  Dei',  confortans  fratres,  aiebat :   '  Milites  Christi,  sitis 

'  Sch.  p.  28  ;  M  p.  120;  S'  §  40.  2  R2  f.  110«!,  3  Sch.  p.  28  ; 

M  p.  121 ;  S'  §  41.         *  portas  R'.         '^  -ci  R'  R^.  '  om.  R-.  ^  altered 

by  R'  m.  sec.  to  ofScia  sua.         '  Christi  R^. 

PLUMMER.  K 


I30  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

robusti  in  fide  non  ficta,  quia,  ut  verum  fateor,  sumus '  modo  iuxta  os 
infernalis  putei.     Vigilate  ergo,  et  uiriliter  agite.' 

lix.  Post-  hec  apparuit  illis  altus  in  occeano  mons  ad  plagam 
septemtrionalem  ',  qui  nebulosus  atque  fumosus  erat  in  sum[m]itate. 
Nauis  uero  eorum,  nolentibus  eis,  uelocissimo  uenti  impetu  ad,  litus 
illius  montis  deducebatur.  Erat  quoque  insula  illa  tante  altitudinis, 
vt  uix  sum[m]itatem  eius  possent  intueri.  Sicut  enim  murus  erat 
mons  ille  erectus  in  altum,  et  in  sum[m]itate  omnino  ignitus.  Vnus 
uero,  qui  remansit  ex  tribus  fratribus  illis,  qui  post  uirum  Dei  uene- 
rant  de  monasterio  suo,  exiens  de*  naui  in  terram,  cepit  clamare, 
dicens:  'Ve  mihi,  quia  tollor  a  uobis,  nec  possum  redire  ad  uos.' 
Quem  ipsi  ibi  dimiserunt,  festinantes  nauem  a  terra  reducere. 
Timebant  enim  sibi  ualde,  atque  dicebant :  '  Miserere  nostri,  Doniine, 
miserere,  quia  in  periculo  sumus.'  Cumque  retrorsum  more  timen- 
tium  aspicerent,  uiderunt  socium  suum  a  demonibus  ad  tormenta 
tractum,  et  qualiter  incendebatur  igne  infernali  inter  eos.  Et  hec 
fratres  intuentes,  apud  se  dicebant :  '  Ve  tibi,  miser,  quia  talem  in 
uita  tua  meruisti  penam.'  Post  hec,  uentis  secundis  flantibus,  elon- 
gati  sunt  a  monte  illo  pestifero,  et  peruenerunt  ad  plagam  maris 
australem.  Et  cum  iterum  respicerent  ad  insulam,  uiderunt  niontem 
discoopertum  fumositate,  et  flammas  usque  ad  ethera  emittentem, 
et  iterum  ad  se  trahentem,  ita  quod  totus  mons  usque  ad  mare  I 
f.  84  "  appareret  quasi  rogus  ardens  °. 

Ix.  Nauigantibus '  eis  post  hec  uersus  plagam  meridianam,  ap- 
paruit  illis  modica  quedam  insula.  Et  cum  fratres  uechementius" 
uersus'  [eam]  nauigassent,  ait  ad  eos  Brandanus :  '  Fratres  mei, 
nolite  ultra  modum  corpora  uestra  uexare.  Septem  enim  anni  sunt 
usque  in  futurum  pascha,  postquam  egressi  estis  de  terra  uestra.' 
Et  iterum  ait :  '  Nunc  uidebitis  heremitam  in  hac  insula,  nomine 
Paulum,  sine  ullo  uictu  corporali  per  triginta  annos  uiuentem,  ante 
enim  triginta  aliis  annis  ministerio  cuiusdam  bestie  cibum  accepit.' 
Et  cum'  hec  fratribus  dixisset,  peruenientes  ad  litus,  aditum  intrandi 
in  insulam  minime  inuenire  potuerunt.  Erat  enim  insula  saxosa^" 
et  alta  atque  rotunda.  In  suni[m]itate  uero  eius  non  erat  terra,  set 
nuda  petra.  Et  tota  insula  quasi  stadium  in  longitudine  et  latitudine 
habebat.  In  fine  quoque  uix,  licet  cum"  labore,  strictum  inuenerunt 
adituni,  quem  prora  nauis  cum  difficultate  potuit  intrare.  Tunc 
Brandanus  ait  fratribus  :    '  Expectate  hic,  fratres,  quia  non  licet  nobis 

*  sum  R^.  '  Sch.  p.  39;  M  p.  121;  S'  §  42.  '  septrionalem  R'. 

*  R2  f.  iio**.  ^  Here  in  N  occurs  the  incident  of  Judas  Iscariot.      R  omits 

it  here,  because  it  occurs  in  a  diiferent  form  below,  §  xcvii,  tal<en  from  the  Vita 
Brendani.  *  Sch.  p.  31:  M  p.  125;  8'  §  46.  '  -sius  R^  R-.  *  uisa 

Ri  R2.         6  om.  R\         1»  laxosa  R^.         "  sine  R^. 


d 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  131 

insulani  sine  licentia  uiri  Dei  intrarc.  Ego  uero  solus  intrabo,  et 
reucrtar  ad  uos  cuni  licentia.'  Cumquc  asccndisset'  sum[m]itatcm 
insule,  uidit  duas  speluncas  e  rcgione  positas,  et  fontem  propc  eas 
positum,  de  quo  uir  Dci  hauriebat  aquam.  Fons-  uero,  ut  surgebat 
de  petra,  mox  absorbebatur  ab  eadem.  Et  cum  Brandanus  appro- 
pinquarct  ad  hostium  vnius  spelunce,  tunc  senex  ex  altera  surgebat 
obuiam  ei,  dicens  :  '  Eccc  quam  bonum,  et  quam  iocundum,  habitare 
fratres  in  unum '.'  Et  cum  hec  dixisset,  Brandanum  rogauit,  ut 
fratres  de  naui  euocaret. 

Ixi.  Quod*  cum  Brandanus  fecisset,  osculatus  est  eos  senex,  |  pro-  f.  84 
priis  nominibus  eos  nominans.  Et  mirati  sunt  fratres,  non  solum 
de  spiritu  scientie  prophetice,  verum  etiam  de  habitu  quo  uestiebatur. 
Erat  enim  totus  coopertus  capillis  capitis  et  ceteris  pilis  corporis 
sui  usque  ad  pedcs.  Et  omnes  capilli  eius  erant  candidi,  sicut  nix. 
Nullum  uero  aliud^  indumentum  erat  ei  preter  pilos  corporis  sui. 
Cumque  sanctus  Brandanus  taliter  uestitum  uidisset,  ait :  '  Ue  mihi 
peccatori,  qui  porto  habitum  monachi,  et  non  facio  actum  dignum 
habitui,  cum  uideam "  hominem  angelici  status  sine  habitu  degentem 
in  terris.'  Cui  Paulus  senex  ait :  '  O  uenerabihs  pater,  cui  tanta  et 
talia  ostenderat  Deus  mirabilia,  qualia  alicui  sanctorum  non  ostendit ; 
et  tu  dicis  te  non  esse  dignum  portare  habitum  monachi.  Dico  tibi, 
pater,  quia  tu  es  maior  monacho.  Monachus  enim  labore  manuum 
suarum  nutritur  et  uestitur ;  Dominus  autem  de  secretis  pabulis  te 
cum  tuis  discipulis  per  septem  annos  pauit,  atque  uestiuit.  Ego  uero 
miser  sedeo  hic  super  petram  hanc  nudus  exceptis  pilis  corporis 
mei,  quibus,  sicut  auis  plumis  suis,  uestior.' 

Ixii.  Querente'  uero  sancto  Brandano  de  aduentu  eius  ad  insulam 
illam,  aut  vnde  ueniret,  uel  quanto  tempore  talem  uitam  sustinuisset. 
respondit  senex :  '  Ego  fui  in  monasterio  sancti  Patricii,  nutritus  per 
quinquaginta  annos,  cimitherium  fratrum  custodiens.  Quadam  uero 
die,  cum  locum  sepulture  designaret  mihi  decanus  monasterii,  ut 
ibi  quendam  sepelirem,  apparuit  mihi  quidam  reuerendus  senex. 
dicens :  "Noli,  frater,  ibi  fossam*  facere,  quia  sepulcrum  alterius 
est."  Cui  ego  :  "Quis  es  tu,  domine  mi  pater?"  At  ille  :  "Curme 
non  cognoscis  ?  Nonne  abbas  tuus  sum  ego?"  Cuidixi':  "Sanctus 
Patricius  est  meus  abbas."  Et  ille :  "  Ego  sum.  En  migraui  heri  | 
de  hoc  seculo  ;  et  iste  est  locus  sepulture  mee."  Et  designans  mihi  f.  85" 
alium  locum  ait:  "  Hic  facies  fossam  pro  sepultura  illius ;  et  nulli 
dicas,  que  tibi  dico.     Cras  autem  proficiscere  ad  litus  maris,  et  ibi 

'  -sent  R-.  2  R-  f.  iii".         '  Ps.  cxxxii.  i.  <  Sch.  p.  32  ;  M  p.  126 ; 

S'  5  47.  ^  aliquod  R».        «  uidiam  R'.         '  Sch.  p.  33  ;  M  p.  136 ;  S'  §  48. 

«  fassam  R'.        »  R^  f.  iti''. 


132  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

inuenies  paratam  nauiculam,  que  te  adducet  ad  locum  sepulture  tue  ; 
ibique  expectabis  diem  mortis  tue."  Mane  uero  facto,  perueni  ad 
litus  mihi  assignatum  ;  et  ascendens  in  nauiculam,  quam  ibi  paratam 
inueni,  cepi  remigare.  Cumque  in  fine  uiribus  deficerem,  dimisi 
eam  superno  gubernatori  regere.  Porro  septimo  die  apparuit  mihi 
hec  insula.  Quam  cum  intrassem,  nauiculam  a  me  in  mare  proieci, 
que  uelocissimo  cursu  per  undas  transibat,  rediens  ad  locum  suum. 
Ego  quidem  postea  hic  permansi,  ut  uidetis.  Primo  uero  die,  quo 
huc  intraui,  luter  marinus  portauit  mihi  unum'  piscem^,  et  fasci- 
culum  vnuni  de  graminibus,  et  paraui'  mihi  corporis  refectionem. 
Et  sic  per  triginta  annos  die  semper  tertia  eadem  bestia  talem  mihi 
ferebat  cibum.  Et  per  tot  annorum  curricula  nulla  mihi  inedia,  uel 
sitis  penuria  fuit.  Die  uero  dominico  semper  parum  aque  de  petra 
ista  stillabat,  de  qua  uasculum  meum  ad  necessitatem  corporis  re- 
plebam.  Post  triginta  uero  hos  annos  inueni  istas  duas  speluncas, 
et  fontem  istum,  de  quo  per  triginta  annos  sine  alico  pabulo  corporali 
per  gratiam  Dei  uiuo.  Sexaginta  enim  annis  sum  in  hac  insula ; 
triginta  silicet  in  pastu  piscis,  et  triginta  aliis  uiuo  de  aqua  fontis 
huius.  Quinquaginta  uero  annorum  fui,  quando  de  terra  mea  recessi. 
Omnes  uero  anni  mei  usque  nunc  cM,  et,  sicut  mihi  fuit  a  Deo  meo 
promissum,  in  carne  mea  hic  debeo  expectare  resurrectionis  com- 
munis  omnium  diem.  Pergite  ergo  uos  ad  patriam  uestram,  et  | 
f.  85  ^"  portate  de  aqua  fontis  huius  uobiscum.  Necesse  enim  erit  uobis 
habere  de  ea,  quia  longum  ^  tempus  habetis  usque  ad  pascha.  Cele- 
brabitis  ergo  sanctum  pascha,  ubi  consueuistis  per  sex  annos  ante 
celebrare  ;  et  postea,  accepta  benedictione  procuratoris  uestri,  ibitis'" 
ad  terram  omnium  terrarum  sanctissimam,  et  ibi  manebitis  per  qua- 
draginta  dies  ;  et  postea  reducet  uos  Deus  uester  incolumes  ad  terram 
natiuitatis  uestre.' 

lxiii.,Et''  accepta  benedictione  uiri  Dei,  ceperunt  nauigare  contra 
meredianam  plagam  per  totum  quadragesime  tempus.  Et  erat  cibus 
eis  aqua,  quam  de  insula  uiri  Dei  acceperunt,  post  triduum  se  semper 
reficientes  ea  ;  et  sic  robusti,  sicut  delicata  queque  acciperent.  Tunc, 
sicut  predixerat  eis  uir  Dei,  venerunt  ad  insulam  procuratoris  in 
sabbato  sancto.  Et  ut  uenerunt,  occurrit  eis  procurator  sepedictus 
ad  portum,  cum  gaudio  singulos  de  naui  propriis  manibus  leuans. 
Cumque  officium  sancti  sabbati  peragerent,  apposuit  eis  cenam. 
Facto  autem  uespere,  ascendunt  nauiculam  suam,  et  procurator  simul 
cum  eis ;  et  uenerunt  ad  insulam,  ubi  tali  tempore  esse  consueuerant, 

'  piscem  unum  R^.  ^  pissem  R^.  ^  parui  R^.  *  Thisofcourse  is 

inconsistent ;  N  makes  the  sojourn  in  the  caves  sixty  years  ;  the  hermif  s  total  age 
is  given  in  some  MSS.  as  140  years,  which  is  consistent,  in  others  as  150,  which 
is  not.         <■  logum  R'.         «  R^  f.  iii".         '  Sch.  p.  34;  M  p.  128  ;  S'  §  49. 


t 
VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  133 

silicct  in  dorso  ceti  magni ;  et  ibi  in  laudibus  Dei  tota  nocte  illa 
permanscrunt.  Mane  uero  missas  celcbrauerunt,  sicut  moris  eorum 
erat.  Finita  uero  missa  ultima,  ecce  belua  iila  mouit  se  per  mare. 
Quod  fratres  percipientes,  clamauerunt  ad  Dominum  dicentes  :  '  Ex- 
audi  nos,  Deus  salutaris  noster,  spes  omnium  fmium  terre,  et  in 
mari  longe '.'  Sanctus  uero  Brandanus  confortabat  fratres,  dicens  : 
'  Nolite  timere,  fratres  mei ;  nil  enim  nocebit  uobis  iste  motus  belue, 
set  potius  adiutorium  itineris  prestabit.'  Quod  et  uenim  fuit.  Nam 
belua  recto  cursu  per|uenit  usque  ad  litus  insule  auium.  Ibi  quoque  f.  85" 
demorati  sunt  uiri  Dei  usque  ad  octauas  Pentecostes. 

Ixiv.  Transacto "  uero  illo  [tempore],  dixit  procurator  sancto  Bran- 
dano  et  suis  :  'Ascendite  in  nauiculam  uestram.  et  implete  utres 
de  fonte  isto  ;  ego  enim  ero  ductor  uester  hac  uice.  Sine  me  enim 
non  potestis  inuenire  terram  repromissionis  sanctorum.'  Ascen- 
dentibus  uero  illis  nauim,  aues  omnes  de  insula  quasi  vna  uoce 
dicebant':  '  Prosperum  iter  faciat*  uobis  Deus^  salutarium  nostro- 
rum.'  Post  hec  nauigauerunt  usque  ad  insulam  procuratoris,  et 
ipse  cum  eis  ;  ibique  sumpserunt  expensas  itineris  pro  quadraginta 
diebus.  Erat  enim  tantum  nauigium  illorum  versus  orientalem 
plagam,  eundo  usque  ad  prefatam  terram.  Porro  procurator  ante- 
cedebat  semper  eos  in  nauicula,  per  mare  dirigens  eos  per  rectum 
iter.  Transactis  autem  quadraginta  diebus,  uespere  imminente  *, 
cepit  eos  caligo  grandis'  inuoluere,  ita  ut  uix  alter  alterum  posse[t] 
uidere.  Tunc  procurator  ait  Brandano  :  'Scitis  que  est  ista  caligo.'' 
Et  ait  ille  iterum  :  '  Ista  caligo  circumdat  insulam  illam  quam  queritis 
per  septem  annos.'  Post  spatium  uero  quasi  vnius  hore  circumfulsit 
eos  lux  ingens,  et  statim  nauis  stetit  ad  litus. 

Ixv.  Porro*,  ascendentibus'  ipsis  de  naui,  uiderunt  terram  spe- 
ciosam  plenam  arboribus  fructiferis,  sicut  in  tempore  solet  esse 
auptumnali'".  Cum  autem  circuissent"  terram  illam,  nulla  aftuit  eis 
nox.  Accipiebant  uero  de  pomis  arborum,  et  de  fontibus,  quantum'' 
uolebant.  Et  ita  per  quadraginta  dies  lustrando  terram  illam  uiuebant. 
Quodam  uero  die  sic  perlustrantes,  inuenerunt  flumen  magnum 
insulam  illam  per  medium  diuidens.  Tunc  Brandanus  ait  fratribus : 
'  Istud  flumen  non  possumus  transire,  et  ignoramus  magnitudinem 
istius  insule.'  Et  cum  hec  inter  se  uoluissent,  occurrit  eis  |  iuuenis  f.  85"' 
quidam,  qui  singulos  osculans,  propriis  nominibus  appellauit.  Dixit- 
que  eis  :  '  Beati  qui  habitant  in  domo  tua,  Domine,  in  secula  seculorum 
laudabunt  te ".'    Et  cum  hec  dixisset,  ait  ad  sanctum  Brandanum : 

1   Ps.  Ixiv.  6.  2  Sch.  p.  34  ;   M  p.  129  ;  S'  §  50.  =  -bat  R'.  ■•  faciet 

R>R2.  5  Deus  uobis  R2.  «R^f.  iii<'.  '  caligo  grandis  eos  R^.  »  Sch.  p.  35  ; 
M  p.  129;  S' §  51.  "  desc- Sch.  ">  apt- R-.  "-setRiR».  '«  quem  R». 
"  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5. 


134  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

'  Ecce  terra,  quam  per  longum  ^  tempus  quesisti.  Et  ideo  non  potuisti 
statim  eam  inuenire,  quia  Deus  uoluit  tibi  ostendere  secreta  sua  in 
mari  magno.  Reuertere  itaque  ad  terram  natiuitatis  tue,  portans 
tecum  de  fructibus  istius  insule,  et  de  gemmis,  quantum  potest  naui- 
cula  tua  capere.  Appropinquat  enim  dies  peregrinationis  tue,  ut 
dormias  cum  patribus  tuis.  Post  multa  uero  annorum  curricula 
manifestabitur  terra  ista  successoribus  uestris,  quando  superuenerit 
.  persecutio  magna  christianis^.  Vnde  istud  flumen  quod  uidetis 
diuidit  insulam  istam.  Et  sicut  modo  apparet  uobis  in  fructibus 
matura,  ita  omni  tempore  est,  et  erit  permansura'.  Nulla  quoque 
nox  obfuscat  eam,  quia  lux  illius  Christus  est^.' 

Ixvi.  Post  ^,  acceptis  de  terre  fructibus  et  gemmis,  quantum  vole- 
bant,  dimissoque  suo  benedicto  procuratore  ac  bono  nuncio  iuuene, 
sanctus  Brandanus  cum  suis  nauiculam  suam  ascendunt^,  redeuntes 
per  medium  sicut  prius.  Cumque  caliginem  pertransissent,  uenerunt 
ad  insulam,  que  uocabatur  deliciosa  uel  deliciarum ',  ibique  cum 
fratribus  per  triduum  commorantes,  benedictione  accepta  a  fratribus, 
reversus  est  ad  locum  suum.  Fratres  uero  in  aduentu  sui  patris 
sum[m]e  exultabant,  Deum  glorificantes,  qui  remisit  eis  suum  patro- 
num  atque  consolatorem.  Tunc  uir  Dei  caritati'  eorum  congratulans, 
ad  solatium  eorum  narrauit  eis  magnalia  Dei,  que  uidit  in  mari^ 

Ixvii.  Inter^"  alia"  hec  quoque  narrauit  eis.  Quadam  autem  die 
apparuit  nobis  Sathanas  in  forma  uoluntati  sue  satis  condigna,  stetit- 
que  super  uelum  nauis.  Cui  Brandanus  :  '  Quid  ad  nos  uenisti  ante 
f.  86"  tempus?'  Cui  ille:  'Te  postulamus  |  in  nomine  excelsi  Christi, 
quem  colis,  ut  nos,  qui  penas  eternas  sustinemus,  aduentus  tui 
sentiamus  fauorem.  In  obscuris  enim  maris  locis  mansiones  pessimas 
habemus.'  Et  quesiuit  Brandanus,  ubi  esset  ille  locus  penalis.  Cui 
demon  :  '  Nemo  hominum  potest  uidere,  et  postea  uiuere.'  Et  indi- 
cauit  demon  portam  loci  illius  penahs  eis.  Fratres  autem  non  uide- 
runt  cum  quo  uir  Dei  sic  loqueretur.  Et  dixerunt :  '  Pater,  indica 
nobis  quem  sic '-  alloqueris.'  Et  indicauit  eis  per  ordinem  '^,  que 
audiuit  a  Sathana.     Tunc  vnus  de  fratribus  ait  Brandano :   '  Dimitte 

'  logiim    Ri.  '^    quando   christianorum   subuenietur   tribulationi    Si. 

'^  -mensura  R'.  *  Here  some  MSS.  of  N  add  :  Tunc  dixit  iuueni  sanctus 

Brendanus  ;  '  Domine  pater,  si  ista  terra  unquam  reuclabitur  hominibus  ? '  At 
ipse  ait  :  *  Quando  altissimus  Creator  subiugauerit  sibi  omnes  gentes,  tunc  eius 
electis  omnibus  declarabitur  ista  terra.'  ^  Sch.  p.  36 ;  M  p.  131  ;  S'  §  52. 

'■  -derunt  R-.  '  R^  f.  112".  *  cariu  R'  ;  carin  R^.  '  Here  ends 

the  text  of  the  Nauigatio.  Most  MSS.  conclude  with  the  mention  of  Brendan's 
death.  R  and  M  of  course  omit  this,  as  they  now  revertto  their  respective  texts 
of  Vita  Brendani.  S'  also  omits  B's  death,  though  it  ends  at  this  point. 
'"   =  L.  3625  fT.  11  aliqua  R-.         ^'^  oin.  R^.         ''  indicauit  eis  per  ordicauit 

eis  perordinem  R^. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  135 

me,  pater,  uidere  illas  penas.'  Et  permisit  eum  uidere  eas.  Cumque 
uidisset  penas  ac  uultus  sustinentium  eas,  statim  mortuus'  est, 
dicens:  'Ve  omnibus  in  illum  locum  tormentorum  uenientibus.' 
Illum  autem  sic  defunctum  resuscitauit  sanctus  Brandanus,  non  tamen 
sine  magno  labore.  Post  hec  dixit  homo  Dci  demoni :  '  Dominus, 
iudex  iustus,  fortis  et  patiens^  uidebit  que  uera  sunt  de  hiis,  que 
postulas.' 

Ixviii.  Non '  ionge  uero  ab  illo  recedentes,  uiderunt  magna  litora, 
in  quibus  inuenerunt  quandam  puellam  mortuam,  quam  uiderunt 
uulneratam  inter  scapulas.  Hec  uero  mire  magnitudinis,  videlicet 
centum  pedes  habens  in  longitudine.  Tunc  pius  pater  Deum  intime 
pro  ea  rogauit*,  et  exaudita  est  oratio  eius;  quia  eam  resuscitauit, 
ac  baptizauit.  Et  cum  interrogaretur'  ab  eo,  de  qua  prouincia  esset, 
uel  gente,  respondit :  '  De  habitatoribus  maris  ego  sum,  et  resur- 
rectionem  communem  speramus.'  Tunc  Brandanus  ait  ei :  '  Ehge 
nunc  unum  de  duobus,  an  ad  tuos  uis  ire,  an  ad  celum.'  Et  illa 
respondit  incognita  lingua  nisi  tantum  seniori:  'Volo  cum  rege^ 
meo  uiuere,  et  eum  cotidie  uidere,  et  cum  angelicis  spiritibus  sine 
intermissione  eum  laudantibus  cohabitare.'  Et  |  statim,  postquam  f- 86  * 
partem  Marie  elegerat',  sine  labore  ac  dolore  in  pace  requieuit,  ac 
in  eodem  loco  sepulta  est. 

Ixix.  Post'  hec  inde  nauigantes,  inuenerunt  quandam  insulam 
ualde  arduam  ;  set  portum  oportunum  ad  intrandum  non  inuenerunt. 
Et  cum  quindecim  diebus  laborarent,  ut  intrarent,  in  fine  a  suo 
desiderio  defecerunt.  Audiebant  autem  sonum  laudantium  Deum 
humanis  uocibus ;  set  ipsos  laudatores  minime  uidere  poterant.  Et 
pre  dulcedine  cantus  melodie  spiritualis  ceciderunt  in  sompnium. 
De  rupe  uero  illa  proiecta  est  eis  quedam  tabula  lignea ',  in  qua  erat 
scriptum  :  '  Noli  laborare  ad  intrandum  insulam " ;  tamen  ea  que 
desiderat  anima  tua  inuenies.  Set  reuertere  ad  terram  tuam  ;  quia  te 
tui  desiderant  uidere.  Non  enim  est  ista  terra  tibi  promissa.  Scru- 
tare  scripturas,  in  quibus  scriptum  est,  quoniam  multe  mansiones 
apud  Deum  ".'  Reuersi  suntergo  ab  insula  portantessecum  tabulam 
eis  missam,  in  signum  letitie  pppuli  illius  inuisi.  Et  cotidie  apud  illos 
recitabatur  ^-  tabula  illa,  quasi  a  Deo  missa. 

Ixx.  Dum^'  quadam  die  graui  siti  laborarent  fere  usque  ad  mo'r'tem, 
uiderunt  rupem  [e]  proximo,  ex  qua  fluminalucida  profluebant'*.  Tunc 

1  mortus  R'm.  pr.  2  Ps.  vii.  12.  ^   =L.  3678  ff.  <  orauit  R-. 

*  et  cum  int.  bis  R'  m.  pr.  «  R2  f_  nat,  ?  .rit  ri  R2.  cf.  Lk.  x.  42. 

'   =  S*  §  9  :  L.  3691  ff.  '  clar  ciartha  L.,.  i.  e.  a  waxed  tablet  ;   literis 

inscripta  latinis  adJ.  S^.  "  -la  R'.  "  John  xiv.  2.  '^  resit-  Ri  KK 

"  L.  3707  ti".  "  -nuerunt  R». 


136  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

fratres  dixerunt :  '  Nuniquid  aquas  istas  de  rupe  fluentes  bibemus  ? ' 
Quibus  uir  Dei  ait:  '  Ympnos  prius  cantate  ad  consecrandas  aquas 
ostensas.'  Benedicentes  uero  aquas  illas,  alleluia  dicentes,  non  com- 
paruerunt  flumina ;  set  uiderunt  diabolum  imniundos  liquores  effun- 
dentem,  ut '  bibentes  mortificaret.  Tunc  temptatio  sitis  recessit  ab 
eis ;  et  Dominum,  qui  eos  de  morte  liberauit,  benedixerunt. 

Ixxi.  Post"  quinque  annos  reuersus  est  homo  Dei  ad  propriam 
regionem.  Etaudientes  uicini  et  cognati  aduentum  eius,  conuenerunt 
f".  86"  ad  eum,  interrogantes  eum  de  suis  ma|gnis  laboribus.  Et  audientes 
doctrinam  eius,  multi,  relictis  mundi  vanitatibus,  Christum  secuti 
sunt  ^  Et  fecit  ibi  multas  uirtutes  et  sanitates  ;  inter  quas  uirtutes 
patrem  suum  conuertit  ad  Christum.  Post  hec  uisitauit  sanctum 
episcopum  Ercum,  et  deinde  sanctam  Itam  nutricem  suam.  Sancta 
uero  Ita,  quasi  *  Christum  cum  apostolis,  recepit  eum  cum  discipulis 
suis  ^  Et  ait  ei :  '  Fili  mi,  quare  absque  consilio  meo  opus  illud 
arduum  attemptare  uoluisti .'  Terram  enim  a  Domino  tibi  ostensam 
non  inuenies  in  pellibus  mortuorum  animalium  ;  quia  terra  sancta  est 
ualde,  in  qua  sanguis  humanus  non  est  effusus.  Applica  ergo  arti- 
fices  qui  sciant  facere  tibi  uas  ligneum.  Forsitan  sic  explorabis 
terram  illam.'  Cuius  consilio  committens  se  Brandanus,  in  regionem 
Connacteorum  perrexit ;  quia  ibi  magis  apta  ligna  esse  pro  hoc  opere 
credidit.  Illic  quoque  parauit  cum  ingenio  artificum  nauem  contra 
niaris  pericula  satis  tutam".  Cumque  artifices  et  fabri  pro  laboribus 
hanc  mercedem  quererent  a  uiro  Dei,  ut  secum  ire  eos  permitteret, 
hoc  eis  pro  munere  concessit.  Et  cum  parati  essent  omnes  ad 
intrandum  nauim,  tunc  uenit  quidam  preconis  '^  in  populo  gerens 
officium,  qui,  genibus  flexis  suppliciter  rogauit,  ut  uir  Dei  secum  ire 
permitteret.  Tunc  pius  pater  precibus  supplicantis  inclinatus,  vna 
cum  ceteris  admisit.  Et  totondit  eum  uir  Dei,  ut  silicet  signum 
religionis  in  capite  deferret.  Et  nauigantes  m  nomine  Domini  primo 
uenerunt  ad  insulam  Ayrne,  vbi  sanctos  Dei  Endeum  et  Pupeum  *  et 
Nochatum  '  inuenerunt,  cum  quibus  in  caritate  non  ficta  per  mensem 
unum  comorati  sunt. 

'  et  Ri  R2.  2   _  Ji  (-_  12^  which  here,resumcs  the  Vita  B.  after  finishing 

the  N.  B.  ;  S''  §  10  ;  L  3717  ff.  ^  et  fecit  eos  .  .  .  monachos,  et  multa  monasteria 
et  cellas  perdiuersas  regiones  Hibernie  fundauit,  inquibus  triamillia  monachorum. 
ut  perhibetur  a  senioribus,  sub  eo  erant  ;  et  patrem  suum  fecit  monachum,  et 
matrem  suam  uiduam  sacratam  M.  *  R'^  f.  112*^.  ^  The  rest  of  the 

section  is  not  in  M,  which  gives  no  more  ocean  voyage  of  Brendan,  being 
content  with  the  N.  B.  Thus  it  avoids  the  inconsistencies  into  which  R  has 
fallen.  ^  fabricatam  tabulari  artificio  nauem  Ix"  cum  discipuhs    ascendit, 

annisque  duobus  nauigando  laborauit ;  tandem  ad  desideratam  insulam  peruenit 
S-  ;  which  then  passes  to  section  Ixxvi.  infra  ;  L.  also  gives  the  number  of 
Brendan's  companions  as  sixty.  '  in  crosan  L.  ^    cf.  Enda  §§  xx-xxiii. 

"  Rochath  L. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  137 

Ixxii.  Post'  hec  inde  nauigantes  per  mare,  uiclerunt  quandam 
insuiam  ualdc  altam,  in  qua  uiderunt  mures  in  similitudinem  cati ; 
qui,  uenientes  ad  litus,  carnes  hominum  dejuorare  cupiebant.  Fra-  f.  se"^- 
tres  hos  uidentes,  inter  se  dixerunt  :  'Quid  bestie  iste  aspiciunt.'" 
Respondit  Brandanus :  '  Nos  omnes  deuorare  desiderant.'  Tunc 
itcrum  ait  uir  Dei  preconi :  '  Surge,  et  accipe  corpus  Domini  nostri 
lesu  Christi;  et  ofler  te  in  sacrificium  Domino  tuo,  qui  pro  te  se 
optulit  Patri  in  sacrificium  ;  ut  pro  breui  labore  patientie  habeas  bra- 
uium  eterne  glorie.  Audiui',  inquit,  'choros  angelorum  in  sedibus 
suis  te  uocantium.'  Audiens  quoquc  preco  pro  terrenis  celestia  sibi 
promitti,  parans  se  ad  martyrium,  ait :  'O  sancte  Dei  Brandane,  quo 
labore  merui  Deum  uidere  hodie  ? '  Et  accepto  salutis  uiatico,  obe- 
diens  patri  usque  ad  mortem,  perrexit  ad  bestias.  Ad  quem,  uelut 
musce  famelice  ad  carnes,  mures  accedentes,  subito  usque  ad  '^  ossa 
carnes  eius  deuorarunt.  Et  ibidem  finem  certaminis  expectantes, 
sepilierunt  ossa  eius  ^ 

Ixxiii.  Nec  *  mora  inde  nauigantes,  et  ecce  mortis  infirmitas  irruit 
in  fabrum,  et  appropinquabat  ad  exitum.  Cui  Brandanus  ait :  '  Quid 
moraris,  frater,  pergere"  in  manus  Dei  tui  ?  Quod  enim  in  tota  uita 
tua  querebas,  hodie  inuenisti.  Si  uis  in  uita  presenti  amp[Ii]us 
manere,  pro  te  Dominum  rogabimus.'  Cui  faber  dixit :  '  Dominum 
lesum  Christum  audio  uocantem  me  nomine  meo.'  Et  accipiens 
corpus  dominicum  tanquam  sui  itineris  fidum  ductorem,  obdormiuit 
in  pace.  Tunc  fratres  cogitabant  ubi  corpus  sancti  uiri  sepulture 
traderent.  Quibus  pater  Brandanus  respondit  :  '  Sepelite  eum  in 
undis  maris,  ex  quo  terram  prope  non  habetis.  Qui  enim  omnia 
ex  nihilo  creauit,  potens  est  aquas  maris  solidare,  ut  fiant  immobiles 
ad  sepulturam  eius.'  Et  sepiherunt  eum  ibi  inter  undas  maris  ;  et 
stetit  corpus  ita  fixum  in  uno  loco,  ut  nec  ad  himum  descenderet ", 
nec  sursum  eum  impetus  aquarum  eleuaret,  |  set  quasi  in  terreno  f-  87  " 
monumento  poneretur.expectans  ultimam  resurrectionem  mortuorum, 
ibi  adhuc  permanet. 

Ixxiv.  Ef  cum  post  hec  per  deuia  maris  nauigassent,  ecce  apparuit 
eis  modica  insula.  Ad  quam  cum  appropinquarent,  subito  apparuit 
illis  multitudo  demonum  in  formis  quasi  pigmeorum*.  Tunc  ait 
Brandanus  suis :  '  Ancoram  hic  in  mare  mittite.  Nemo  enim 
ascendit  in  terram  istam,  nisi  is  qui  bella  humana  gerit,  et  sanguinem 
fundit.'     Et  in  eodem  loco,  mittentes  ancoram  suam  in  mare,  septem 

*  L.  3743  ff.  '  R*  f.  112''.  '  7  scribthar  a  ainm  a  martralaic,  ar  ba 

mairtir  amra  he  L.,  i.e.  and  his  name  is  written  in  the  martyrology,  for  he  was 
a  glorious  martyr.  *    =L.  3760^.  ^  perge  R-.  ">  -dit  R^  R°. 

'   =L.  §  3774  ff.  8  abhac  7  luchrapan  L.,  i.e.  of  dwarfs  and  lupracliauns. 


i''.8 


VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 


diebus  manserunt.  Cum  uero,  expleto  hoc  tempore,  proficisci  inde 
conarentur,  ancoram  ad  se  minime  retrahere  potuerunt ;  quia  inter 
saxa  maris  detenta  fuit.  Tunc  ft-atres,  de  se  quasi  desperantes, 
dixerunt :  '  Ecce  faber  noster  mortuus  est,  et  neminem  illi  habemus 
similem,  qui  nobis  ancorara  faciet.'  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus  in 
summo  artifice  confidens,  sacerdoti  sibi  ministranti  ait :  '  Tu,  frater, 
opus  nobis  facito  fabri,  et  omnia,  que  necessaria  sunt,  usque  in 
finem  mensis  perage.'  Et  benedixit  Brandanus  manus  eius,  ut  artem, 
quam  non  nouerat,  intelligere  queat.  Et  surgens  sacerdos  instru- 
menta'  artis  accepit,  et  ancoram  optimam  mox  -  confecit. 

Ixxv.  Nauigauerunt'  inde  ad  aliam  insulam  amenam  ualde  sed 
modicam,  in  qua  gurges  ad  capiendum  pisces  ab  antiquo  uidebatur 
esse.  Redeunte  uero  mari,  animalia  marina  ibi  relinquebantur. 
Cumque  insulam  pertransissent,  inuenerunt  ecclesiam  quandam  lapi- 
deam,  et  in  ea  senem  reuerendum  orantem.  Et  quid  dico  senem  ? 
Immo  pene  ossa  animata  uiderunt.  Et  idem  senior  ait  ad  eos : 
'  Popule  Dei  sancte,  fugite  ab  hac  insula  festinanter.  Est  enim  hic  muri- 
f.  87''  ceps*  quidam  antiquus  ^*  inuento'' |  consiliis,  qui  creuit  deuoratis 
piscibus  plurimis.'  Tunc  reuersi  sunt  ad  nauim  cum  festinatione, 
relinquentes  insulam.  Et  ecce  post  se  uident  bestiam  illam  per  mare 
natantem,  et  oculos  ita  magnos  habentem  in  modum  uasis  uitrei '. 
Tunc  cum  omnes  ponerent  se  in  oratione,  ait  Brandanus  :  '  Domine 
lesu  Christe,  tuam  prohibe  bestiam.'  Et  statim  surrexit  alia  bestia 
de  profundis  maris,  et  accedens  iniit  bellum  cum  illa  ;  et  ambe  de- 
scenderunt  in  profundum  maris,  nec  ultra  uise  sunt.  Tunc  gratias 
Deo  ipsi  dederunt,  et  reuersi  sunt  ad  seniorem  interrogantes  eum  de 
statu  suo  et  unde  esset.  Et  ait  ad  eos  :  '  Duodecim  uiri  numero ' 
de  Hibernia  insula  uenimus  ad  locum  istum,  locum  resurrectionis 
nostre  querentes.  Undecim  ergo  mortui  sunt ;  solus  ego  remansi, 
sacrificium  de  manibus  tuis,  o  sancte  Dei,  expectans.  Nobiscum  in 
naui  duximus  vnum  catum  nobis  ualde  amabilem,  qui  creuit  multum 
deuoratis  piscibus,  ut  dictum  est ;  set  Dominus  noster  lesus  Christus 
non  permisit  eum  nocere  nobis.'  Et  tunc  indicauit  eis  uiam  ad  terram 
quam  querebant ;  et  accipiens  sacrificium  de  manibus'  Brandani, 
letus  in  Domino  obdormiuit  ;  et  inter  suos  socios  ibidem  sepultus  est. 

Ixxvi.  Post "  hec  inde  profecti  peruenerunt  ad  terram  ualde  desi- 
derabilem.     Cumque,  appropinquantes  ad  illam,  portum  quererent 


'  instructa  R2  m.  pr.  '^  R«  f.  113".  '   =  L.  3787  ff.  «  murchat  L., 

i.e.    a    sea-cat ;  perhaps  a   misunderstanding    of  7;?Mnceps.  ^  mor   amaii 

ogdam  no  ech  trebliadhnaidi  L  add.,  i.  e.  as  big  as  a  young  ox,  or  a  three-year- 
old  horse.  *  this  seems  corrupt ;  'Pinueteratus.  '  coire  umhaidi  L.,  i.  e. 


a  brazen  cauldron. 


8  om.  R2. 


sancti  add.  R».        '»  5«  §  11  ;  L.  3843  ff. 


'I- 

I 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  139 

aptiiin  ad  intrandum,  audierunt  uocein  cuiusdam  senioris  de  insula 
dicentis  :  '  O  laboriosi  peregrini,  expectantes  celestia  premia,  o  lassi 
labore,  paulisper  sustinete.'  Cumque  modicum  expectarent,  iterum 
ait  eis  :  '  Fratres  mei  in  Christo,  en  cernitis  terram  bonam  ualde  et 
sanctam,  et  nullo  humano  sanguine  pollutam,  nec  ad  sepulturam 
alicuius  hominis^  exaratam.  Omnia  ergo  uestra,  exceptis  uestibus 
et  libris  necessariis,  in  naui  relinquite ;  et  sic  huc  venite.'  Et  tunc, 
osculatis  singulis",  flens  pre  |  gaudio,  ait :  '  Sedete,  et  aspicite  Christi  f.  87"^ 
prata,  paradisumque  inter  undas  maris.'  Illi  autem,  uidentes  magnalia 
Dei,  Dominum  glorificauerunt.  Senior  autem  uestimenta  non  habe- 
bat,  set  propriis  pilis  auium  more  contectus '  erat ;  et  quasi  loquela 
angelorum  loquebatur  eis.  Et  cum  horam  tertiam  fixis  in  Christo 
mentibus  celebrassent,  nihil  ausi  sunt  interrogare  illum',expectantes 
ut  ipse  prius  loqueretur.  Et  ait  eis :  '  Unusquisque  vestrum  separatim 
oret'^  sine  alterutra  salutatione.  Terra  enim  ista  sancta  est  ualde,  et 
in  multiloquio  non  deerit  peccatum.  Nam  et  antiquis  fabulis  [non] 
sine  tristitia  inepta*  letitia  nascitur.'  Et  responderunt  ei :  'Quod 
dicis  non  est  contrarium  nobis.'  Postquam  sic  ad  tempus  orabant, 
accedens  ad  eos,  ait :  '  Sextam  horam  celebrare  debemus.'  Et  cum 
celebrassent,  ait  ad  illum  Brandanus :  '  Si  Deus  uoluerit,  mansio  mea 
hic  erit.'  Cui  senior :  '  Voluntati  Dei  resistit,  qui  uoluntatem  pro- 
priam  querit.  Ecce  ego  hic  mansi  sexaginta  annis  angelorum  pabulis 
vtens  ;  et  quando  ad  hunc  locum  ueni,  pene  totum  tempus  meum 
defecit.  Tunc  Christus  Dominus  meus  locutus  est"  ad  me,  quod 
uenturus  esses  in  insulam  istam  sanctam  ;  et  ideo  mansi  triginta 
annis  in  uita  mea  infirma  adhuc.  Hodie  enim  oportet  me  intrare  ad 
uitam.  Uos  autem  ite  ad  terram  natiuitatis  vestre  post  nonam  horam. 
Et  tu  predica  genti  tue  Hibernice,  que  ad  salutem  animarum  [per- 
tinent].  Scelera  enim  gentium  per  te  abscindentur.  Deus  enim 
meus  in  hac  hora  dixit  mihi,  quod  post  finem  temporum  reliquie  tue 
ad  hanc  insulam  deducentur  cum  familia  tua,  et  cum  anchora  illa 
mirabiliter  facta  manibus  indoctis*;  et  hoc  septem  annis  ante  diem 
iudicii  ultimi.'  Hora  ergo  nona  post  hec  celebrata,  uenit  ad  eos  auis 
quedam,  que  posuit  dimidium  panis  in  conspectu  vniuslcuiusque  f.  87  <* 
eorum,  et  partem  piscis.  Et  ex  hiis  come^erunt,  gratias  largitori  in 
commune  agentes.  Post  hec  senior  ille  sanctus,  accepto  salutis 
uiatico,  obiit ;  et  ibidem  in  pace  sepultus  est'. 


1  sepult.  nocentis  S^ ;  do  adhnacul  pectach  na  drochdhaine  L.,  i.  e.  for  the 
burial  of  sinners  or  e^nl  men.  -  R^  f.  113''.  ^  -textus  R'  R-.  *  Here  L. 
in  fact  ends,  imperfectly  ;  the  remainder,  as  printed,  really  belonging  to  another 
work,  the  Fis  Adamnain,  or  Vision  of  Adamnan.  ^  et  arfrf.  K^.         "  fabulis 

sine  tristitia  sine  inepla  R'  R-.  '^  oiii.  R'  m.  pr.  R^.  '  §  Ixxiii.  supra. 

"  Here  S"  §   12  gives  a  short  summary  of  the  things  which  he  has  omitted, 
'  compellente  breuitatis  angustia.' 


I40  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

Ixxvii.  Ipsi  uero  post  biennium  ad  predictam  insulam  Ayrne  Airthir 
reuersi  sunt ;  et  ibi  a  fratribus  cum  magno  gaudio  suscepti  hospitio, 
narrauerunt  per  ordinem,  que  uiderunt.  Quibus  auditis,  fleuerunt  pre 
gaudio,  et  rogauerunt  sanctum  Brandanum  dicentes :  '  Mane  nobis- 
cum  ;  ecce  enim  terra  ista '  in  manu  tua  est.'  Quibus  ipse  respondit : 
'  Non  est  resurrectio  mea  hic  ^.'  Cumque  illic  mansissent  vno  mense, 
relinquentes  ibi  uas  suum  mirabile,  et  anchoram  suam,  uenerunt  ad 
Hiberniam"  applicante[s]  in  insula  Druma*  nomine,  prope  Lym- 
bricam  ^  ciuitatem  ^ ;  et  ibi  ieiunantes  septem  diebus  sine  humanis 
pabulis,  mortui  sunt  septem  ex  eis,  et  ibi  sepulti  sunt. 

Ixxviii.  Quodam  tempore  misit  sanctus  Brandanus'  duos  de  di- 
scipulis  suis  ad  piscatores  fluminis,  Forgus  nomine,  ut  darent  de 
piscibus  ad  opus  fratrum.  Et  cum  illi  negarent  dare,  iusto  Dei 
iudicio  factum  est  ut  fluuius  ille  sterilis  permaneret.  Et  hoc  idem 
miraculum  ob  eandem  causam  in  multis  aquis  factum  est. 

Ixxix.  Alio'  in  tempore  peruenit  ad  tcrram  cui  nomen  Clyach,  et 
ibi  illa  nocte  habitauit  in  loco  nominato  Bry  Oss  nomine'.  Et  acce- 
dentes  ad  eum  loci  illius  incole,  dicunt :  '  In  magna  temptatione  est 
locus  iste,  nam  pullices,  sicut  arena  maris  in  multitudine,  gignit.' 
Tunc  homo  Dei  compatiens  eis  orauit  dicens  :  '  Domine,  libera  eos  ab 
hac  molestia,  qui  nos  in  tuo  nomine  susceperunt.'      Et  sic  factum  est. 

Ixxx.  Quinquaginta  opida  regum  per  uerbum  eius  euacuata  sunt, 
et  sine  habitatore  permanent,  eo  quod  sanctum  uirum  habitatores 
offenderunt. 

Ixxxi.  Cum^^apud  insulam,  |  Druma  nomine,  nauem  suam  cuidam 
puero  custodiendam  commisisset ",  et,  redeunte  fluxu  maris,  germanus 
pueri  murmurando  timuisset,  ne  puer  cum  naui  perisset,  respondit 
Brandanus  :  '  Si  amplius  uis  misereri  eius  quam  ego,  uade,  et  uicem 
illius  imple,  et  custodi  nauem.'  Cumque  ille  abisset,  ut  fratri  suo 
subueniret,  mari  undique  ueniente,  demersus  est  in  aquis  uehemen- 
tibus.  Puero  uero  erat  mare  quasi  murus  a  dextris  et  a  sinistris, 
sicut  quondam  Moysi  et  populo  suo  in  mari  rubro. 

Ixxxii.  Brandanus^-  autem  de  morte  iuuenis  submersi  scrupulum 
conscientie  incurrit,  et  omnes  sanctos   Hibernie  consulens,  interro- 

1  R2  f.  113".  2  o,„,  Ri  m,  pr.  R2.  3  cf.  M  c.  12'' ;  S^  §  13.  "  insula 

de  Druma  S* ;  de  Trumma  M  ;  ag  Inis  da  Droma  Br.  ^  -cum  R'  R'. 

'^  in  septentrionali  parte  pelagi  Luymnidh  .  .  .  M  ;  iliicque  clarum  monasterium 
fundauit  M  add.  '  misit  add.  R'  m.  pr.  *    =  M  c.  13;  Capg.  i.  152. 

^  contra  montem  Porci  M.       "   =Mc.i4.       "  commiss- R' R^.       "=M.c.i5; 
S»  §  13- 


i 

r 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  141 

gavit  ab  cis  uerbum  penitentie  de  scripturis  '.  Qui  cum '  ad  nutricem 
suam  sanctam  virginem  Itam  peruenisset,  et  ei  de  morte  inuenis 
nunciasset,  dixit  ei  uirgo  Christi :  'Terram  peregrinam  debes  uisitare, 
ut  alios  ^  doceas,  et  aninias  Christo  lucrifacias'.' 

Ixxxiii.  Tunc '  ille,  uerbo  nutricis  sue  obediens,  perrexit  ad  Bri- 
tanniam.  Audiens  enim  famam  sanctissimi  Gilde,  uiri  siHcet  magne 
uirtutis,  assumptis  secuin  uiris  religiosis ",  properauit  uisitare  illum. 
Et  cum  uenissent  ad  Britanniam,  Spiritu  Sancto  aduentu[m]  eorum 
sancto  Gilde  reuelante,  dixit :  '  Preparate  cenam,  quia  populus  Dei 
sanctus  et  laboriosus  ad  nos  uenturus  est.  Prope  enim  est,  et  uide- 
bitis  quasi  Petrum  apostolum  in  carne  renouatum,  et  maximum 
patrem  ualde  laboriosum'.'  Tunc  enim  hyems  erat*.  Cum  uero  ad 
portam  ciuitatis,  ubi  uir  Dei  erat,  peruenissent,  tunc  sanctus,  uolens 
experiri  constantie  eorum  perseuerantiam,  dixit  ianitori  suo,  ut  septem 
seris  ferreis  firmaret  hostium  ciuitatis.  Illa  ergo  nocte  sub  diuo  in 
laudibus  Dei  permanentes,  licet  nix  profunda  totam  terram  operiret, 
in  nullo  tamen  tetigit'  eos.  Tunc  |  hostiarius,  mane  surgens,  de  muro  f.  88* 
ciuitatis  allocutus  est  eos,  dicens :  '  Venite  ad  portam,  et  merita 
uestra  aperiant '"  uobis.'  Tunc  sanctus  Brandanus  iussit  ministro 
suo,  Chamatho"  nomine,  ut  ostium  aperiret.  Qui  statim  iussa  com- 
plens,  accessit  ad  portam,  et  extendens  manum  ad  hostium,  reces- 
serunt  septem  sigilla  ferrea  ante  posita,  et  ultra  non  apparuerunt. 
Post  hec  uenerunt  ad  templum  quod  erat  in  ciuitate,  quod  erat  clau- 
sum  tribus  seris.  Et  cum  claues  non  haberent  ad  aperiendum,  posuit 
sanctus  Brandanus  manus  in  ualuis  ecclesie,  et  ait :  '  Mater  ecclesia 
Christi,  aperi  nobis  portas  tuas.'  Et  hoc  dicto,  nunquam  postea 
sigilla  illa  uisa  sunt. 

Ixxxiv.  Tunc '-  minister  ecclesie  ex  precepto  sancti  Gilde  dixit 
Brandano:  '  Sancte  Dei  Brandane,  offer  corpus  Domini  nostri  lesu.' 
Altare  autem  paratum  fuit,  habens  librum  grecis  conscriptum  literis^'. 
Aperiens  igitur  Brandanus  librum  ait :  '  Litere  tue,  Christe,  aperte 
sint  nobis.  Credenti  autem  in  te  omnia  possibilia  sunt.'  Et  statim 
aperte  ei  sunt  litere  ille  grece,  sicut  essent  latine  ^*.  Completa  autem 
missa,  uocatus  est  Gildas  cum  populo,  ut  sacramentum  sumerent.    Et 

'  qui  dixerunt  ei :  Vade  ad  sanctam  Dei  prophetissam  Ytam,  nutricem  tuam, 
etipsadicet  tibi,  quid  te  oportebit  facere  M  add.  -  autem  R-.  ^  quos  R' R^. 
'  S-  makes  the  journey  purely  missionary,  omitting  the  penitential  object 
altogether.  ^    =  M  c.  15  ;  S^  §  14.  *  R'  f.  113'^.  '  quem  ego  in 

aliquibus  temptabo,  ut  sciat  ipse  culpam,  propter  quam  huc  uenit,  sibi  a  Deo 
remissam  M  add.  *  et  post  tres  annos  .  .  .  ad  illum  locum  peruenit  M  add.  ; 

so  Br.  iar  m-beith  tri  bHadhna  for  sligidh  do,  i,  e.  after  he  had  been  three  years 
on  the  road.  '  detegit  R-.  ^"  -iunt  R^  "  Talmach  M  Br.  (recte. 

'-   =  M  c.  15  ;  S^  §  14.  "  missale  grece  scriptum  S^.  "  sed  diuina 

uirtus  .  .  .  aperuit  ei  sensum,  et  legit  grecum  sicut  latinum  S'. 


142  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

cum  Gildas  accederet,  ut  corpus  Domini  sumeret,  uidit  digitum  hu- 
manum'  in  disco,  et  sanguinem  in  calice.  Et  timens  Gildas  uin- 
dictam  Dei  super  se  ait :  '  Quid  merui,  ut  iudicium  Dei  super  me 
ueniret  ? '  Cui  Brandanus  ait :  '  Manus  mea  proteget  caput  tuum  a 
uindicta.  Probasti  enim  peregrinos.  Nunc  tempus  dimittendi  tibi 
est.'  Iterum  Brandanus  benedicens  altare,  apparuit  corpus  Domini 
in  disco,  et  uinum  in  calice  cum  aqua ;  et,  omnibus  aspicientibus 
corpus  Domini,  mansit  illic  tribus  diebus  et  noctibus. 

Ixxxv.  Et '  cum  sanctus  Brandanus '  nunciaret  ei  causam  sui 
itineris  uolens  silicet  habere  penitentiam  salutarem  pro  homine 
submerso,  respondit  Gildas  :  '  Non  sum  iudex  aptus  pro  culpa  tua ; 

f.  88"^  tamen  dico  tibi  ex  parte  Domini  nostri  lesu  Christi,  ut  uadas  |  in 
desertum  istud  propinquum,  ubi  leo  et  leena  habitant,  qui  plebem 
nostram  cotidie  inuadunt'.'  Audiens  sanctus  Brandanus  uerbum 
penitentie  salutaris,  letus  obedientiam  suscepit ;  atque  cum  ministro 
suo  Calmacho  ^  in  desertum  perrexit.  Et  cum  hora  merediana  ad 
loca  bestiarum  uenissent,  tunc  leenam  dormientem  inuenerunt.  Tunc 
Brandanus  ait  discipulo  suo  :  '  Ex[c]ita  bestiam  istam  de  sompno.'  Qui 
cum  fecisset,  leena  insolito  modo  de  cubili  excitata,  rugitum  magnum 
dedit.  Ettunc  leo  ad  eius  rugitum  statim  properauit.  Et  mandauit  uir 
Dei  leonibus,  ut  secum  ad  ciuitatem  properarent.  O  mira  uirtus 
omnipotentie  Dei !  qui  leones  feroces  fecit  uoci  hominis  sic  obedire, 
ut  eum  ad  ciuitatem  sequerentur,  sicut  canes  domestici  solent  do- 
minos  suos  sequi.  Et  cum  ciues  mortem  illorum  potius  quam  uitam 
expectarent,  ecce  respiciunt  eos  sanos  redire,  et  leones  per  ordinem 
eorum  uestigia  sequentes.  Tunc  ciues  ascendentes  equos  et  currus  ad 
loca  tutiora  fugerunt,  timentes,  quod  sepe  eis  euenit,  feritatem  silicet 
leonum  ;  precepit  homo  Dei  leonibus,  ut  non  nocerent  ciuibus,  set 
potius  eos  defenderent  pro  uiribus.  Quod  et  leones  fecerunt.  Nam 
sicut  canes  domestici  apud  illos  pascebantur ;  et  quasi  pastores  cu- 
stodiebant  peccora  eorum.  Quod  cernens  sanctus  Gildas,  timens 
sanctum  Brandanum,  ait :  '  Homo  Dei,  accipe  me  discipulum  atque 
ob'e'dientem  monachum  tibi  in  perpetuum.  ludicium  quoque  tuum 
in  manu  Dei  sit ;  tamen  consilium  do,  et  rogo,  ut  tibi  placeat.  Mane 
enim  hic,  et  accipe  regimen  huius  plebis  tibi,  et  locum  istum  custodi.' 
Cui  Brandanus  ait " :  '  Quid  mihi  et  mundo  presenti  ? '  Et  non  acquie- 
scens  recipere  quod  oflerebatur,  inde,  licet  flentibus  omnibus,  cuni 

f.  88  "*  benedictione  |  uiri  Dei  cum  suis  discessit  ;  quasi  enim  patrem  omnes 
diligebant  eum. 

1  carnem  crudam  M.  2   =  M  e.  i6 ;  S=  §  14.  '  R"  f.  ii^".         <  et  tibi 

Deus  concedit  ut  expellas  eas  .  .  .,  ut  per  hoc  .  .  .  scias  culpam  propter  quam 
huL-  uenisti  tibi  a  Deo  remissam  M.  ^  Chal-  R-  ;  Talmacho  S^  ;  Talmach 

M  Br.         '  '  hic  non  expectabo,  quia  resurrectio  mihi  in  Hybernia  erit  '  M. 


I 


^. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  143 

Ixxxvi.  Post '  hec  peruenit  ad  insulam  quandam  Britannie  nomine 
Auerech ',  et  ibi  fundauit  ecclesiam,  pi'oponens  ibi  manere  usque  in 
finem.  Quadam '  autem  die,  cum  solus  oraret  prope  mare  in  rupe 
cminenti,  uidit  duas  bestias  de  profundo  occeani  consurgentes,  bel- 
lumque  diirum  inter  se  agentes.  Cumque  una  *  in  fugam  uerteretur, 
ilia  bestia  fugata  ad  persequentem  se  uoce  humana  dixit  ^ :  'Adiuro 
te  in  nomine  Brigide,  uirginis  Hibernensis,  ut  me  dimittas.'  Et  mox 
dicto,  beiua  persequens  dimisit  persequi  alteram.  Auditis  hiis  bestie 
secmonibus,  rediit  homo  Dei  ad  fratres,  dicens  :  '  Cito  surgamus,  et  ad 
Hiberniam  reuertamur,  ut  salutemus  sanctam  Brigidam.'  Cum  uero 
ad  Hiberniam  uenissent,  ipse,  quod  a  bestiis  audiuit,  retulit  Brigide, 
dicens  :  '  O  Brigida,  quo  labore  meruisti,  cum  absens  esses  corpore, 
ut  meritum  tuum  marina  belua  imploraret?  Ego  enim  presens  fui 
corpore,  et  pretermissus  sum.'  Et  respondit  illa :  '  Tibi,  pater, 
veram  causam  huius  rei  indicabo.  Ex  illo  enim  die  quo  semel  dedi 
me  in  manus  Christi  mei,  mentem  meam  nunquam  in  res  mundanas 
fle.xi.  Tu  autem  in  temptationibus  frequenter  positus  es,  et  mundus 
post  te  uadit.' 

Ixxxvii.  Profectus '  est  iterum  sanctus  Brandanus  in  Britanniam, 
et  fundauit  ibi  ecclesiam,  nomine  Bledach ',  in  regione  cui  nomen 
Heth  *,  ubi  multas  fecit  uirtutes.  Vidit  quoque  ibi  mirabilem  uisionem, 
quam  fratribus  non  reuelauit,  nisi  quod  Britannia  maximam  heresim 
ante  iudicium  ultimum  teneret. 

Ixxxviii.  Postquam'  ergo  uisionem'"  illam  uidit,  cito  surgens,  ad 
Hiberniam  uenit ;  terram  Connactensium "  intrans,  habitauit  in 
quadam  insula'-  que  uocatur  insula  Maccu'^  Chuind,  in  qua  duo  equi 
regis  terre  pascebantur ;  quos  sanctus  Brandanus  in  necessitatibus 
fratrum  |  occupabat'*.  Quod  cum  rexsuperbus'^  audiens,  silicet  Edus  f.  89" 
mac  Eathach,  indignaretur,  ait :  '  Ego,'  inquit,  '  uadam,  et  uirum  illum 
interficiam,  qui  equos  meos  sic  seruiliter  Tacit  laborare.'  Et  quod 
ore  superbo  dixit,  opere  nefando  complere  uoluit.  Surgens  igitur 
quasi  furibundus,  ad  portum  insule,  ut  intraret,  aduenit.  Set  uentus 
uehemens  tribus  diebus  et  totidem  noctibus  eum  impediuit.  Expe- 
ctanti  igitur  regi  irato  serenitatem  temporis  apparuit  Dominus  in 
sompnis,  dicens  :    '  Caue   ne  aliquid  mali  facias  homini  Christiano ; 

>   =  M  cc.  16,  17  ;  S2  §  15.  2  Ailech  M  S^  Br.  '  This  incident  is  not 

in  S-.  *  K-  f.  114''.  5  In  M  the  beaten  beast  first  appeals  to  Patrick, 

and  thento  Brendan,  but  in  vain  ;  this  explains  the  '  pretermissus  sum  '  below  ; 
cf.  L.  W  i.  108,  118,  L.  S.  pp.  51-2.  6  =  M  c.  16;  S»  §  15.  '  Beldach  R^. 
*  Hech  R^;  in  terra  Ethica,  in  loco  nomine  Bledua  S^  *  =  M  c.  i8  ;  S^S  15. 
10  bis  R>  m.  pr.  "  -cium  Ri.  12  stagni  Oirbsen  S=  add.  "  Mac  R^. 

"  sanctusque  episcopus  Moenu  cum  sancto  Brendano  erat  illuc  M  add. ;  the 
incident  of  the  horses  is  not  in  S^.  '^  jniquus  R-. 


144  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

alioquin  morte  morieris.'     Tunc  ex  terribili  uisione  perterritus,  insu- 
lam  cuni  equis  uiro  Dei  donauit. 

Ixxxix.  Eodem '  tempore  misit  Brandanus  quinque  de*  suis  ad 
insulam  de  Drumma,  ut  in  ea  Deo  seruirent'.  Comorantibus  igitur 
ibidem,  accidit  quod  vnus  alium  in  capite  cum  securi  percutiens 
occidit.  Et  statim,  eo  occiso,  mittunt  fratres  nuntios  ad  sanctum 
Brandanum,  ut  indicarent  ei  de  morte  fratris.  Et  ait  ad  eos 
Brandanus  :  '  Reuertimini,  et  dicite  occiso  :  "  Surge  cito,  et  euigila  ; 
uocat  te  Brandanus." '  Quod  cum  complerent  fratres,  statim  surrexit, 
qui  mortuus  fuerat,  et  uenit  cum  eis  ad  Connactiam  *,  portans  in 
capite  securim.  Qui  cum  ad  uiruni  Dei  uenisset,  ait  ad  eum  :  '  Elige 
unum  de  duobus  modo ;  an,  silicet,  hic  uis  ulterius  uiuere,  an  modo 
ad  celum  ire.'  Ille  autem  letus  de  optione  celum  elegit,  et  mundum 
caducum  spreuit.  Et  mortuus  est  in  insula  Maccu  Chuind  ;  et  ideo 
uocatur  usque  hodie  in  ea  sepulcrum  in  ToIIcind  ^ 

xc.  Quodam"  alio'  tempore  perrexit  homo  Dei  ad  campum  illius 
insule  propinquum,  vbi  occurrit  homo  quidam,  qui  flens  procidit  ad 
pedes  eius,  dicens :  '  Miserere  mei,  homo  Dei,  quia  grauissimo 
seruitutis  onere  huic  regi  deseruio.'  Tunc  pater  pius  homini  compa- 
f.  89''  tiens  baculo  |  suo  terram  fodit,  et  de  fossura  pondus  auri  eleuauit ; 
et  tribuens  pauperi,  ait :  '  Nemini  dicas  a  quo  hoc  aurum  accepisti ; 
set  uade  ad  regem,  et  da  ei  pro  libertate  tua  et  tuorum.'  Pauper 
vero  homo,  gratias  refundens  pro  tanto  dono,  abcessit,  atque  regi  pro 
redemptione  sui  tradidit.  Set  quia  lucerna  Domini  non  potuit  poni 
sub  modio,  homo  pauper  celare  beneficium  Dei  non  potuit,  quin  regi 
propalaret,  a  quo  id  talentum  accepit.  Audiens  uero  rex  miraculum 
in  repertione '  auri  factum,  ait :  '  Aurum  Christi  non  est  meum 
custodire,  set  seruorum  eius.  Ego  enim  gratis  te  libertati  donabo ; 
et  perge  quo  uis.'  Liberatus  uero  homo  a  servitute,  ne  ingratus 
foret  liber'a'tori',  reuersus  est  ad  sanctum  Brandanum,  recognoscens 
suum  beneficium  '". 


1  =  M  c.  19;  notin  S'.  '  R' f.  114^  '  -ret  R^.  *  Connacceam  R^. 
'"'  ToUtino  R-  ;  in  .  .  .  Ynis  meic  I  Chuind,  et  sepuichrum  eius  Scottice  dicitur 
Lebaydin  tollcynd,  id  est  lectus  perforati  capitis.  qui  locus  honorifice  habetur  M. 
^    =  M  c.  20  ;  S^  §  15.  '  quodam  autem  ahquo  R-.  ^  reparatione  R". 

^  libatori  R^.  '**  Here  S-  §  16**  inserts  an  incident  which  is  quite  peculiar 

to  itself,  except  that  it  has  been  incorporated  in  the  highly  conflate  Brussels 
Irisli  life  c.  61  ;  Elapso  dehinc  tempore,  fratribus  ait :  '  In  Mananeorum  regiones 
[id  est  Y  Mani  marg.]  ire  debemus.  Terra  enim  illa  de  nobis  opus  habet ;  ibi 
forsitan  nostre  requiescent  reliquie.  Audiui  enim  angelum  illius  bellantera  in 
nomine  meo.  Nos  itaque  in  nomine  nostri  Redemptoris  subsidium  ei  confera- 
mus.*  Eo  anno  aquilonalis  p.irtis  Hibernie  regcs,  memoratusque  Edus  cum 
suis  contra  Dermicium  Hibernie  regem  in  loco  qui  Cul  Dreibne  dicitur  bellum 
commiserunt,  et  uictores  extiterunt. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  145 

xci.  Cum  •  homo  Dei  esset  annorum  septuaginta  septem,  fundauit 
ecclesiam  apud  Ciuayn  Ferta,  dicens :  '  Hic  habitabo  in  secula-.' 
Cumque  ibi  ad  tempus  moram  faceret,  mortuus  est  puer  Senanus, 
queni  secum  de  Britannia  adduxerat.  Et  tunc  Brandanus ',  dolens 
de  morte  sui  discipuli,  dixit  cuidam  episcopo  Britoni,  qui  fuit  Moneu*, 
qui  ucnerat  similiter  cum  eo  de  Britannia:  'Pone,' inquit,  'baculum 
meum  super  puerum.'  Et  ille  dum  iussa  compleret,  puer,  qui  triduo 
ante  mortuus  fuit,  sanus  et  incolumis  surrexit". 

xcii.  In'  diebus  illis  sancta  Ita,  de  absentia  sui  alumpni,  silicet 
sancti  Brandani,  dolens,  dixit :  'O  si  uideam  oculis  meis  sanctum 
Brandanum,  dilectum  alumpnum  meum,  et  percipiam  auribus  meis 
uocem  eius,  et  sumam  de  manibus  eius  corpus  Domini  mei  lesu 
Christi  hac  instanti  nocte  natiuitatis  eiusdem  Domini  mei ! '  Et 
exaudita  est  oratio  eius.  Nam  nocte  preoptata'',  ueluti  alter  Abacuc 
propheta,  ab  angelo  subleuata  est  sursum  per  aera,  et  circa  uigiliam 
primam  noctis  ad  CIuaj'n  Ferta  mirabiliter  deducta.  Quod  in  spiritu 
cognoscens  sanctus  Brandanus,  cito  1  consurgens,  uenit  obuiam  sue  f.  • 
nutrici'.  Vbi  autem  steterunt  pedes  uirginis,  lapis  in  signum  miraculi 
positus  est.  Et  dixit  Brandanus :  '  Hic  erit  sepultura  leprosorum  ;" 
quod  et  factum  est.  Illa  ergo,  accepto  corpore  Domini  de  manu 
Brandani,  itinere  septem  dierum'  in  ictu  oculi  ab  angelo  subleuata 
eodem  modo  per  aera  deducta  est. 

xciii.  Quodam"  aIio'i  tempore,  perambulans  Momoniam,  uenit  ad 
terram  que  Muscraige  Tj^re  uocatur ;  vbi  ignis  mirabilis  de  terra  ipsa 
exortus  est,  qui  flammam  sulphuream  et  horribiliter  fetentem  usque 
ad  ethera  emittebat.  Et  tunc  homo  dei  ait  plebi :  '  Videte,  homines, 
ignem  infernalem.'  Tantus  enim  erat  feruor  illius,  quod  per  tres 
annos  tota  plebs  cum  multis  aquis  non  potuit  extinguere  eum. 
'leiunate',  inquit  sanctus  ad  eos,  'per  triduum,  et  orate  Deum,  ut 
ignem  extinguat.'  Et  illis  ieiunantibus,  iterum  addidit  dicens  :  '  Ite 
omnes  ad  sanctam  uestram  Keram'^  ut  oret  pro  uobis,  quia  ipsi 
dabitur  a  Domino  uirtus  extinguendi  hunc  ignem.'  Cumque  omnes 
ad  illam  pergerent,  et  humiliter  pro  extinctione  tanti  mali  eam 
rogarent,  eadem  hora,  ea  deprecante,  ignis  ille  sublatus  est,  nec 
amplius  apparuit.    Quia  enim  uirgo  sanctissima  ignem  concupiscentie 

■   =  M  c.  21 ;  S-  §  16'' ;  Capg.  i.  152.  -  Ps.  cxxxi.  14.  '  R-  f.  114'*. 

*  Moeneiu  M.  ^  receptaque  incolumitate,  missus  est  .  .  .  in  Brittaniam 

M  add. ;  osin  alle  Cluain  Ferta  Br.  add.,  i.  e.  thencelorward  [the  place  was  called] 
C.  F.  (the  field  of  the  miracle  .  ^  =  M  c.  22 ;  Capg.  u.s.  '  preoctata  R' ; 
uoce  preoccata  R-.  '  de  sua  ecclesia  cum  communione  dominica  foras  in 

atrio  M  adJ.  '  iter  trium  dierum  inter  monasterium  S.Yte,  Cluayn  Creda?, 

.  .  .  et .  .  .  Cluain  Ferta  . .  .  constat  M.  The  distance  in  a  straight  line  seems 
to  be  about  75  miles.  ">   =  M  c.  23.  ''  aliquo  R^  "  Chiar  M. 


146  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

carnalis  in  se  edomauit,  ideo  ardorem  illius  ignis  in  populum  carnalem 
seuientem  apud  Deum  extinguere  meruit^ 

xciv.  Post  hec  uenit  sanctus  Brandanus  ad  uisitandum  alium 
Brandanum  usque  ad  Birram  ciuitatem,  ubi  homo  Dei  in  contempla- 
tione  celestium  demorabatur.  Tempus  uero,  quo  illuc  uenerat  cum 
suis,  erat  quadragesimale,  et  in  parascheue  specialiter.  Cum  uero 
uir  Dei  in  aduentu  hospitum  esset  angustiatus,  eo  quod  cibum  alium, 
quem  coram  eis  apponeret,  preter  carnes  non  haberet ;  caritate 
urgente,  id  quod  habuit,  silicet  carnes  porcinas  salsas,  coram  eis, 
f-  £9''  ut  comederent,  apponere  curauit.  Hospiltes  'uero',  formam  euangeli- 
cam  seruantes,  coraederunt  de  appositis,  nihil  propter  conscientiam 
interrogantes  -.  Et  cum  omnes  in  Dei  timore  atque  amore  de  annona 
allata  cum  gratiarum  actione  sumerent,  vnus  conuersus,  immo  a  lege 
fraternitatis  auersus,  lardum  respuens,  panem  solum  coram  omnibus 
comedit.  Crastino  uero  die  fragmenta  fratrum  de  carnibus  panes  de 
tritico  puro  uidebantur ;  set  residuum  conuersi  de  suo  pane  cruda 
caro  s[c]aturiens  vermes  apparebat.  Cui  Brandanus  ait :  '  Isto  anno 
carnem  iumenti  lactantis  pullum  suum  igni  assatam^  in  siluis 
comedes ;  et  eadem  hora  ab  inimicis  iugulab[er]is.'  Et  ita  comple- 
tum  est,  ut  uir  Dei  dixit. 

xcv.  Regnante*  Dermitio  filio  Kerballi  in  Hibernia,  exiit  sanctus 
Brandanus  in  regiones  aquilonares  terre,  visitare  cupiens  sanctos 
jbidem  °  habitantes.  Et  tunc  rex  Dermitius  uidit  sompnium ;  id  est, 
duos  angelos  subleuantes  cathenam  auream  de  collo  eius,  et  tradentes 
eam  alicui  uiro  maturo  posito  inter  seniores  multos.  Postera  autem 
die  uenit  sanctus  Brandanus  ad  regem  salutandum.  Cumque  eum 
uidisset  rex,  ait:  'Vere  hic  est  uir,  de  quo  dixi  uobis  heri,  cui 
in  sompnis  uidi  quod  daretur  torques  aureus  de  collo  meo.'  Et  tunc 
sapientes  regis  dixerunt  ei :  '  Regnum  tuum,  o  Rex,  consum[m]atum 
est,  et  sanctis  uiris  ecclesiasticis  dabitur.  Et  hic  uere  est,  cui  a  Deo 
'et'  angelis  eius  regnum  tuum  donatum  est''.'  Relatum  est  autem 
sompnium  beato  Brandano,  et  qualiter  sapientes  dixerunt  interpreta- 
tionem  eius  regi ;  et  ait :  '  Verus  est  hic  sermo,'  inquit,  '  quia  colenti- 
bus  Deum  omnia  cooperantur  in  bonum''.  "Querite",  inquit  Saluator, 
"  primum  regnum  Dei,  et  hec  omnia  adicientur*  uobis'."' 

xcvi.  Cum  uir  Dei  cum  suis  quodam  tempore  hospitaretur  apud 

quemdam  patrem  familias,  acciditut  unus  e  fratribus  obliuioni  traderet 

I  90'  calciamenta  sua  ibi ;  |  et  cum  frater  rediret,  et  sotulares  inueniret, 

1  R2  f.  115'.  '  I  Cor.  X.  25.  '  MSS. -tum.  <  =  M  c.  24.  ^  in  regione 
Midhi  M.  '  et  hic  sanctus  magnam  parochiam  per  Hyberniam  habebit  M 
add.  '  Rom.viii.  28.  *  R^  f.  115^  "  Matt.  vi.  33;  et  rex  Diarmayt 

honorem  dedit  S.  Brendano  ;  iusti  tenax  enim  et  catholicus  erat  ipse  rex  M  add. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  147 

fratres  in  reditu  eius  Deum  laudabant,  quod  integros  sine  corruptione 
alica  inueniret.  Tunc  Brandanus  ait  fratribus  :  'O  fratres,  laudate 
Dominum,  et  hoc  quod  uobis  dicam  nulli  dixeritis,  quandiu  ego  in 
hac  uita  durauero.  Senior  enim  noster,  episcopus  Ercus,  quodam 
tempore  dedit  inihi  uas  quoddam  eneum  in  quo  consueuit  bibere, 
mandans  ut  illud  diligenter  custodirem.  Et  hoc  uas  in  dorso  belue 
marine  reliquimus  in  primo  paschate,  quando,  mouente  se  bestia, 
fratres  fugerunt,  relictis  ibi  suis  utensilibus '  ad  nauem.  De  huius 
uassis  perditione  dolui,  timens  transgredi  mandatum  senioris.  In 
sequente  uero  paschate,  quando  ad  eundem  locum  peruenimus, 
uasculum  nostrum,  ubi  dimisimus,  illibatum  reperimus.  Et  hoc  uas 
mecum  detuli,  et  episcopo  Erco  iterum  dedi.  Audiens  uero  pius 
pater  uassis  amis[s]ionem,  et  iteratam  mirabilem  inuentionem,  ait 
cum  fletu :  "  O  uas  eneum,  in  quo  meruisti  magnum  per  te  fieri 
miraculum  ?  Tu  enim  de  cetero  eris  karissimum,  ut  permaneas 
posteris  in  exemplum."    Quod  et  factum  est.' 

xcvii.  Quadam  '^  die  hyemali  ambulans  uir  Dei  cum  fratribus,  irruit 
tempestas  niuis'  et  grand[in]is*  super  eos,  ita  quod  uix  poterant 
incedere.  Nix  uero  cooperuit  terram.  Et  dixerunt  fratres,  humano 
modo  sapientes,  ad  inuicem :  '  Numquid  pena  infernalis  est  maior 
isto  frigore?'  Audiens  hec  Brandanus  ait :  'Audite,  fratres,  id  quod 
dicam  uobis.  In  nauigationibus  meis  quodam'  die  audiuimus  in 
pelago  fletum  et  planctum  magnum,  ita  quod  hor[r]uit  spiritus 
cuiusque  nostrum.  Et  nauigauimus  ad  locum  ei  propinquum,  scire 
uolentes  flendi  causam.  Et  ecce  uidimus  os^  maris  apertum,  et  in 
eo  conspeximus  petram  unam,  super  quam  erat  uox  illa  lugubris  et 
miserabilis.  Mare  enim  |  undique  super  petram  ascendebat,  et  ab  f-  9°' 
oriente  fluctus  igneos,  ab  occidente  uero  fluctus  glaciales  et  intollera- 
bilis  frigoris  emittebat.  Et  sic  uerificatum  est  uerbum  lob',  quod  in 
suppliciis  ibunt  ab  aquis  niuium  *  ad  calorem  nimium.  Et  interro- 
gantes,  quis  esset,  qui  sic  uocem  flebilem  emitteret,  respondit,  qui 
sic  patiebatur:  "ludas,"  inquit,  "Scariothis  ego  sum,proditor  Christi, 
et  usque  ad  diem  magni  iudicii  hic  expecto  resurrectionem '."  Et 
tunc  omnes  fleuimus,  compatientes  miserie  sue.'  Et  postquam  hec 
narrauit,  intulit  dicens :  '  Nonne,  fratres,  maior  est  ">  illa  lude  miseria 
quam  hec  pena  frigoris  quam  hodie  patimur  ? ' 

xcviii.    Quodam  "  alio ''  tempore,  cum  uir  Dei  cum  suis  stetisset  in 
quodam  loco  ameno  ualde  et  pulcro,  dixerunt  fratres  ad  eum:  'Nullus 

'  utensibus    R''.  ^   =  M  c.   25  ;  see  p.   130,   note  5.  '  nimis  R*. 

*  grandis  R'  R''.  ^  in  dominico  M.  *  hos  R'.  '  c.  xxiv.  ig. 

®  nimium  R^.  ^  '  et  hec  pena  maxima  sibi  requies  uidebatur  ;  in  dominicis 

enim  diebus  pro  requie  sibi  clementia  Dei  talis  locus  datur.  Quid  est  igitur 
esse  in  inferno  ? '  M.  '"  R'  inserts  '  fratres  '  again.  "   —  Capg.  i.  152. 

"  aliquo  R2. 

L2 


148  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

hominum  potest  terram  istam  pulcram  relinquere  prepter  Christum.' 
Quibus  ait  ipse  :  'Audite  uerbum  istud.  Erat  quidam  uir  ualde  diues' 
in  finibus  Corcumruad,  habens  duas  uxores,  secundum  legem  illius 
temporis.  Et  liic  homo  ambulabat  in  mandatis  Dei,  dona  et  decimas 
dans  in  honore  eius.  Et  dixerunt  ei  uxores :  "  Quousque  sic  co- 
habitabimus' ?"  Et  respondit  ipse:  "Vsque  dum  discordiam  inter 
uos  habueritis.  Dominus  enim  lesus  Christus  per  discordiam  eicitur 
ab  hominibus,  et  tunc  demones  ei[s]  appropinquant."  Post  uero  ali- 
quantulum  temporis,  audiens  eas  inter  se  rixantes,  surrexit,  Spiritu 
sibi  consulente,  et  pergens  solus  ad  mare,  cui  nomen  Ath  Lagen 
prope  Arann,  et  ibi  inueniens  nauim  a  Deo  paratam  ',  intrauit,  et  per- 
ductus  est  ad  insulam  quandam  ab  hominibus  ualde  semotam,  in  qua 
permansit  usque  quo  nobis  predicauit,  et  eukaristiam  de  manu  mea 
accepit.  Et  hic  more  auis  pilis  corporis  sui  tegebatur.  Beatas  ergo 
erit  qui  mundum  istum  reliquerit ',  sicut  uir  ille  fecit.' 

f.  90  "■  xcix.  Quadam  ^  |  die,  cum  sanctus  Brandanus  in  desertis  Gallie 
cum  suis  ambularet,  flante  maximo  uento,  dixit  unus  ex  fratribus  : 
'  Nos  timemus  quod  iste  magne  arbores  cadant  super  nos,  et  occidant 
nos.'  Audiens  hec,  Brandanus  ait :  'Audite  me,  fratres.  Quadam 
nocte,  cum  essemus  in  mari,  ceteris  dormientibus,  ego  solus  uigi- 
labam.  Et  cum  sic  essem  in  oratione,  ecce  quandam  insulam  in 
mari  uidi,  que  quattuor  columpnis  in  altum  extensis  fulcitabatur,  et 
subtus  illas  intrabant  naues.  Nam  tres  erant  ibi  naues  simul  *  funi- 
bus  alligate,  et  uentus  agitabat  eas.  Uidete  ergo  quia  Deus,  qui  insu- 
lam  super  quattuor  columpnas  sustinet,  potest  nos  hodie  a  casu 
istarum  arborum  liberare.' 

c.  Alio '  quoque  tempore  dixit  unus  de  fratribus  alteri  coram  uiro 
Dei :  '  Si  peccata  mortuorum  redimi  possunt  ab  amicis  suis  uiuenti- 
bus?'  Tunc  pius  pater  audiens  uerbum,  dixit:  'Audite  me,  fratres. 
Cum  in  mari  magno  quadam  nocte  essemus,  et  corporibus  nostris 
quietem  dormiendi,  preter  unum,  qui  uigilabat,  daremus ;  ecce  per- 
uigil  noster  ab  extremis  occidentalibus  partibus  nubem  quandam 
ualde  horribilem  et  obscuram  ad  se  accedere  intuetur.  Tunc  ille 
timore  simul  atque  terrore  percussus,  ad  me  excitandum  properauit, 
dicens :  "  Euigila,  pater,  et  uide  nubem  mirabilem,  et  audi  uocem 
lugubrem.  Ecce  enim  in  medio  eius  apparet  forma  hominis  nigri 
ualde,  sicut  carbo  aut  coruus."  Et  cum  appropinquasset  ad  nauem, 
fecit  planctum  magnum,  dicens  mihi :  "Obsecro  te,  in  nomine  lesu 
Christi,  ut  hodie,  et  cras,  et  dominico  die,  post  cras,  roges  Dominuni 

^  diues  uir  ualde   R^*  -  quousque  sic  habitabis  nobiscum,  nostro  non 

utens  connubio?  Capg.  ^  -tum  Ri  R^ ;  paratum  a  Deo  R*.         *  relinquerit 

Ri  R'.         5   =  M  c.  26.  6  R2  f.  115"^.  '   =  Capg.  i.  153. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  149 

pro'  mc  ;  quia  sum  spiritus  cuiusdam  peccatoris."  Et  hiis  dictis, 
abcessit.  Tunc  surreximus  omnes,  et  pro  ipso  Dominum  rogauimus. 
Post  tres  '^  uero  dies  iterum  uenit,  |  quasi  iacintino  corpore  apparens,  f.  90'' 
et  leniore  planctu  ostendens  tristitiam.  Et  tunc  iterum  attente  rogauit, 
ut  pro  co  Dominum  iterato  tribus  aliis  diebus  deprecaremur.  Et  cum^ 
hoc  di.xisset,  statim  abcessit.  Cumque  pro  eo  diuinam  clementiam 
iterum  pulsaremus,  tunc  in  fine  ebdomade  in  nube  quadam  pallida  et 
in  corpore  splendido  sicut  sol  comparuit ;  et  in  illa  nube  pallida 
audiebamus  quasi  septem  alias  uoces  similes  uoci  eius.  Et  tunc  ait 
ipse  ad  nos  :  "  Gratias  ago  Deo  meo  et  uobis,  quia  ob  preces  uestras 
mecum  fecit  misericordiam ;  et  nunc  uocat  me  in  mansionem  cele- 
stcm."  Et  tunc  dixi  ad  eum  :  "  Quod  est  nomen  tuum  .'"  Et  ait  ad 
eum ' :  "  Colmanus  monacus,  qui  fui  ualde  iracundus  et  turbator 
fratrum."  Et  cum  benediceret  fratribus,  properauit  ad  celum.  In 
hoc,  fratres,  apparet,  quod  oratio  uiuorum  ualde  proficit  mortuis.' 

ci.  Quodam '  alio  tempore  uenerunt  reges  Momonie  ad  deuastan- 
dum  terram  Conactie  in  multitudine  magna  atque  potentia.  Tunc'^ 
sanctus  Brandanus  rogatus  a  Conactensibus'  obuiam  prefatis  regibus 
uenit,  ut  conatum  eorum  impediret.  Set  preces  uiri  Dei  non  fuerunt 
exaudite.  Noluerunt  enim  intelligere,  ut  bene  agerent*.  Set  quem 
feritas  humana  non  auscultauit,  pietas  diuina  exaudiuit.  Uiro  enim 
Dei  orante,  atque  cum  sancto  Heliseo  propheta  contra  superbos 
Assirios  se  in  oratione  erigente,  ecce  ipsi  peccatores  de  loco,  in  quo 
steterunt,  ire  non  preualuerunt,  set  in  circuitu,  passione  uertiginis 
seducti,  rotabantur^,  ambulando  circa  unum  semper  locum.  Et  quia 
uexatio  dat  aliquando'"  intellectum  ",  et  sui  recognitionem,  conuersi 
ab  impietate  sue  intentionis,  dixerunt  ad  inuicem :  '  Stultum  est, 
quod  conamur.  Quis  enim  potest  nutui  Dei  uiui  resistere  uel  con- 
traire?  Reuertamur,'  inquit,  | 'ad  terram  nostram,  et  dimittamus  f- 9' " 
hac  uice  Conactiam.'  Et  reuersi  sunt  ad  propria,  frustrati'^  a  desiderio 
suo.  Rediit  igitur  homo  Dei  ad  suos,  gratias  agens  Deo  omnipotenti, 
qui  sic  restitit  regum  iniquitati. 

Et  cum  in  uia  deambularet,  oblatus  est  ei  mutus^'  quidam  ex  utero 
matris  sue.  Et  cum  in  nomine  Domini  benediceret  linguam  eius, 
mox  locutus  est  mutus,  et  admirati  sunt  astantes. 

cii.  Post"  hec  uenit  pius  pater  ad  uisitandum  sororem  suam 
Brigam,  que  habitabat  in  loco  qui  dicitur  Enach  Duyn'^    Cumque 

1  post  Ri  R2.  2  bis  Ri.  s  (,,„.  Ri.  4  sic  Ri  R2  ;  it  should  be 

'ad  <»((■'.     The  compiler  has  momentarily  forgotten  that  Brendan  is  speaking. 
'-   =  M  c.  27  ;  Capg.  u.  s.         «  R2  f.  116".  '  -cibus  Ri  R^.         «  Ps.  xx.w.  4. 

'  rog-  R'  m.  pr.  R".  '"  R'  inserts  uexatio  ■  again.  "  Is.  xxviii.  ig. 

'2  sunt  add.  R-.  "  est  ei  mutus  bis  R'  m.  pr.  "    =  M  c.  28  ;  S*  §  17. 

''  quae  sub   cura  S.  Brendani    monasterium,  quod  dicitur  Enach  Duin,  guber- 
nabat .  .  .  in  plebe  Hua  Bruin  M.     Quam  [sc.  Brigam]  .  .  .  sue  resurrectionis 


150  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ibi  esset,  quodam  die  dominico  post  missarum  sollempnia  dixit 
fratribus :  '  Hodie  uocat  me  Dominus  meus  in  uitam  eternam.  Vos 
autem,  me  defuncto,  deferte  corpus  meum  iiinc  usque  ad  ciuitatem 
meam  Cluaynfertensem.  Illic  enim  erit  usque  in  sempiternum 
adiutorium  misericordie  Dei.  Vnus  autem  ex  uobis  debet  corpus 
meum  portare  in  curru,  ne  plebs  uideat  planctum  multitudinis.  Set 
et  corpus  meum  deferenti  o[c]curret  laycus  quidam  monoculus, 
nomine  Currenus '  mac  Setny  ^,  qui  dicet  fratri :  "  Quid  portas  sic 
occulte  in  curru!"  Et  accedens  percipiet  corpus  meum  esse  in 
curru ;  et  dicet  uerbo  horribili :  "  Relinque  hic  sanctum  Dei.  Hic 
enim  erit  resurrectio  tua,  sancte  Dei."  Et  tunc  auriga,  extendens 
manum  ad  glebam  proximam,  inueniet  pondus  auri  ibi,  et  dicet  illi : 
"Accipe  aurum  istud,  et  permitte  nos  ire  uiam  desideratam."  Et 
dicet :  "  Non  permittam ' ;  nec  aurum  tuum  accipiam."  Et  iterum 
dicet  ei  frater :  "  Regnum  plebis  tue  tenebis,  et  semen  tuum  post 
te  per  tempora."  Et  adhuc  frater  dicet  signum  certum,  quod  ille 
cogitauit  hodie  quomodo  tenebit  principatum  inter*  fratres  suos.  Et 
tunc  dimittet  illum  in  pace  ire.     Et  frater  benedicat  eum  ex  hoc°.' 

ciii.  Et'  cum  hec  omnia  dixisset  verus  futurorum  cognitor,  in 
speculo  enim  diuinitatis  omnia  futura  sibi  presentia  erant,  valefecit 
f.  91 ''  fratribus  et  sorori  sue,  que  Briga,  id  est  uirtuosa,  uocabatur.  Et  |  cum 
domum  intrare  conaretur,  decidit  super  limen  domus  dicens :  '  In 
manus  tuas,  Domine,  commendo  spiritum  meum  ;  redemisti  me, 
Domine  Deus  ueritatis'.'  Et  tunc,  hiis  dictis  uerbis^,  inter  manus 
sanctorum  discipulorum  suorum,  expletis  nonaginta  tribus  annis, 
perfectus  Christi  imitator  existens,  angelis  quorum  disciplinam  tenuit 
in  terris  exultantibus,  migrauit  ad  celum. 

locum  edocens,  ait :  '  Non  hic  .  .  .  sed  in  tua,  scilicet  Ciarrageorum  [MS.  Trag-] 
terra  resurges.  IUuc  ergo  proficiscere,  quia  gens  illa  Dei  misericordiam  in  tc 
consequetur.  Locus  iste  uirorum  est,  non  mulierum.'  Et  addidit  .  .  .  :  '  Tertia 
.  .  .  ab  hac  die  patrum  mcorum  ingrediar  uiam.'  Illa  autcm  dies  erat  dominica. 
Qua,  post  oblata  altaris  sacramenta,  astantibus  ait  :  '  Commendate  precibus 
uestris  exitum  meum.'  Et  Briga  ait :  'Quid  .  .  .  times,  pater?'  'Timeo', 
inquit,  '  si  solus  migrauero,  si  tenebrosum  fuerit  iter  ;  timeo  inexpertam  regionem, 
regis  presentiam,  iudicis  sententiam'  S*  ;  this  beautiful  trait  has  been  omitted 
jn  the  other  Lives,  perhaps  because  it  was  considered  that  such  human  shrinlving 
was  unworthy  of  a  saint.  A  similar  instance  occurs  in  the  Lives  of  Ciaran  of 
Clonmacnois.  See  the  Introduction  to  his  Life  ;  and  the  Life  §  xxxi  note.  The 
account  in  S*  may  itself  be  a  later  and  more  Christian  version  of  the  story  given 
in  LL.  371",  where  the  interlocutor  is  Bishop  Moenu  or  Moinenn.  Unfor- 
tunately  it  is  mutilated  and  obscure.  '  Curryun  M.  '^  Secny  R^. 

'  R^  f.  116''.  *  interficiens  M.  ^  In   S''  all  these  details  are  omitted, 

Brendan  merely  ordering  that  his  body  shall  be  carried  secretly  to  Clonfert  : 
Deinde,  singulis  deosculatis,  sancte  Brigeait :  'Saluta  ex  parte  meaamicos  meos, 
et  sibi  a  blasphemia,  licet  uera,  quanto  magis  falsa,  cauere  dic  eis.  Blasphemi 
etenim  filii  perditionis  sunt.'  ^   =  M  c.  29  ;  S*  §  17.  '  Ps.  xxx.  6. 

'  atque  quibusdam  de  futuri  statu  prophetizatis  S^  add. 


VITA  PRIMA  SANCTI  BRENDANI  151 

civ.  Set  hoc  pretereundutn  non  est,  quod  in  uita  sancti  Columbe 
abbatis  legitur.  Sicut  Christus  Lazari  dormitionem  apostolis  nun- 
ciauit,  sic  sanctus  CoUniiba  in  spiritu  suis  prenunciauit  discipulis  de 
morte  sancti  Brandani.  Vidit  enim  animam  illius  inter  angeiorum 
choros  ad  celestia  transferri ;  et  ideo  sacra  missarum  soUempnia  in 
eius  honorem  precepit  iratribus  celebrari. 

ev.  Crastina*  uero  die,  ut  ipse  ante  ordinauerat,  positum  fuit  in 
curru  suo  corpus  benedictum^  eius,  et  solus  auriga  secum  in  uia, 
ne  ab  incolis  terre  teneretur^  Et,  sicut  ante  uir  Dei  dixerat*,  ecce 
quidam  laycus,  Currenus  nomine,  occurrit  in  itinere ;  qui  omnia  que 
sanctus  Brandanus  predixcrat  complens,  tandem  tamen  ad  hoc  In 
fine  deuenit,  quod  licentiam  ducendi  corpus  usque  ad  Cluayn  Ferta 
condonauit.  Auriga  ergo  sic  ab  illo  permissus,  duxit  secum  sanctum 
pignus  sine  alico  impedimento'  usque  ad  locum  prefatum  ;  et  ibi 
cum  honore  debito  sepultum  decimo  septimo  kalendas  lunii,  re- 
gnante  Domino  nostro  lesu  Christo,  qui  cum  Patre  et  Spiritu  Sancto 
uiuit  et  regnat  Deus  in  ^  secula  seculorum.    Amen. 

EXPLICIT  UITA  SANCTI   BrANDANI '^ 


1   =  M  c.  29  ;  S^  §  18.  2  -to  Ri  RK  3  tenetur  R'.  ■>  di.xit  R3. 

°  per  iter  trium  dierum  M  atlii.  "  per  omnia  R^.  '  sanctissimi  Brandani 

abbatis   de   Cluaynferta    Brenaind.     Cuius   meritis  et  precibus  deleatur  culpa 
scriptoris.     Amen.     R^. 


Vita  sancti  (Cainniri  alibatis  trc  ^cljati  B6 
(JTainnict 

f.  ,24»  Incipit  vita  sancti  Cainnici'  abbatis 

i.  Cainnicus'',  sanctus  abbas,  de  genere  Connath  Dhuinne  Gem- 
hyn',  que  est  aquilonaHs  pars  Hibernie  insule,  ortus.  Cuius  pater 
poeta  venerabilis  fuit,  et  dicebatur  Lughaydh  Leithdhearg* ;  mater 
vero  erat  de  nepotibus  mic  Nais^,  et  nomen  eius  uocabatur  Mella". 
Hii  ergo  parentes  sancti  Cainnici  in  loco,  in  quo  natus  est,  uaccam 
non  habebant,  de  cuius  lacte  sanctus  infans  nutriretur.  Tunc 
Deus  omnipotens  hoc  miraculum  fecit,  quia  eum  elegit  a  natiuitate 
ipsius,  ut  mitteret  in  nocte  natiuitatis  eius'  vaccam  pulcram*  ad 
domum,  in  qua  natus  est  sanctus  Cainnichus  ;  et  in  crastino  venit 
vitulus  post  matrem,  de  cuius  lacte  sanctus  infans  est  nutritus. 
Mirati  omnes  sunt  vnde  vac[c]a  illa  venit.  Sanctus  igitur  Cainnicus 
baptizatus  est  a  venerabili  episcopo,  nomine  Luyrech,  quem  misit 
Deus  ad  eum  baptizandum^  Sanctus  autem  Cainnicus  in  propria 
regione  sua^"  natus  est ;  set  in  regione  mic  Nayss'^  nutritus  est, 
in  loco  qui  dicitur  Chemnughe". 

ii.  PuER  i^  sanctus  Cainnicus  quodam  die  foris  in  agro  erat ",  alius- 
que  puer  secum  iunctus  nomine  Geal  Bregach,  id  est  Albus  mendax  ; 
ipse  enim  puer  scuta  et  hastas  ad  ludendum  faciebat.  Sanctus 
autem  Cainnicus"  diuinis  operibus  uacabat.  Videns  idem  Albus '^ 
Cainnicum  volentem  Deo  placere,  inter  licita  poma  furtiua  com- 
miscebat,  et  sancto  puero  ignoranti  dabat ;  set  sanctus  puer  illicita 
ignoranter  commedens,  statim  vomebat.  Tandem,  Spiritu  Sancto 
sibi  reuelante,  agnoscens  illicita,  mirabiliter  repellebat,  digna  autem 
conimedebat. 

1  On  margin  of  M  a  pedigree  of  Cainnech  in  Irish,  which,  except  as  to  three 
generations,  does  not  agree  with  either  of  the  alternative  pedigrees  given  in 
LL.  34S''.  2   =S  §§  1-3  ;  Ri  f.  128"^,  R-  f.  143".     Kannechus  S,  and  so 

generaily ;  Kynnicus  R,  and  eo  generally,  but  with  various  other  spellings. 
^  s:c  MS  ;  it  should  be  Ciannacht  Duine  Gemhin  ;  Corcodalann  S  ;  Corchu 
daland  R.  *  Laidech  Lecerd  S;  Laydecus  R.  ^  sic  MS  ;  it  should 

be  Uais  ;  Macguais,  Macguas  S.  *  Meld  S  ;  Melda  R.  '  ab  insula 

NuHge,  ubi  est  origo  gentis  eius  S  adt^.  ^  a  stagno  aque  S  add.  ^  Much 

fuUer  in  S.  ">  scilicet  in  Valle  pellis  S  add.  11  Kenn  Buge  S  ;   Reeves 

read  it  as  Themnughe;  see  Index.  '*   =S  §  3  ;  R'  f.  128'',  R^  f.  143''. 

"  peccora  pascebat  S.  ''  quando  ludum  faciebat,  ecclesias  paruas  [sibi  R] 

construebat  S  R.  ^^  MS.  abbas. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  153 

iii.  CuM  *  crgo  sanctus  Cainnicus  creuisset,  ct  perfectus  esset 
sensu,  voluit  scientiam  discere,  ct  religiose  vite  vacarc.  Perrexit  ad 
mare,  transnauigauitquc  ad  Britanniam  ad  virum  rcligiossum  et 
sapientem,  nomine  Docum'.  Legit  vero  apud  illum  sedule,  et  mores 
bonos  didicit.  Hic  sanctus  toto  corde  erat  humilis  valde  et  obediens. 
Quodam  autem  die,  cum  sanctus  Cainnicus  scriberet,  audiuit  uocem 
niagistri '  invitantis  fratres  ad  opera  ;  et  pro  festinacione  obedientie 
implende  dimediam  partem  scribens  litere  o,  alteram  partem  semi- 
plenam  reliquit  imperfectam.  Ab  illo  autem  die  abbas,  magister  eius, 
dilc.xit  eum  ualde. 

iv.  ViDENs'  autem  yconomus  quod  abbas  multum  diligebat  sanctum  f.  124 
Cainnicum,  instinctu  diabolico  odiuit  eum,  et  persecutus  est  in 
omnibus.  Quadam  die  ipse  iracundus  venit  ad  sanctum  Cainnicum 
legentem,  et  increpauit  eum,  dicens  :  'Omnes  fratres  cum  plaustris 
trans  fretum  maris  "in'  primo  mane,  quando  fuit  siccum,  perrexerunt ; 
et  tu  sedes.  Surge,  male  homo,  et  post  eos  cito  perge.'  Tunc 
sanctus  Cainnicus  obediens  statim  surrexit.  Volens  yconomus  illi 
malum  facere,  misit  illum  ad  duos  boues  indomitos  et  feros,  quia 
putabat  quod  non  potuisset  Cainnicus  apprehendere  eos.  Set  cum 
venisset  'ad  eos',  diuina  virtute  facti  sunt  mites.  Veniens  ergo 
sanctus  Cainnicus  cum  plaustro,  invenit  tunc  fretum  impletum 
invndacione  magna,  maris  vndis  tumescentibus  ;  erat  enim  siccum 
quando  fratres  per  fretum  transierunt.  Tunc  Dominus  diuisit  fretuni 
in  duas  partes  ;  et  sanctus  vir,  plenus  Spiritu  Sancto,  apparente  arida 
terra,  siccis  pedibus  cum  plaustro  transiuit,  et  simili  modo  reddiit. 
Quod  sanctus  abbas  uidens,  valde  dilexit  Dominum,  et  discipulum 
obedientem  honorauit ;  j'conomumque  persecutorem  eius  increpauit, 
et  ipse  conuersus  est  ab  odio. 

V.  Postquam'  autem  sanctus  Kainnicus  canones*^  legisset,  et 
ecclesiasticas  regulas  didicisset,  pergere  Romam  voluit';  et  hoc 
sancto  magistro  suo  *  multum  placuit.  Tunc  accipiens  sanctus 
Cainnicus  sacerdotalem  gradum,  peregre  perrexit  in  Ytaliam  ;  ibi 
uirtutes  multas  Deus  fecit  per  ipsum.  Quodam  enim  die,  cum  ibi 
iter  ageret  sanctus  Cainnicus,  in  manus  duodecim  latronum  'incidit', 
qui  eum  occidere  uoluerunt.  Sanctus  vero  Cainnicus  predicabat  eis 
verbum  Dei.  Illi  autem  non  audientes  eum,  eleuauerunt  manus  ad 
interficiendum    eum ;    set    statim    quasi   lapides    siccati  sunt,    non 

'   =S  §  4  ;  R'  R^  u,  s.  2  Docc  S  ;  sancti  Doaci  R.         '  sonum  [sonitum 

R]  tintinabuli  S  R.  <   =S  §  5  ;  Ri  f.  129«,  R*  u.  s.  ^   =S  §§  6,  7  ; 

Ri  u.  s.,  R-  f.  143".  ^  utrumque  canonem  S  ;  i.  e.  O.T.  and  N.T.  '  et  post 
hec  ad  Hyberniam  reuerti,  ut  suam  plebem  agentilitate  ad  Dominum  conuerteret 
S  aiid.  (,not  K).  8  Uoaco  R  add. 


154  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

valentes  se  mouere.     Tunc  illi   penitentiam    agentes,    crediderunt 
eum  sanctum  Dei  esse,  et,  orante  sancto  pro  eis,  soluti  sunt. 

vi.  Alio  ■  quoque  die  sanctus  Kainnicus  in  Ytalia  iter  agens, 
inuenit  armentarium  cuiusdam  ducis,  qui  letatus  est  in  aduentu  eius, 
et  inuenit  gratiam  in  oculis  eius.  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  munuscu- 
lum  auri  dedit  illi  armentario.  Audiens  [du.\]  ille  crudelis  et  immitis, 
aliis  sibi  nunciantibus,  quod  sanctus  Cainnicus  aurum  dedis[s]et 
armentario  suo,  iratus  est  ualde  ;  et  displicuit  ei  donum  regi  con- 
gruum  seruo  dari,  et  dixit :  '  Reus  est  mortis,  qui  opus  insolitum 
ausus  est  facere.'  Tunc  dux  ille  iussit  rogum  magnum  incendi,  et 
sanctum  Cainnicum  in  illum  mitti ;  quod  ita  est  factum,  iuxta 
preceptum  ducis.  Ideo  hoc  fecit  dux,  quia  putauit  sanctum  Cain- 
nichum  plus  habere  de  auro  ;  set  statim  ignis  ille  a  Deo  extinctus 
est,  non  audens  tangere  sanctum  Dei.  Quod  videns  dux,  suadente 
diabolo,  iussit  sanctum  Cainnicum  iterum  puniri,  et*  in  picem 
calidam  '  mitti.  Serui  autem  ducis  fecerunt,  sicut  eis  iussum  fuerat ; 
set  de  liquore  feruenti  diuina  uirtus  sanctum  euadere  saluum  fecit. 
Tunc,  iubente  duce,  milites  lapidem  magnum  ligauerunt  collo  eius, 
et  miserunt  in  profundum  maris ;  set  Dominus  lesus  Christus 
magnificare  volens  sanctum  famulum  suum  Cainnicum,  eleuauit 
eum  supra  mare,  et  ad  placitum  portum  perduxit  illesum.  Tunc 
f.  124"  omnes  exclamauerunt,  vno  ore  dicentes :  '  Magnus  et  |  mirabilis  est 
vir  sanctus,  quem  ignis  non  vrit,  mare  non  mergit.'  Et  cum  duce 
genua  flectentes,  penitentiam  egerunt.  Dux  autem  obtulit  sancto 
Cainnico  magnas  oblaciones*  cum  sua  ciuitate,  ac  semet  ipsum 
seruire  ibi  Deo  et  sancto  Cainnico  promisit.  Ibique  adhuc  nomen 
sancti  Cainnici  celebratur  et  honoratur.  Facto  uero  ibi  monasterio, 
et  congregacione  congregata,  sanctus  Cainnicus,  rogatus  a  toto 
populo,  promisit  ut  ibi  essent  rehquie  sue^  Set  angelus  Domini, 
sanctum  frequenter  uisitans,  increpauit  illum  propter  incautam 
promissionem  suam,  dicens :  '  Deus  predestinauit  resurrectionem 
tuam  in  Hybernia  esse ;  et  quomodo  promisisti  hic  esse  ?  Scias 
autem  denuo  quod  in  Hybernia  eris  resurrecturus.'  Sanctus  ergo 
Cainnicus  anxiatus  est,  quod  promissis[s]et  ut  reliquie  sue  ibi  essent; 
et  predicasset  angelus  resurrectionem  eius  in  Hybernia.  Set  Domi- 
nus,  verus  iudex,  adiuuauit  promissionem  sui  famuli ;  nam  draco 
igneus  de  celo  descendit,  et  extremum  digitum  pedis  dexteri  sancti 
Cainnici  circumcidit.  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  gratias  egit  Deo, 
sciens    suam    promissionem    impletam    esse.       Digitum    suum    ibi 

1  =S  §§  8,  g;  Ri  f.  129'',  R2  u,  s.  2  bis  MS.  =  MS.  -dum  ;  in  uas  pice 
rellquata  plenum  R.  *  quantum  potest  acies  oculorum  in  die  sereno  uidere  S  ; 
and  practically  R.  ^  suam  sepulcionem  [5/c  S  m.  pr.,  -turam  S  m.  sec.]  et 
suam  resurrectionem  in  illa  ciuitate  .  .  .  futuram  esse  promisit  S. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  155 

reliquit,  et  verbo  angeli  obediens,  ad  Hyberniam  reversus  est.  Dux 
vero  supradictus,  diuina  gratia  in  eo  "inspirante',  et  donante  sibi 
magnam  sapientiam,  sanctus  episcopus  effectus  est. 

vii.  Veniens  '  itaque  sanctus  Cainnicus  ad  Hyberniam,  predicauit 
verbum  Dei  coUactaneo  suo,  Albo,  qui  tunc  temporis  dux  nepotum 
mic  Nais  ^  fuit ;  suadebatque  ei  vir  sanctus,  ut  medicinam  anime  sue 
faceret  Dux  ille  nolens  acquiescere  verbis  sancti,  tandem  dixit :  '  Si 
prodest,  ego  faciam  parum  propter  te  ;  quia,  cum  sim  bellator,  homo 
non  possum  religiossus  esse.'  Cainnicus  sanctus  dixit :  'Valdeprod- 
est.'  Tunc  dux  paruam  oblacionem  obtulit  Deo.  Statim  vero  digitus 
illius  in  dolore  versus  est,  ac  paulatim  in  tumore  manum  tenens  dolor 
totum  corpus  inuassit.  Tuncdux  illud  videns,  ait:  'Putabamquod  mihi 
mclius  esset  si  aliquid  Deo  dedero ;  set  modo  video  quod  peius  est 
mihi.'  Sanctus  Cainnicus  ait :  '  Vsque  modo  impius  fuisti,  et  diabolo 
seruisti,  et  gratia  Dei  non  fuit  tecum ;  modo  autem  quia  conuersus 
es,  et  dedisti  aliquid  Deo,  ideo  hic  dolor  tenuit  te  ad  curandam 
animam  tuam.'  Illo  autem  petente,  et  sancto  Cainnico  pro  eo  orante, 
iam  sanatus  est  a  dolore  corporis  et  anime. 

viii.  Sanctus  '  ergo  Cainnicus  ab  illo  rccedens  in  curru,  pauperem 
se  rogantem  inveniens  in  itencre,  duos  equos  currus  sui  tribuit  ei. 
Sanctus  autem  sedens  in  via  canebat  psalmos.  Dux  quidem  Albus, 
veniens  per  eandem  viam,  quem  sanauit  sanctus  Cainnicus,  dixit 
sancto:  '  Cur  ibi  sedes?  et  vbi  sunt  equi  currus  tui?'  Et  ait  dux 
iterum  :  '  De  equis  meis  in  montanis  locis  habitantibus  adducantur* 
tibi  duo  optimi.'  Erant  autem  illi  equi  indomiti  et  feri.  Cum  ergo 
venissent  nuncii  sancti  Cainnici,  mites  facti  sunt  equi.  Mites  iam  ac 
domiti  currum  sancti  Dei  vehebant. 

ix.  Auo^^die  cum  sanctus  Cainnicus^  iam  ambularet  cum  populo 
suo,  antiquum  capud  mortui  hominis  super  terram  conspexerunt. 
Tunc  vnus  de  turba  ait' :  '  Vtinam  hoc  capud  loqueretur  nobiscum, 
quia  ab  antiquis  temporibus  defunctum  est,  et  fabulas  nobis  narrare 
potuisset.'  I  Ouod  \nr  sanctus  gratia  Dei  plenus  audiens,  oransque,  f.124'' 
capud  aridum  et  antiquum  benedixit  in  nomine  Domini  lesu  Christi, 
et  statim  caro,  cutis,  capilli,  de  foris  illud  viuificatum  induentes*,  anima 

1  =S  §  10;  Ri  f.  129",  R2  f.  144«.  Much  more  original  in  S  R.  The  chief 
oflfers  his  httle  finger  to  God  :  *abscidens  ergo  rex  digitum  suum  paruulum, 
Deo  .  .  .  immolauit.  Set  uulnus  post  abscisionem  creuit  in  tumorem'  (R),  which 
attacked  the  whole  body.  On  his  complaining,  Cainnech  answers  :  '  tu  .  .  . 
modicam  hereditatem  unius  digiti  tui  Deo  dedisti,  et  ipse  in  unum  dlgitum 
ueniens,  dilatauit  terminos  suos,  ut  totum  corpus  teneat '  S  R.  '  See  p.  152, 
note  5.  '  =S  §  II ;  Ri  f.  129'',  R»  u.  s.  *  MS.  -cuntur.  =  =S  §  12;  R> 
R^  u.  s.  '  in  regione  Cennacte  S  ;  in  terra  Kyannacteorum  R  adii.  '  fratres 
.  .  ,  admirantes  magnitudinem  eius  dixerunt  R.         *  sic  S  R  ;  intucntes  M. 


156  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

intus  reuixit,  et  loqu[u]tum  est  sic  Scotice  :  '  Mochean,  Mochean 
a  Chainnich,'  id  est :  '  beneuenias,  beneuenias  '  sancte  Dei  Cainnice.' 
Postea  genus  et  nomen  suum,  et  conuersacionem  narrauit  eis,  et 
locum  sepulcri  sui  ostendit,  animam  suam  in  inferno  per  triginta^ 
annos  confessus  est.  Alias  multas  fabulas,  quas  propter  breuitatem 
non  possumus  narrare,  loquutus  est.  Set  multum  rogauit  ut  baptiza- 
retur  in  nomine  Patris,  et  Filii,  et  Spiritus  Sancti ;  et  ita  factum  est. 
Accepto  autem  baptismo,  positus  est  cum  corpore  suo  in  alio' 
sepulcro. 

X.  Alio  '  quoque  die,  cum  sanctus  Cainnicus  iter  ageret  cum  fratri- 
bus  suis,  subito  absconditus  est  ab  eis,  et  nesciebant  quo  iret.  Post 
vero  duas  horas  ad  eos  reddiens,  interrogauerunt  eum,  quo  exiret. 
Ouibus  respondit :  '  Vnus  de  amicis^  meis,  nomine  Senach  *,  qui 
mihi  corpus  et  animam,  et  stirpem,  suosque  agros  obtulit,  nunc  iugu- 
latus  est  in  australi '  parte  Laginensium,  et  occubuit ;  lacerantesque 
demones  animam  eius,  audiui  eum  vocantem  me  in  auxilium  sibi. 
Concedente  Domino  meo  lesu  Christo,  angeli  sui  tulerunt  me,  ut 
pro  illo  cum  angelis  contra  demones  pugnarem.  Et  ab  illis  de  inferno 
violenteream  rapuimus  ;  carius  enim  mihi  erat  animam  saluare  quam 
corpus.' 

xi.  QuADAM '  autem  die  sanctus  Cainnicus  vidit  magnam  congre- 
gacionem '  in  quodam  loco  circa  quendam  magum  qui  coram  eis 
signa  fallacia  faciebat.  A  stultisque  hominibus  quasi  diuinitus  facta 
credebantur,  diuinumque  honorem  dabant  ei.  Nam  omni  multitudini 
vissum  est  quod  hic  magus  per  medium  arboris  maxime  illic  stantis 
transiret.  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  benedixit  oculos  illorum,  et  vide- 
runt  omnes  magum  secus  latus  arboris  ambulare.  Et  omnes  gloriam 
Deo  et  sancto  Cainnico  dederunt ;  magusque  miser  cum  sua  arte 
despectus  est '". 

xii.  QuODAM  "  die  sanctus  Cainnicus  inuenit  hominem  cum  tabulari 
facie,  sine  oculis  et  auribus  et  naribus ;  et  miser  valde  erat.  In  illo 
autem  loco  aqua  non  erat.  Tunc  iussit  sanctus  Cainnicus  suis  com- 
mitibus,  ut  terram  foderent  ad  aquam  inueniendam.  Cum  autem 
fodissent  discipuli  humum,  statim  fons  aque  prorupit  e  terra.  Famu- 
lus  vero  Dei  Cainnicus  benedixit  aquani,  aspersitque  hominem  ea ; 
et  clementer  orans  sanctus  ad  Deum  pro  eo,  date  sunt  ei  aures  et 

'  MS.  '  Chainnidh  beneuernas ',  id  est  '  beneuenias'.  '  Fochen,  Fochen  a  Kain- 
nich '    S.  2    XXX    S    R    M ;    we    should    probably    read    ccc    i^trecentos). 

2  eodem   R.  "   =S  §  13;   R'  f.    130«,    R^   f.    144''.  ^  monachis   S   R. 

«  Senach  Ron  S.  '  dextera  S.  »   =S  §  14  ;  R' R2  u.  s.  '    plebis 

Kennacte  S  add.  '"  Here  S  §  15,  R'  f.  130'',  R-  u.  s.  insert  a  story  how 

Cainnech  in  Lent  turned  bacon  into  wheat.         "   =S  §  16;  R'  u.  s.,  R-  f.  144'. 


I 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  157 

nares  cum  oculis  ;  et  ex  omni  infirmitate  sua  sanatus  est  per  famulum 
Dei  Cainnicum. 

xiii.  QuoDAM  '  autcm  tempore,  cum  sanctus  Cainnicus  hospitaretur 
apud  Eas  Ruaidh  ^  dixit  ministris  suis :  '  Ite  ad  piscatores  fluminis 
illius,  forsitan  illi  dabunt  nobis  aliquid  de  piscibus.'  Illi  autem  nichil 
dederunt  sancto  Dei.  Tunc  sanctus  Kainnicus.vni  de  fratribus  di.xit  : 
'  Cum  baculo  meo  ad  tollum  perge,  et  Deus  miserebitur  nostri.'  Ille 
autem,  nomine  Sceallanus,  perrexit  ;  et,  cum  baculum  sancti  in  tollum 
intinxisset,  statim  piscis  mire  magnitudinis  super  illum  venit,  quem 
Scellanus  ad  terram  trahens,  iterum  baculum  [in  tollum  misit '],  et 
alium  piscem  cepit.  Manens  |  vero  Cainnicus  in  domo,  lumine  •"•  125" 
Spiritus  Sancti  illud  vidit,  et  dixit:  'O  Scellane*,  sufficit  nobis  quod 
captum  est.'  Diuina  potentia  ille  a  longe  audiuit  hunc  sermonem, 
et  statim  secundum  piscem  dimisit  in  mare,  et  cum  'pisce'  prius 
capto  ad  domum  reddiit. 

xiv.  QuoDAM  °  tempore  sanctus  Cainnicus  ad  beatum  Comgallum  " 
venit,  et  ab  eo  cum  magna  leticia  susceptus  est.  Comgatlus  autem  in 
die  dominico  dixit  fratribus  suis  :  '  Oportet  sanctum  Cainnicum  hodie 
predicare  nobis.'  Rogatus  vero  sanctus  Cainnicus,  mirabilem  ualde 
predicauit  predicacionem  populo  ;  omnis  vero  populus  uechementer 
fleuit.  Tunc  sanctus  Comgallus  dixit :  '  Frequenter  iste  populus 
predicatione  fleuit ;  set  talem  ac  tantum  fletum  vsque  hodie  non 
effudit.'  Tunc  omnis  populus  audiuit  vocem  desuper  dicentem : 
'  Hesterno  die  istam  predicacionem  ab  ore  angeli  Dei  sanctus  Cain- 
nicus  audiuit'.'  Tunc  omnes  gratias  Deo  egerunt,  benedicentes 
sanctum  Cainnicum. 

XV.  QuoDAM '  die  mulier  quedam  cum  filio  suo  venit  ad  sanctum 
Cainnicum  dicens  :  '  O  sancte  Dei,  quid  faciam  de  filio  meo,  qui 
impius  est,  et  male  viuit  ? '  Tunc  sanctus  increpauit  illum,  pre- 
dicans  illi  pia  exemplaria,  ut  matri  sue  obediret.  Set  ipse  puer 
superbus  et  lasciuus,  verbum  Dei  despiciens,  super  equum  ascendit ; 
subito  vero  recedens,  cecidit  de  equo,  et  mortuus  est.  Tunc  pia  mater 
eius,  flens  ac  lugens,  rogauit  sanctum  Cainnicum  ut  suum  sibi  su- 
scitaret  filium.  Videns  sanctus  Cainnicus  anxietatem  mentis  matris 
ilHus,  ad  Deum  orauit  pro  eo  ;  et  Deus  donauit  sibi  animam  eius,  et 
surrexit  incolumis.  Agens  vero  penitentiam,  ille  puer  genua  fle.xit 
ante  eos,  matremque  relinquens,  sanctum  Cainnicum  sequ[u]tus  est. 
Duxit  vero  sanctus  Cainnicus  eum  secum  in  Brittaniam,  et  alligauit 

'   =S  §  17  ;  Ri  R»u.  s.  2  ad  Tollum  Ruaid  S.  '  Supplied  from  S. 

*  auarum  est  S  add.  ^   =S  §  i8  ;  R'  f.  130',  R-  u.  s.  «  Benchorensem 

R  add.  '  In  S  R  it  is  Cainnech  himself  who  tells  this.  *   =S  §  19; 

R'  u.  s.,   R' f.  144'';   Colgan  has  printed  this  section  in  his  Life  of  S.  Liber, 
A.  S.  p.  566. 


158  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

pedes  eius  compede,  ne  uagus  esset ;  et  clauem  compedis  eius  sanctus 
Cainnicus  proiecit  in  mare.  Postquam  ille  filius  septem  annis  sic 
mansit  alligatus,  dixit  ei  sanctus  Cainnicus,  sciens  quid  illi  con- 
tingeret :  '  Vade  iterum  ad  Hyberniam,  et  in  quocunque  loco  in- 
ueneris  clauem  compedis  tui,  ibi  mane.'  Ipse  uero  iuxta  preceptum 
magistri  sui  veniens  in  Hiberniam  ad  ampnem  Liffi  in  terra  Lagi- 
nensium,  vbi  piscatores  inuenit,  et  postulans  ab  eis  accepit  magnum 
piscem,  et  in  medio  ipsius  clauem  sui  compedis  inuenit.  Postea 
quidem  in  ciuitate  que  dicitur  Lectebhae'  in  multis  uirtutibus  mansit. 
Hic  est  [Liber-]  filius  Aradii,  vir  sanctus  et  mirabilis  coram  Deo  et 
honiinibus,  in  celo  et  in  terra. 

xvi.  QuoDAM '  vero  die  sanctus  Cainnicus  et  sanctus  Columba, 
sanctusque  Comgallus  erant  congregati  in  vno  loco,  et  tunc  pluuia 
nimis  pluit  super  eos  ;  set  siquidem  uestimenta  duorum  sanctorum, 
Columbe  et  Comgalli,  humida  ualde  erant,  sancti  autem  Cainnici  uesti- 
mentum  erat  a  pluuia  intactum.  Tunc  sanctus  Columba  et  sanctus 
Comgallus  interrogauerunt  sanctum  Cainnicum  cur  illorum  uesti- 
menta  humida  erant,  illius  autem  uestimentum  siccum  erat.  Re- 
spondit  eis  sanctus  Cainnicus  :  '  Vos  dicite  mihi  quid  in  hac  hora 
cogitastis.'  Tunc  sanctus  Columba  ait:  '  Cogitaui  in  ista  hora,  reue- 
lante  mihi  Spiritu  Sancto,  de  mea  familia  periclitante  in  nauiga- 
cione.'  Sanctus  Comgallus  dixit:  '  Mens  mea  modo  sollicita  est  de 
f.  135'  fratribus  meis  in  |  messe  laborantibus.'  Sanctus  autem  Cainnicus 
dixit:  'Scit  filius  uirginis,  quia  mens  mea  inter  angelos  in  celo  fuit; 
a  die  qua  in  celestibus  cogitacionibus  ieci  *,  iterum  in  terrenis  cogita- 
cionibus  non  deduxi  eam.' 

xvii.  Sanctus  °  Cainnicus  desertum  locum  iuxta  radicem  cuiusdam 
montis  in  Britannia  tenuit ;  set  sol  non  clarescebat  ibi  trans  monteni 
interpossitum.  Tunc  angelus  Domini  ad  eum  uenit,  dicens  ei  : 
'  Mons  iste  tibi  multum  nocet,  et  te  offendit ;  ideo  vvlt  Deus  eum 
reiicere  de  statu  suo,  et  iuxta  euangelii  uerbum  in  alium  locum 
mutetur.'  Famulus  autem  Dei  Cainnicus  dixit :  '  Non  mea  causa 
Dei  elementa  mouebuntur.'  Deus  uero  volens  magnificare  seruum 
suum  sanctum  Cainnicum,  montem  illum  mouere  de  loco  suo  cepit", 
donec  sanctus  Cainnicus,  audiens  magnum  sonum  de  monte,  pro- 
hibens  dixit:  'Exibo  de  loco  isto,  mi  Domine  lesu  Christe  ;  hunc 
montem  noli'  mutare  vsque  ad  diem  iudicii.'  Et  sic  factum  est. 
Nam  mons  ille  iuxta  uerbum  sancti  Cainnici  statim  cepit  stare  in 
loco  suo;  set  hucusque  habet  scissuram  in  signum  mutacionis  sue*. 

'  Letube  Kainnich  S.  ^  Supplied  from  S  R  ;  Colg.  also  omits.  '  =  S  §  20  ; 
R'  f.  130"*,  R^  u.  s:  *  MS  iaci ;  in  S  and  R  the  sentence  is  incomplete. 

'  =S  §  21  ;  Ri  u.  s.,  R'  f.  145".  "  temptauit  S.  '  nolo  S.  *  nisi 

Kannechus  [nisi  sanctus  R]  prohiberet  S  R  add. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  159 

xviii.  Alio*  quoque  die  ibi  sanctus  Cainnicus  exiens  foras  ad  opus 
manuum  ignem  incaute  reliquid  in  domo.  Tunc  ignis  suos  terminos 
[transiens']  incendit  totam  domum,  et' consumpsit.  Set  mirabiliter 
euangelium  apertum  in  eadem  donio  relictum  post  legendum  ab  igne 
intactum  inventum  est*. 

xix.  Postea'  sancti  Hibernenses  miserunt  nuncios  post  sanctum 
Cainnicum,  audientes  eum  heremitam  esse  in  Britannia ;  et  tunc 
ductus  est  sanctus  Cainnicus  de  heremo  contra  suam  uoluntatem. 
Cum  autem'  ambularent,  inuenerunt  in  medio  solitudinis  aliquam 
mulierem  in  die  magne  niuis,  fame  et  frigore  semimortuam,  et  fdia  eius 
inuenta  est  apud  eam  mortua.  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  commitibus 
suis  dixit :  '  Ignem  accendite,  et  adiuuate  miseram,  et  mulierem  cito 
pascite.'  Tunc  illa  mulier,  igne  calefacta,  et  cibo  saciata,  fortisque 
facta,  fecit  magnam  tristitiam,  vlulans  iiham  suam.  Sanctus  Cain- 
nicus,  motus  misericordia,  et  rogatus  a  muliere  ut  oraret  pro  filia  sua  ; 
eo  vero  orante,  et  fratribus  cum  eo,  pro  filia  mortua,  ipsa  ad  eos 
pulcre  surrexit  quasi  de  sompno ;  et  in  loco  in  signum  uirtutis  usque 
hodie  multe  cruces  conspiciuntur. 

XX.  Cumque'  inde '  exis[s]ent,  venerunt  ad  quandam  ecclesiam  ^,  et 
intrantes '  eam  ',  sanctus  Cainnicus  ad  altare  accessit ;  et  cum  dedisset 
pacem  altari '",  capud  contra  cornu  altaris  incaute  percussit,  et  de  capite 
eius  fluxit  gutta  sanguinis.  Ibi  vero  fuit  filia  "  regis  Pictorum  '^,  que 
erat  ceca,  surda  et  muta ;  quam  duxerunt  nutritores  sui  ad  sanctum 
Cainnicum,  ut  oraret  pro  ea.  Illi  autem  guttam  sanguinis  capitis 
sancti  Cainnici  possuerunt  super  os,  oculos,  et  aures  filie  egrotate  ;  et 
Deus  fecit  illam  statim  videre,  et  audire,  et  bene  loqui.  Tunc  omnes 
et  illa  gratias  Deo  egerunt,  benedicentes  sanctum  Cainnicum.  Illa 
uero  filia  gaudens  ad  domum  suam'^  sana  reuersa  est. 

xxi.  Laicus  "  quidam,  nomine  Tulchanus,  Deo  placere  desiderans, 
de  Hibernia  ad  insulam  Hithe  "*  ad  sanctum  Columbam  perrexit ; 
ibique  "  monachus  effectus  'est',  vnum  filium  habens  secum  duxit ; 
et  amabat  eum  ualde.  Videntes  uero  omnes  totam  curam  eius  circa 
filium  suum,  quodam  die  beatus  Baithenus  ad  sanctum  Columbam 
dixit:  1  '  Frater  Tulchanus   plus   amat   filium  suum  quam   Deum  "  ;  f.  i: 

>   =S  §  22;  Ri  f.  131",  R2  f.  145».  2  Supplied  from  S  R.  '  MS.  et 

before  totam.  *  Here  S  §  23  ;  Ri  R-  u.  s.  insert  a  story  how  Cainnech's  gospel- 
book  was  uninjured  by  the  snow.  '^  =  S  §  24  :  R'  R-  u.  s.  '  trans  dorsura 
Britannie  S  add.         '   =S  5  25  ;  R'  f.  131'',  R^  f.  145''.  »  MS.  inde  exinde. 

°  in  insulam  le  S  ;  I,  R.  >"  osculatus  fuisset  [est  R]  altare  S  R.  ''  Bruidei 
S  R  add.  12  Scocie  R.  "  MS.  veram.  "   =S  §  26  ;  R>  R2  u.  s. 

'^  le  S:  I,  R.  •'  baculum  tenens  apud  Columbam  S  add.  i'  MS.  adds 

quasi  Deum,  but  the  words  are  struck  out. 


i6o  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ideo  melius  est  illos  separari.'  Tu[n]c  a  sancto  Columba  et  ab 
omnibus  fratribus  illi  preceptum  est,  ut  filiolum  suum  de  excelsa  rupe 
in  mare  iactaret.  Hic  autem  monachus  preceptum  durum  obediens 
impleuit,  gratias  Deo  agens  cum  magno  dolore  cordis ;  in  maris 
profundum  iecit  filiolum  suum'.  Tunc  descenderunt  due  aues  albe 
marine,  et  subito  ad  puerum  per  mare  enatabant^  Hoc  vero  osten- 
sum  est  sancto  Cainnico,  tunc  nauiganti  ad  Hiberniam  ^ ;  et  rogans 
multum  pro  puero  ad  Deum,  incolumem  super  vndas  eum  inter  aues 
inuenit,  quem  secum  in  nauem  afferens  sanctus  Cainnicus,  ad  sanctum 
Columbam  cum  ualde  irata  mente  venit,  et  dixit :  '  Ex  hac  hora 
amici  non  erimus  tu  et  ego,  quia  tam  crudele  imperium  precepisti, 
et  miserum  peregrinum  afflixisti.'  Et  vix  potuit  placari  mens  sancti 
Kainnici^  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  et  sanctus  Columba  osculantes 
se  ad  invicem  fraternitatem  firmissimam  inter  se  et  discipulos  suos 
semper  firmauerunt ;  et  sanctus  Cainnicus  ad  Hiberniam  nauigauit, 
sanctusque  Columba  in  suo  monasterio  Hith  stetit. 

xxii.  Qu.XDAM^die  cum  custos  eiusdem  monasterii  Hithe  ^  horam 
nonam  pulsare  voluisset,  prius  perrexit  ut  sanctum  Columbam  inter- 
rogaret ;  set  ipsum  non  inuenit.  lam  per  totas  cellas  ab  omnibus 
fratribus  diligenter  querebatur ;  et  nec  est  inuentus.  Tunc  beatus 
Baithenus  ius[s]it  ut  pulsaretur  nona.  Cumque  fratres  celebrare' 
cepissent,  subito  sanctus  Columba  cum  wltu  ignito  et  fulgurantibus 
oculis  ad  eos  in  ecclesiam  venit.  Sciens  sanctus  Baithenus  quod  ille 
inter  angelos  Dei  fuisset,  flexis  genibus,  penitentiam  agere  pro- 
misit,  sicut  sanctus  Columba  iudicaret.  Cui  dixit  sanctus  Columba : 
'  Non  ego  te  iudicabo ;  set  vade  ad  sanctum  Cainnicum,  ut  ipse  te 
iudicet.'  Baithenus  igitur  ad  Hiberniam  venit,  et  querens  sanctum 
Cainnicum  per  multum  tempus,  post  multum  laborem' invenit  eum. 
Cui  sanctus  Cainnicus  ait :  'Vade  ad  monasterium  tuum,  quia  peni- 
tentiam  implesti  per  laborem  magnum  in  mare,  et  ambulando  demum 
super  terram.'  Baithenus  dixit :  '  Timeo  si  non  me  meus  magister, 
sanctus  Columba,  recipiat.'  Cainnicus  respondit :  '  Porta  tecum  in 
signum  '  illi '  graffium  istud,  quod  in  aere  ex  pallio  eius  cadens  reliquit, 
quando  ille  et  ego  et  Comgallus  cito  perreximus  ad  sanctum  Eugenium 
episcopum  de  Ard  [S]ratha '  nos  vocantem '"  in  auxilium  sibi,  qui  in 

1  Ipse  autem  est  Mundu  filiusTulcani  S  add.  '  This  incident  of  the  birds 

is  omitted  by  S  R ;  R  has  instead  ;  'O  quam  magnum  apud  Deum  est  meritum 
sancte  obediencie,  in  hoc  lacto  relucet.  Puer  enim  in  aquis  uehementibus 
proiectus,  super  undas  sedet,  et  non  submergitur.'  ^  According  to  S  he  was 
on  his  way  from  '  regio  Heth  *  (Tiree)  to  Ireland,  and  turned  aside  to  visit 
Columba  in  lona.  *  S  R  omit  the  rest  of  the  section.  ^  =S  §  27  ; 

R'  R-  u.  s.  "^  le  S  ;  I,  R.  '  R  throughout  misunderstands  this  of  a 

cclebration  of  Mass.  ^  post  tres  annos  S.  ^  Arid  Sratho,  altered  to 

Sratha  S ;  Arda  Sratha  R.         "  -tes  M. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  i6i 

aere  contra  demoncs  pugnabat'.  Et  dic  ei  quod  nobis  importunum 
erat,  quando  vox  cimbali  vestri  nos  invitauit'  a  nostro  certamine'; 
set  nos  in  nomine  Doniini  nostri  cum  angelis  eius  demonia  supera- 
uimus.'  Tunc  sanctus  Baithenus  reuersus,  demonstransque  graffium 
cuni  hiis  verbis  sancto  Columbc^,  cum  gaudio  susceptus  est. 

xxiii.  QuoDAM°  tempore  in  die  tempestiuo  sanctus  Columba  dixit 
fratribus  suis  :  '  Preparate  cito  hospicium ".'  Cum  vnus  ex  fratribus 
ait :  '  Quis  in  hac  die  ventosa  et  periculosa  potest  nauigare  ? '  Sanctus 
Columba  dixit :  '  Ecce  sanctus  Cainnicus,  electus  Dei,  hodie  ad  nos 
veniet,  cui  Dominus  donauit  tranquillitatem  in  qualibet  tempestate.' 
Et  post  paruum  nauis  sancti  Cainnici  portum  tenuit ;  in  cuius  obuiam 
sanctus  Columba  cum  fratribus  venit,  et  ab  eo  honorifice  suscep|tus  f.  125° 
est  sanctus  Cainnicus.  Tunc  fratres  sancti  Columbe  interrogauerunt 
discipulos  sancti  Cainnici,  dicentes:  'Quomodo  potuistis  hodie  naui- 
gare  ? '  Illi  responderunt :  '  Dominus  omnipotens  tranquillam  viam 
nobis  fecit  per  immensas  vndas ;  nam  in  mari  vndique  circa  nos 
seua  tempestas  fuit,  et  longitudine  virge  longe  circa  nauem  nostram 
omni  parte  erat  mira  tranquillitas.' 

xxiv.  Sanctus' Cainnicus  die  quadam  dominica  in  Ibdone  insula 
hospitatus  est ;  set  mures  loci  illius  ficones  [eius*]  lacerauerunt, 
carpseruntque  et  commederunt.  Videns  vir  sanctus  offensionem  illam, 
maledixit  mures,  atque  de  illa  insula  reiecit  eas  in  se[m]piternum. 
Nam  omnes  mures,  congregacione  facta,  iuxta  sancti  Cainnici  verbum 
in  maris  profundum  se  precipitauerunt,  et  in  illa  insula  usque  hodie 
mures  vise  non  sunt. 

XXV.  Alio'  quoque  tempore  sanctus  Cainnicus  die  dominico 
hospitatus  est  in  alia  insula  que  dicitur  Insula  Auium  '".  Aues  autem 
garrule  et  ualde  loquentes  ibi  erant,  et  sanctum  Dei  offenderunt. 
Tunc  loquacitatem  illarum  ipse  prohibens,  sermoni  illius  obedierunt ; 
nam  omnes  aues  simul  congregate,  et  sua  pectora  contra  terram 
dimittentes,  tacuerunt,  [et]  usque  ad  horam  matutinalem  secunde 
ferie  sine  motu  et  sine  sonitu  manserunt,  donec  eas  sanctus  vir  verbo 
suo  soluit.  Cum "  autem  sanctus  Cainnicus  inde  nauigaret  cum 
festinacione  ad  Hyberniam,  baculum  suum  in  littore  maris  oblitus 
est.  Cumque  in  mari  nauigasset,  cor  suum  de  baculo  oblito  semper 
secum  commitante  compunctum  est ;  set  cum  de  naui  in  terram 
descendisset,  baculum  in  portu  vidit,  et  genua  flectens,  Deo  gratias 
egit. 

1  circa  animam  Aidui  monachi  sui  S  add.  ;  cuiusdam  monachi  sui  R.  ■  ammouit 
S  R.  '  S  R  omit  the  rest  of  the  section.  *  MS.  -ba.  ^  =  S  §  28  ;  Ri  f.  131«, 
R-  f.  145'^ ;  Adamnan's  Columba  i.  4.  «  et  aquam  ad  lauandos  pedes  S  add. 

'   =S  5  29  ;  Ri  f.  131'',  R2  f.  145''.  8  From  S.  'i    =  S  5  30  ;   Ri  R2  u.  s. 

'"  que  uulgariter  dicitur  En  inis  S.  11  S  R  omit  the  rest  of  the  section.     A 

different  version  of  the  incident  is  in  Adamnan's  Columba  ii.  14. 


i62  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

xxvi.  QuoDAM '  vero  die  sanctus  Cainnicus  exiit  ad  vissitandum 
sanctam  sororem  suam,  nomine  et  merito  Columbam,  habitantem  in 
alio  loco  ;  et  apud  eam  magnam  leticiam  '^  inuenit,  et  quasi  vero 
hospiti  diligenter  ministrabat  ei.  Erat  autem  puerulus,  nomine 
Brachtanus,  alumpnus  sororis  sancti  Cainnici ;  et  ille  multum  dili- 
gebat  sanctum  Cainnicum,  et  Cainnicus  similiter  eum.  Contigit 
autem  quod  mortuus  esset  puer  ille.  Sanctus  vero  Cainnicus  sorori 
sue  ait :  '  Vbi  est  Berchanus '  ? '  Illa  vero  per  artificialia  verba  mortem 
pueri  abscondere  volebat.  Cui  sanctus  Cainnicus  dixit :  '  Non  pran- 
demur  *  hodie,  donec  puer  noster  Bractanus  ad  nos  veniat.'  Tunc 
gemens  narrauit  sancto,  quod  mortuus  esset.  Adorans,  flens,  et 
lacrimans  sanctus  Cainnicus,  ille  puerulus  °  surrexit  a  morte,  et  venit 
ad  sanctum  Dei,  dicens  ei :  '  Propter  verbum  tuum,  serue  Dei,  quod 
dixisti :  "  Non  prandemur,  donec  veniat  Bractanus,"  suscitauit  me 
Deus  a  morte,  et  noluit  ut  uerbum  tuum  vacuum  esset.' 

xxvii.  Alio  '  autem  tempore  sanctus  Edus  episcopus,  filius  Bric, 
exiit  ad  regem  Hua  Neill,  Colmanum  modicum,  filium  Dermicii,  qui 
habitabat  in  stagni  insula  Ros';  eratque  sanctus  Edus  iuxta  stagnum 
ieiunans  contra  illum  regem  pro  causa  sororis  sue  religiose',  que  ad 
regem  in  rapmam  erat,  ut  dareturviro^  Hoc  vero  audiens  beatus 
Cainnicus,  et  compatiens  episcopo,  perrexit  in  auxilium  illi.  Tunc 
rex  iussit*"  rates"  diligenter  abscondi,  ne  sancti  insulam  intrarent. 
f.  126"  Set  Dominus,  volens  adiuuare  sanctos  suos,  |  ianuam  insule 
aperuit,  et  ratem  ex  loco  concluso  eduxit  ad  sanctos ;  et  viri  sancti 
in  illa  rate  nauigauerunt  in  insulam,  et  sanctus  Cainnicus  regem 
superbum  increpauit,  et  precepit  ei  ne  episcopum  Edum  offenderet. 
Rex  autem  ambos  despexit,  set  Dominus  honorificauit  eos.  Nam 
statim  rex  ille  superbus  sedens  vidit  currum  igneum  cum  equis 
igneis,  et  aurigam  in  eo  terribilem,  habentem  gladium  fulgureum  in 
manu  per  campum  ab  oriente  venientem  trans  stagnum  in  insulam  ; 
et  percutiens  celeriter  ante  omnes  regem  '^  statim  mortuus  est. 
Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  rogatus  a  regina  et  ab  omnibus,  orauit  ad 
Deum  pro  rege,  et  eum  suscitauit  a  morte.  Rex  uero  ipse 
a  morte  suscitatus  sic,  gratias  egit  Deo,  et  quecunque  ei  sanctus 
Camnicus  dixit,  facere  promisit ;  et  sororem  Edi  episcopi  raptam 


*  =S  §  31  ;  R' R' u.  s.  ''■  pietatis  uiscera  Ri ;  pietatis  in  sancta  R^  '  qui 
nobis  ministrabat,  et  pedes  nostros  lauabat,  et  in  aduentu  nostro  letus  fiebat 
S  add. ;  and  practically  R.         *  prandebimus  S  R.  ^  Brecanus  nomine  S  R 

add, ;  the  only  place  where  they  mention  the  name.  ^   =S  §  32  ;  Ri  f.  132", 

R'  u.  s.  '  in  Stagno  Rosso  S  ;  apud  Loch  Rossa  R.  '  reliose  S. 

^  ut  .  .  .  uiro  om.  S  R.  '"  castella  fortiter  concludi  et  S  add.  ;  municipium 

suum  obfirmari  et  R  add.        "  MS.  rattes.         '^  pene  in  duas  partes  diuisisset 
eum,  nisi  Kannechus  cum  suo  baculo  prohibuisset  S  add. 


f 


^ 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  163 

reddidit ',  et  alia  bona  opera  fecit.    Et  tunc  omnes  leti  erant,  gratias 
Deo  agentes. 

xxviii.  QuADAM  '  die  sanctus  Cainnicus  habitans  in  heremo  '  exiit 
foras  ad  opus  manuum*,  et  dimisit  habitaculum  solum.  Venerunt 
duo  latroncs,  et  incendcrunt  domum  eius  igni;  et  dimidia  pars  eius 
combusta  est,  altera  vero  pars  integra  permansit,  quia  ignis  non  est 
ausus  tangere  parteni  in  qua  libri  °  sancti  Cainnici  erant.  Set  illi 
latrones  statim  a  Domino  vindictam  consecuti  sunt;  nam  vnus  illorum 
himen  oculorum  amisit,  et  alter  claudus  factus  est.  Cuni  autem  non 
potuissent  illi  miseri  exhinc  ire,  penitentiam  egerunt ;  et  venientes 
ad  sanctum  Cainnicum,  obedientes  facti  monachi  recesserunt ". 

xxix.  Item'  sanctus  Cainnicus',  ut  mos  erat  ei  sepe,  ab  hominibus 
recedens,  terrena  obliuiscens,  celestia  cogitans,  euangelium  secum 
portans  ac  diligenter  scrutans,  et  orans  in  secreto  loco,  discipulis 
dicebat  ne  aliquis  ad  se  ueniret.  Fuit  autem  in  deserto  sine  cibo  et 
potu,  non  senciens  noctem  uel  tenebras,  nec  famem  uel  frigus,  usque 
ad  horam  diei  tercii  nonam.  Familia  autem  eius  hiis  tribus  diebus 
ieiunauit.  Puerulus  quoque,  qui  cum  illis  erat,  famem  talem  non 
sustinens,  mortuus  est.  Sanctus  autem  Cainnicus  ad  eos  ueniens 
dixit  eis  :  '  Numquid  adhuc  nona  hora  uenit  ? '  At  illi  dixerunt  ei : 
'  Etiam  nona  tercie  diei  uenit.'  Tunc  corpus  pueri  fame  morientis 
ductum  est  ad  sanctum  Cainnicum  ;  et  ipso  orante  pro  eo  cum  om- 
nibus  sanctis  fratribus  ieiunantibus,  ille  reuixit ;  et  postea  omnes 
gaudentes  refecti  sunt,  gratias  Deo  agentes. 

XXX.  Ad  quandam  '  vero  cellam  sancti  Cainnici  quedam  cerua  de 
silua  cotidie  cum  vitulo  veniebat,  mulgebatur  autem  ibi,  et  iterum 
sine  timore  paulatim  rediebat. 

xxxi.  Alio  '°  quoque  die  in  hyeme  sanctus  Cainnicus  ambulans  in 
Hybernie  regionibus,  vidit  crucem  stantem  in  via.  Horam  nonam 
celebrans  iuxta  illam,  interrogauit,  cur  crux  ibi  posita  esset.  Cui  periti 
responderunt :  '  Hic  rex  istius  regionis,  Colmanus,  filius  Dermicii, 
iugulatus  est  ab  inimicis  suis  bellantibus  contra  eum ;  et  ideo  crux 
hic  possita  est.'    Sanctus  autem  Cainnicus  audiens  hec  verba,  dixit : 

'  et  sancto  Kannecho  locum  obtulit,  et  in  illo  loco  Kannechus  [ad  tempus  R] 
habitauit  S  R.  «  =  S  |  33  ;  R»  f.  132'',  R2  f.  146«.  s  ;„  supradicto  loco  S ; 
in  loco  .  .  .  illo  R.  *  exiit  ad  fontem  aque  S.  ^  scetha  [cetha  m.  sec.j 

cum  libris  S.  «  Here  S  §§  34,  35  ,  Ri  R^  u.  s.  insert  two  stories  :  i^a)  how 

Cainnech  punished  a  woman  for  neglecting  to  feed  a  dog  ;  (6)  how  at  •  Cluoin 
Bronich  .  .  .  haut  longe  o  Birraib'  he  blessed  a  threshingfloor,  which  remained 
ever  afterwards  dry  and  free  from  rain.  '  =S  §  37  ;  R'  f.  132°,  K-  f.  146''. 

*  in  supradicto  loco  .  .  .  habitans  [commorans  R]  S  R.  ^  =  S  4  36 ;  R^  R2  u.  s. 
"  =S§38;  notinR. 

M  2 


i64  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

'  Scit  filius  uirginis,  quod  aliquando  promisi  orare  pro  illo.'  Tunc 
f.  126''  sanctus  posuit  contra  crucem  faci|em  suam,  et  cum  lacrimis  orauit  pro 
anima  regis.  Tunc  dictum  est  ei  desuper ' :  '  Nunc  anima  Colmani 
regis  ex  ymis  inferni  eiecta  est  per  orationem  tuam  ^,  serue  Dei 
Cainnice.'  lam  sanctus  Cainnicus,  et  omnes  qui  ibi  erant,  gratias  Deo 
egerunt. 

xxxii.  Alia'  die  sanctus  Cainnicus  ad  cellam  nomine  Acht  Droma* 
veniens,  magnam  ibi  letitiam  ^  inuenit.  Videns  autem  sanctus  Cain- 
nicus  vvltum  ministri  hospitum  tristem  esse,  interrogauit  causam 
tristitie.  Cui  minister  ait  :  '  Vir  mirabilis,  gratia  Dei  plenus,  sapiens 
et  doctus,  qui  nos  cotidie  docebat,  modo  mortuus  est ;  et  ideo  fratres 
sunt  tristes,  ieiunantes,  et  psalmos  cantantes  circa  corpus  eius.' 
Sanctus  uero  Cainnicus  hoc  audiens  ait :  '  Nos  ibimus  ad  populum 
sanctum,  et  cum  illo  pro  mortuo  orabimus.'  Sanctus  autem  Cainnicus 
ingrediens  orauit,  et  posuit  tuniculam"  super  mortuum,  qui  statim 
viuus  surrexit  et  sanus.  Quod  videntes  omnes  benedixerunt  Domi- 
num,  et  sanctum  Cainnicum  honorificauerunt,  rogantes  eum,  ut 
tuniculam,  de  qua  mortuum  suscitauit,  illis  relinqueret.  Ille  uero 
tuniculam  ^  illis  reliquit,  que  apud  illos  adhuc  honorifice  manet. 

xxxiii.  In'  monasterio  sanctarum  uirginum,  quod  dicitur  Cluain' 
Sescainn',  erat  quidam  puerulus  mutus,  surdus,  et  cecus.  Contigit 
autem  ut  morerelur  ille  in  aduentu  sancti  Cainnici  ad  monasterium  ; 
de  cuius  morte  ille  multum  doluerunt.  Sanctus  autem  Cainnicus 
intrauit  ad  corpus,  et  orante  sancto  pro  eo,  puer  ille  surrexit,  sanis 
oculis,  auribus,  et  lingua  ;  et  sancta  uerba  eis  indicauit.  Ille  uero 
puer  de  nepotibus  Duach  natus  est '",  et  postea  uir  magnus  et  sanctus 
eftectus  est. 

xxxiv.  CuM  "  autem  sanctus  Cainnicus  in  australes  '^  partes  Lag[i]- 
nie,  id  est  Hua  Cennselaich,  venisset,  vbi  erat  curia  magna  apud 
regem  Cormacum  ",  quidam  puer  paruulus  ductus  est  ad  mortem 
crudelem,  id  est  gall-chcrd^*.  Videns  hoc  sanctus  Cainnicus  esse 
horribile  opus,  postulauit  a  rege  puerum  liberari ;  set  non  impetrauit. 
Tunc  sanctus  rogauit  Deum,  et  ipse  exaudiuit  eum.  Nam  proiecto 
puero  super  hastas  stantes  sursum  positas,  nec  potuerunt  iugulare 
uel  lacerare  eum  ^^  Hic  est  Dolue  Lachdere '",  quem  rex  Cormacus 
sancto  Cainnico  obtulit,  cuius  ciuitas  dicitur  Ceall  Dolue  ". 

'  Tunc  sanctus  dixit,  per  spiritum  Dei  uidens  S.  '  quomodo  massa  ignea 

ac  feruens  exiecetur  {sic)  S  add.  ^   =S  §  39  ;  R'  R''  u.  s.  '  cellam 

Achith  Drummoto  [apud  Achach  Drummata  R]  in  finibus  Lagnensium  S  R. 
6  See  Glossary.  «  So  R  :  trauiciilam  S.  '  =S  §  40;  Rif.  132"',  R^f.  146^ 
*  Cluoin  S.  ^  Siscnan  S  R.  "  et  nomen  .  .  .  Emene  [Eminus  R]  uocatur 
S  R  add.  "  =5541;  not  in  R.  "  dexterales  S.  "  filium  Dyarmici  S. 
"  gialcherd  S  ;  see  Glossary.  '^  nisi  quod  eius  oculi  semper  obliqui  erant,  penas 
horribiles  conspiciendo  S  add.         "  Lebderc  S  ;  see  Index.       "  Kell  Tolue  S. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  165 

XXXV.  Quodam'  autem  tempore  sanctus  Cainnicus  desiderans  ab 
hominibus  separari,  et  orationibus  iungi,  recessit  a  fratribus  in  aliqua 
silua,  et  oculte  latebat.  Tunc  fratres  huc  atque  illuc  querebant  eum, 
et  non  inuenerunt.  Ouidam  autem  puer,  qui  apud  sanctum  Cain- 
nicum'  legcbat,  in  nocte  oculte  ibat  ad  eum,  ut  sibi  Cainnicus 
scriberet  in  cera,  quia  illi  soli  sanctus  Cainnicus  indicauit  quo  exiret, 
Tunc  fratres  illum  puerum  obseruantes,  in  nocte  secuti  sunt  eum 
celatiue.  Videruntque  fratres  lucernam  ualde  lucidam,  que  ante- 
cedebat  puerum  usque  ad  locum  ubi  erat  lux  illa  magna  de  eleua- 
cione  manus  sancti  Cainnici  in  oculto  legentis^.  Fulgebant  enim 
quinque  digiti  sinistre  manus  Cainnici  quasi  candele,  quando  in 
noctibus  uolebat  legere.  Fratres  igitur  puerum  et  lucernam  sequentes, 
inuenerunt  suum  abbatem  Cainnicum,  quem  secum  ad  locum  suum 
duxerunt. 

xxxvi.  I  CuM^esset  sanctus  Cainnicus  alia  vice  in  solitudine  cela- f.  laS" 
tiue,  ibi  ad  eum  ceruus  ueniens,  librum  sancti  legentis  sedule  suis 
cornibus  sustinebat.  Quodam  autem  die,  timore  illum  cogente,  sine 
abbatis  consilio  in  fugam  ruit,  et  librum  apertum  super  cornua  sua 
tulit ;  set  tamen  sanum  et  integrum  librum  eodem  modo  in  suis 
cornibus  habens,  quasi  monachus  fugitiuus  ad  abbatem  suum  ^ 
rediit. 

xxxvii.  CuM "  sanctus  Cainnicus  perambularet  in  solitudine,  tres 
laj'ci  ualde  crudeles  occurrerunt  ei,  volentes  eum  iugulare,  et  spo- 
liauerunt  eum  uestimentis  suis',  dicentes:  '  Hic  est  monachus*,  qui 
multos  in  hiis  locis  seduxit.'  Cumque  illi  in  longum  ire  conarentur 
habentes  spolia  sancti,  non  potuerunt  transire,  set  per  circuitum  in 
vno  loco  ambulabant.  Nocte  autem  ueniente,  sanctus  Cainnicus 
lucernam  celesti  igne  ardentem  habuit ;  et  videntes  illi  laici  ipsam 
lucernam,  venerunt  ad  eam,  et  tunc  vnus  de  illis  pene  mortuus 
fuit'.  Tunc  illi  latrones  genua  flectentes,  penitentiam  egerunt ;  et 
monachi  obedientes  apud  sanctum  Cainnicum  erant. 

xxxviii.  QuoDAM '"  autem  tempore  ambulans  sanctus  Cainnicus  in 
regionibus  Mumenensium "  iuxta  stagnum  Leyn  cum  discipulis  suis, 

'   =  S  §  42 ;  Ri  R2  u.  s.  2  psalmos  S  R  add.  '  Sic  M  ;  perhaps  \ve 

should  read  ;  '  ubi  erat  [sanctus  ;  et]  lux  illa  .  .  .  legentis  [fulgebat].  Fulgebant 
enim  etc.  The  words  in  brackets  are  from  S  ;  which,  however,  has  not  the 
sentence   'fulgebant  .  .  .  legere'.  *   =S  §  43;    R'  f.   133",   R^   f-   146''. 

^  quasi  .  .  .  suum  om.  R.  '   =  S  §  44  ;  R'  R-  u.  s.  '  lineis  S  add. 

*  Hic  est  baculatus  modicus  S  ;  hic  est  ille  cum  baculo  suo  R.  '  For  the 

sentence  '  Nocte  .  .  .  fuit '  S  has  :  Laicus  de  illis  lucernam  [?  rcad  lacernam] 
circa  se  tenens,  celesti  igne  ardens,  pene  consumptus  est.  R  reads  :  Et  cum 
unus  illorum  temerarie  ueste[m]  sancti  indueret,  celesti  etc.  It  is  clear,  there- 
fore,  that  M  has  recast  the  whole  passage  to  suit  the  wrong  reading  'lucernam'. 
**  =S  §  45  ;  R'  R2  u.  s.  "  in  regione  de  Kyrraigi  Lucra  R. 


i66  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

occurrerunt  ei  duodecim  'layci'  votum  malum  promittentes',  et  multa 
mala  locuti  sunt  contra  sanctum.  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  illos  in- 
crepans,  docuit  eos  uerbo  Deo.  Dux  autem  illorum  cum  invicta 
mente  dixit  ei :  'Obaculate^,  ociosa  uerba  noli  loqui,  que  nec  te 
liberabunt ;  quia  hodie  anima  tua  peribit,  nisi  per  Dei  tui  potenciam 
facias  ut  vnus  ex  cignis,  qui  nunc  super  istud  stagnum  natant,  in 
hac  hora  celeri  uolatu  ueniens  super  meam  ollam '  stet,  vnus  super 
tuam.'  Sanctus  respondit :  '  Omnipotenti  Deo  possibilia  sunt  omnia, 
licet  apud  homines  difficilia.'  Statimque  in  illa  hora  duo  cigni  velo- 
citer  volantes,  vnus  super  layci,  alter  super  sancti  Cainnici  ollam* 
stetit.  Tunc  laici  illi  duodecim  obtulerunt  se  Deo  et  Cainnico,  et 
apud  eum  semper  monachi  fuerunt. 

xxxix.  CoLMANUs'  filius  Fearaidhe,  dux  regionis  Osraidhe'',  sancto 
Cainnico  amicus  erat ;  et  ipse  multas  villas  dedit  ei,  in  quibus  sanctus 
Cainnicus  edificauit  monasteria  et  ciuitates.  Quodam  tempore  ille 
dux  in  suo  castello  vndique  conclusus  est  ab  inimicis  suis,  regnum 
tenere'  cupientibus^  Audiens  hoc  sanctus  Cainnicus  a  sua  ciuitate 
Achad  Bho',  id  est  agro  bouum,  nec  currum  neque  eq[u]um  querens, 
ad  ducem  liberandum  velociter  perrexit.  Deus  autem  lasso  suo 
seruo  misertus  est ;  nam  quedam  benigna  mulier  habitans  Membri"', 
vidensque  sanctum  Cainnicum  lassum  in  itenere  voluit  adiuuare 
eum ;  set  diabvlus,  prout  potuit,  hoc  prohibuit,  quia  ipse  nebulam 
magnam  super  agrum  misit,  et  equi  non  sunt  inuenti.  Tunc  sanctus 
Cainnicus  manum  suam  eleuans,  signo  sancte  crucis  benedixit  agrum ; 
totusque  campus^'  illuminatus  est,  et  auriga  invenit  equos.  In  illa 
autem  hora  aliud  valde  mirabile  Dominus  fecit ;  nam  sanctus  Cain- 
nicus  corpore  modicus  erat,  et  non  potuit  de  terra  in  currum 
ascendere.  Tunc  Dominus  terram  eleuauit  sub  pedibus  sancti 
Cainnichi ;  et  tumulus  iste  sub  pedibus  eius  eleuatus  a  Deo  usque 
f.  126"^  hodie  I  ita  manet  in  signum  uirtutis. 

xl.  Quandoque'-  'cum'  sanctus  Cainnicus  in  curru  per  campum 
Ragni"  pergeret  ad  ducem,  occurrit  ei  princeps  Domhpnaidh  Mhoir" 
in  uia,  qui  erat  inimicus  ducis  et  inuidus.  Et  superbo  animo  dixit 
sancto  Cainnico :  '  Scio  quod  ad  Colmanum  tuum  amicum  festinas, 
set  non  prodest ;  quia  non  invenies  eum  viuum,  sed  cadauer  eius 
iugulatum  et  combustum  igni.'    Cui  beatus  Cainnicus  dixit :   '  Scit 

1  scilicet  dihergich  S  add.  ;  xii  uiri  ad  male  agendum  prompti  R.  '  rustice  R. 
2  olam  S  ;  uolam  R'  ;  nolam  R^.  *  olam  S  ;  manum  R.  ^*   =S  5  46  ; 

Ri  f.  133'',  R''  f.  147".  "  Feradichi,  rex  Ossirgi  S  ;  wliich  adds  on  margin  : 

mhic  Giolla  budhig  ;  Colmanus  regulus  in  .  . .  Ossrigia  R.  '  eum  comburere  R. 
'  scilicet  Malgarb  et  Maelodur  S  «rfrf.  "  a  Campulobouis  S.  '"inAcuthuch 
[read  ;  Achuth]  Mebri  S.  ^'  suam  leuauit,  et  luce  manuus  eius  totus  campus 
S  ;  and  practically  R.  "  =S  §  47  ;  R^  f.  133",  R*  u.  s.  "  qui  Mag  Raygni 
dicitur  R.         •*  ei  alius  [  =  Ir.  araile]  pinguis  princeps  Domnich  Moir  Roigni  S. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  167 

filius  uirginis,  quia  estverius'  aliud  quam  'quod'  dicis';  nam  ante- 
quam  ad  domum'  tuam  peruenias,  morieris\'  Quod  ita  factum  est. 
Nam  cum  ipse"  in  suo  curru  per  aliquam'  ianuam  sue  ciuitatis 
intrasset,  valua'  in  capud  eius  cecidit,  et  statim  mortuus  est.  Sanctus 
ergo  Cainnicus  in  curru  ceieriter  festinans,  pcruenit  ad  castellum 
magna  multitudine  circumdatum,  et  igne  succensum.  Tunc  sanctus 
Cainnicus  intrauit  castellum  ardens  igne,  et  per  Dei  potenciam, 
nemine  vidente,  ducem  de  magno  periculo  inter  turbas  celative  foras 
perduxit,  et  longe  a  castello  secum  commigrans,  dixit  illi  sanctus : 
'  Expccta  hic  ;  licet  solus  sis  hodie,  set  non  ita  eris  cras.  Tres  enim 
viri  in  isto  loco  uestro  ad  te  venient,  et  postea  trecenti ;  et  tercia 
die  dux"*  totius  Osraidhe  iterum  eris.'    Quod  ita  factum  est. 

xli.  QuoDAM '  autem  die  dux*  supradictus  Colmanus  cum  exercitu 
suo  et  sanctus  Cainnicus  cum  suo  clero  in  vno  loco  fuerunt.  Tunc'" 
dux  mire  magnitudinis  pomum  in  manu  sua  habens,  et  aspiciens 
clerum  Cainnici,  dixit :  '  Dicat  aliquis  ex  uobis  mihi,  quot  sunt  grana 
in  isto  pomo.'  Sanctus  Cainnicus,  timens  si  sui  fratres  recte  non 
responderent,  statim  dixit :  '  Magnum  quidem  est  pomum,  set  vnum 
graiunn  habet  intus.'    Scisso  vero  pomo  sic  inuentum  est. 

In  illa  itaque  congregacione  vir  quidam  equum  equitans  velociter, 
de  equo  cecidit,  et  femur  eius  confractum  est  in  duas  partes.  Cain- 
nicus  autem  audiens  vocem  illius  viri,  agnouit  quod  filius  vite  esset. 
Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  benedixit  femur  illius,  et  statim  sanatum 
est ;  et  vir  ille  se  obtulit  Deo  et  sancto  Cainnico ;  et  vir  sanctus 
postea  fuit ". 

xlii.  Quodam'"  autem  tempore  sanctus  Cainnicus  volens  fugere 
homines,  sine  naui  siccis  pedibus  intrauit  diuina  uirtute  in  insulam 
stagniCre'';  ibique  exemplo  Domini  quadraginta  diebus  et  quadra- 
ginta  noctibus  mansit.  Set  cibum  humanum  non  habuit,  nec  domum; 
set  super  nudam  terram  habitauit.  Ipse  autem  non  sentiit  famem 
uel  sitim,  nec  frigus  necque  pluuia  sibi  nocuit ;  solus  orationibus 
diuinis  vacabat,  et  nemo  sciuit  quod  ibi  fuit.  Quodam  autem  die  cum 
esset  in  oratione  in  illa  insula,  vidit  turbas  demonum  sedentes  super 
equos  secus  se  festinantes.    Interrogante  autem  illo  demones,  quo 

'  carius  S ;  quod  est  alius  tibi  carior  in  periculo  maiori  quam  ille  R,  which 
seems  a  recastmg  of  the  sentence  due  to  the  false  reading  of  S.  ^  cogitas  S. 

^  cellam  S.  *  MS.  morierieris.  ^  ipse  pinguis  S.  *  aliam  [  =  araile]  S. 
'  que  dicitur  donickth  S  add.  »  re.x  S  R.  '   =S  §§  50,  51  ;  R'  f.  133'', 

f.  147^  1"  tunc  .  .  .  inuentum  est  om.  R.  "  Here  S  §  52  ;  R'  f.  134",  R^  u.  s. 
insert  an  incident,  very  similar  to  §  xiv  supra,  of  Cainnech  preaching  at  lona.  It  is 
pretaced  thus  :  •  Sanctus  Kannechus  in  insula  stagni  Cree  quattuor  euuangeliorum 
uolumen  scripsit,  quod  usque  hodie  manet  in  loco  eius,  et  dicitur  Glass  Kannechi ' 
S,  and  practically  R.  12   =  §  48  ;  R'  f.  133",  R2  f.  147!» ;  cf.  Book  of  Fermoy, 

f.  62".  '3  insulam  de  Ross  Cre  R. 


i68  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

pergerent,  vnus  ex  illis  respondit  ei :  '  Nos  festinamus  ad  contenden- 
dam  animsm  vnius  diuitis  in  regione  Muscraighi'.'  Cui  dixit 
sanctus  Cainnicus :  '  Venias  ad  me  iterum  cum  fabulis,  ut  dicas  de 
illa  anima  aliquid  milii.'  Cumque  post  pugnam  ad  eum  redisset 
demon,  vidit  sanctus  Cainnicus  eum  sine  equo^,  et  tristem  ualde. 
Interrogans  eum,  ille  respondit :  '  Nos  victi  sumus,  nam  vir  ille 
tria  capitula  de  ympno  sancti  Patricii  ante  mortem,  nobis  nescientibus, 
cantauit,  et  per  hoc  liberatus  est  de  manibus  nostris.' 

(•  127 "  I  xliii.  CuM '  ergo  Dominus  omnipotens  voluisset  sanctum  suum 
Cainnicum  ostendere,  fecit  quendam  venatorem  sequentem  canes 
sequentes  ceruum  ad  stagnum.  Tunc  ceruus,  sequentibus  se  canibus, 
natauit  in  insulam ;  et  videns  sanctum  Cainnichum,  venit  et  stetit 
ante  eum.  Canes  autem  post  ceruum  in  insulam  uenerunt,  et  simi- 
liter  ante  sanctum  cum  ceruo  mitissime  steterunt.  Adueniens  autem 
venator,  et  videns  ceruum  et  canes  sedentes  ante  sanctum,  miratus 
est  ualde.  Cainnicus  autem  iuramento  iniunxit  illi,  ne  eum  proderet 
nisi  ante  horam  mortis  sue.  IUe  venator,  volens  complere  iura- 
mentum  illud,  statim  ad  domum  reuertens,  graui  dolore  grauatus 
est ;  ceruus  vero  liber  recessit  ad  siluam.  Venator  quidem  cum 
duceretur  ad  mortem,  in  confinio  mortis  dixit  quod  sanctus  Cain- 
nicus  fuit  in  insula  Cre.  Ipse  *  vero,  ut  hoc  dixit,  statim  solutus 
est  a  suo  dolore.  Sanctus  uero  heremita,  Cainnicus,  reductus  est 
ad  sua  monasteria. 

xliv.  QuoDAM  ^  tempore  sanctus  Brendanus '  habens  artifices  facien- 
tes  calicem  aureum  altaris,  set  aurum  sufficienter  non  habuit  ad 
illum  fabricandum.  Tunc  alii  dixerunt  sibi:  'Vade  ad  sanctum 
Cainnicum;  forsitan  aurum  ipse  habet^.'  Veniens  ergo  Brendanus, 
senior  sanctus,  de  aduentu  eius  Cainnicus  gauisus  est  ualde.  Cau- 
sam  illius  audiens,  benignus  Cainnichus  corde  compunctus  est,  quia 
nichil  de  auro  habuit.  Deus  autem  omnipotens  duobus  sanctis  suis 
misertus  est.  Nam  sanctus  Cainnicus  commedens  cum  sancto  Bren- 
dano,  benedixit  panem,  et  ponens*  super  mensam,  totus  ipse  panis 
aurum  optimum"  et  purum  factus  est".  Videntes  sancti  hoc,  gratias 
Deo  egerunt ;  et  sanctus  Brendanus  totum  illud  aurum  secum  por- 
tauit,  et  de  illo  auro  totus  calix  factus  est,  qui  usque  hodie  'in 
monasterio'  sancti  Brendani  manet. 

1  diuitis  hi  Mollib  Muscrigi  S  ;  diuitis  qui  Maeldub  uocatur  R  (probably  a  mis- 
understanding  of  Sl ;  the  Bookof  Fermoy  calls  him  Cromdub.  *  claudicantem 
pede,  sagitta  enim  [ignea  R]  per  eius  genu  intrauit  S  (and  practically  R). 
'  =  S  §  49  ;  Ri  f.  133'',  R'  u.  s.  *  This  addition  of  the  man's  recovery  is  not 
in  S  R.  5   =S  §  53;  R'  f.  134",  R''  f.  147'^.  "  Maccualte  nrfrf.  S;  Mac 

Cuaylti  R.  '  quia  frequenter  in  Britanniam  uadit  S  ;  eo  quod  in  Britannia 

frequenter  habitaret  R.  '  eam  wrongly  added  above  the  line  m.  sec. 

°  obrizum  R.  '"  In  S  R,  which  are  much  more  original  here,  the  gold  was 

vomited  by  Cainnech. 


VITA  SANCTI  CAINNICI  169 

xlv.  Quodam'  autem  die,  cum  sanctus  Columba  in  mari  nauigaret, 
et  nauis  in  tempestate  magna  periclitaretur,  dixerunt  ci  fratres  sui : 
'  Roga  Deum  pro  nobis.'  Quibus  sanctus  Columba  dixit :  '  Non  est 
meum  hodic  liberare  vos  per  Dei  potenciam ;  quia  non  mihi,  set 
sancto  Cainnico  "Dcus'  donauit  vos.'  Tunc  sanctus  Cainnicus  inter 
fratres  suos  iuxta  mensam  sedens  in  monasterio,  quod  vocatur 
Achadh  Bh6-,  audiuit  vocem  sancti  Columbe  se  vocantis  de  longe, 
ct  cito  surrexit  de  mensa,  dicens:  '  Non  est  hora  nobis  nunc  cenandi, 
quia  nauis  sancti  Columbe  magna  tempestate^  nunc  periclitatur.' 
Tenens  vnum  ficonem  circa  pedem  cucurrit  ad  ecclesiam.  Tunc 
enim,  ipso  orante,  facta  est  magna  tranquillitas  in  mari.  Tunc 
sanctus  Columba  dixit:  'O  sancte  Cainnice,  oportunus  fuit  nobis 
tuus  cursus  cum  vno  ficone  ad  ecclesiam  ;  quia  pcr  tuam  orationem 
a  magno  periculo  a  Deo  liberati  sumus*.' 

xlvi.  MuLTA^  alia  mirabilia  magna,  que  propter  breuitatem  non 
scripsimus,  Dominus  lesus  Christus  per  sanctum  famulum  suum 
Cainnicum  perfecit ;  ipse  enim  octo  mortuos  in  nomine  Domini  nostri 
lesv  Christi  suscitauit,  cccos  multos  videre,  surdos  audire,  mutos- 
que°  loqui  fecit.  Dcmones  vero  vociferanfes  contra  eum  ferocibus 
verbis  de  multis  locis  fugauit ;  cetcrasque  virtutcs  quas '  fecit,  curantes 
breuitati  omittimus.  |  Cum  autem  dies  exitus  eius  venisset,  toto  (■  121'' 
corporc  infirmatus  est ;  noluitque  communionem  accipere  de  manu 
alicuius  illorum,  qui  ibi  erant,  dicens:  'Alium  virum  sanctum, 
nominc  Fintanum,  mittere  wlt  Dominus  ad  mc,  ut  ab  eo  corpus 
Domini  accipiam.'  Tunc  sanctus  Fjmtanus  Moeldubh,  missus  a 
Domino,  venit  ad  eum,  et  accipiens  cucharistiam  de  manu  illius, 
sanctus  Cainnicus  in  monasterio  Achadh  Bo  quinto  Idus  Octobris 
feliciter  migrauit  ad  Dominum  lesum  Christum,  cui  est  honor  et 
gloria  in  secula  seculorum.    Amen. 

EXPLICIT   VITA   SANCTI    CaINNICI 
ABBATIS 

'  =S  §  54  ;  R>  f.  134^,  R2  f.  147'' ;  cf.  Adamnan  ii.  13.  ^  in  Achuth  bo  S  ; 
Akachbo  in  Lagenia  R.  *  se  vocantis  .  .  .  tempestate  om.  S  (due  to  recur- 

rence  of  the  words  '  sancti  Columbe ').  *  Here  S  §§  55-9,  R'  R^  u.  s.  insert 

five  incidents  :  (a)  punishment  of  a  thief ;  (A)  cure^of  a  pregnant  nun  ;  (c)  Cain- 
nech  and  a  disciple  walli  on  the  sea,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  joumey  sit  down 
and  read  on  the  disciple's  outspread  cowl ;  {d)  lamb  raised,  which  the  nuns  of 
'  insula  nepotum  Conkj-nn  '  had  killed  for  Cainnech's  refection  ;  (e)  wolf  takes 
the  place  of  calves  which  it  had  eaten.  The  text  of  R^  ends  near  the  beginning 
of  S  §  57,  owing  to  the  loss  of  a  leaf.  ^   =  S  §  60  ;  R>  f.  134''.  «  MS. 

rautossque.  '  MS.  que. 


Vita  sancti  orartj^agi  siue  iHoci^utu 
cpiscopi  tJC  ILcss  i^flor 

f.  60''  InCIPIT   UITA   SANCTI    CaRTHAGI  '    EPISCOPI   ET   CONFESSORIS 

i.'  Gloriosus  '  EPiscopus^  Carthagus,  qui  vulgo  uocaturMochuthu  ^, 
de  gente  Chiaragi''  Luachra',  de  nepotibus  specialiter  Fergusi',  qui 
fuit  fortissimus  heros  Ultorum,  cuius  nepotes  sunt  in  diuersis  locis  per 
Hiberniam  ;  et  ipse  per  inuidiam  zeli  Illella"  regis  Connachtorum '", 
qui  de  gente  Laginensium  natus  est  origenahter,  cecidit ".  Pater  iam 
sancti  Carthagi  Fingenn"'  filius  Guoe  de  gente  Chiarrigi"  erat. 
Mater  autem  eius  Med[b]  uocabatur,  que  fuit  fiha  Fingeni  de  gente 
Corcu  Duibne  " ;  que  gens  est  in  occidentali  Hibernie  plaga  contra 
occeanum,  circa  fluenta  piscossi  fluminis  Lemhna. 

ii.  Sanctum  "  iam  Carthagum  nasciturum  angelus  Domini,  ante- 
quam  nasceretur,  sancto  seniori  Comgello"  predixit,  dicens  :  '  Na- 
scetur,  beate  senior,  filius  in  occidentah  Hibernie  regione,  qui  a  fonte 
baptismatis  Carthagus  uocabitur",  eo  quod  amabilis  Deo  et  homini- 
bus,  in  celo  et  in  terra  erit.  Et  post  multum  tempus  ueniet  ad  te, 
cupiens  Romam  ire;  et  ne  derelinquas  illum,  quia  hoc  mandatum 
a  Domino  est ;  set  maneat  annum  integrum  tecum.'  Quod  ita  postea 
completum  est. 

iii.  Item  sanctus  Mochuthu  prophetatus  est  ab  angelo  sancto 
Brendano,  qui  inuenit  terram  repromissionis  sanctorum,  dicens  ei : 
'Veniet  ad  te  cicius  frater  mirabilis,  qui  gentem  tuam  hic  et  in  futuro 
adiuuabit.  Et  regionem  Chiaraigi "  diuident  homines  inter  uos ;  et 
nomen  eius  erit  Carthagus,  et  multi  in  nativitate  "  eius  gaudebunt  '*. 
Ipse  siquidem  magnam  congregacionem  de  multis  gentibus  ad  Do- 
minum  in  die  iudicii  colliget.     Et  prima  ciuitas  eius  Raithen  dicetur, 

'  qui  Muchudu  dicitur  arfrf.  S  ;  on  the  lower  margin  of  M  is  a  long  pedigree  in 
Irish,  which  agrees  for  the  most  part  with  that  in  LL.  349".  ^  =S  §  i  ;  Ir. 

Stowe  MS.  ix.  p.  18.  '  Gloriosus  Christi  M.  ^  episcopus  om.  M.  ^  M  writes 
this  name  Mochudu  or -da.  *  Kiarraidhi  M  ;  and  so  elsewhere.  '  Luacra  M. 
"  -sii  M.  «  Oilella  M.  '"  Onnactacthorum  M.  "  There  is  a  tale 

called  Aided  Fergusa  tnaic  Roicli,  i.  e.  the  Death  of  Fergus  son  of  Roech,  in 
Edinb.  MS.  No.  40;  this  tale  was  also  known  as  Oen-et  amnas  AilcVa,  i.  e.  the 
one  cruel  jealousy  of  Ailill,  LL.  31''  29;  now  printed  by  K.  Meyer,  Death-talcs 
of  the  Ulster  Heroes,  p.  32.  ^^  Fynghein  M,  13  Corco  dvibhne  M. 

"  §§  ii.  iii  are  not  in  S.  ^^  -gallo  M.  i''  -batur  M.  "  solemnitate  T. 

'*  Lul^e  i.  14. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  171 

posita  in  medio  Hibernie  in  rcgione  Midi',  in  plebe  silicet,  [que]  Fir 
Ciiell  nuncupatur,  et  erit  clara,  set  clarior  erit  secunda,  et  maior,  et 
magnum  principatum  tenebit;  que  uocabitur  Leas'  Mor.' 

iv.  Aliquando'  collectis  multis  in  vno  loco  in  regione  Chiaraigi 
ex  utroque  sexu,  uisus  est  globus  igneus  descendens  de  celo  super 
[caput]  matris  *  sancti  Carthagi,  ipso  in  utero  tunc  illius  manente  ;  et 
euanuit  cicius,  nichil  nocens.  Admirati  vero  sunt  illi  omnes,  ne- 
scientes  quid  hoc  significaret.  Gratia  enim  Dei  sanctum  in  uentre 
matris  sue  uisitabat  infantulum. 

V.  Pater'  silicet  sancti  Carthagi  potens  homo  erat,  habens  duo 
clara  castella,  vnum  in  agro  Eolum  *  in  australi  latere  Montis  Miss, 
alterum  uero  in  saltibus  fluminis  Mainne';  et  in  eo  natus  est  sanctus 
Mochuthu.  Et  utraque  illa  castella  benedicta  sunt  ab  illo  tempore  ; 
eo  quod  in  vno  eorum  sanctus  Dei  Carthagus  conceptus  est,  et  in 
altero  natus  est.  Et  nobis  perhibetur  quod  non  possunt  malifici 
homines  in  illis  habitare. 

vi.  DEinde'  ductus  est  sanctus  Carthagus  ad  baptismum  ;  et  ob- 
uiauit  portatoribus  eius  uir  Dei,  Edanus'  nomine,  et  rogauerunt  eum 
illi,  ut  infantem  baptizaret.  Ibi  autem  arida  terra  erat.  Set  dicto 
cicius  I  aqua  de  terra  manauit  in  loco  ubi  fuerunt ;  et  baptizatus  est  f.  6i' 
ibi  sanctus  infans.  Et  fons  ibi  lucidus  manet  usque  in  hodiernum 
diem.  Et  nomen  '"  infantis  a  fonte  baptismatis  Carthagus  dictum  est ; 
quod  antea  ita  prophetatum  est"  ab  angelo  sanctis  senioribus.  Set 
modo '-  ab  omni  vulgo  Mochutu  uocatur,  eo  quod  ita  sanctus  senior 
Carthagus  episcopus,  magistersuus,  consuebat'^  uocareeum'*  pietate 
propter  dilectionem  ilhus,  osculans  et  benedicens  eum.  Ab  illo  iam 
tempore  pauci  sciunt  aliud  nomen  eius,  nisi  Mochutu.  Et  ideo  non 
curamus  siue  Mochutu  siue  Carthagum  scripsimus.  Set  uos  scitote 
quod  ista  duo  nomina  vnam  personam  significant.  Aeidanus  ^^  autem 
baptizator  sancti  Carthagi  dixit  prophetice  :  'Hic  infantulus  clarus  et 
amabilis  Deo  et  hominibus,  in  celo  et  in  terra  erit.' 

vii.  Sanctus  '°  iam  Mochutu  forma  et  vultu  desiderabilis,  ut  Dauid, 
abstinens  ab  inlicitis,  ut  Daniel,  mitis  ad  populum,  ut  Moj'ses,  fuit ; 
et  despiciebatur  a  parentibus  suis,  quia  non  consentiret  secularibus 
eorum    moribus.      Diligebatur  uero    a   Domino,  ut    illi  conueniret 

'  Mighi  M.  2  Lios  M.  '   =  S  §  i.  <  super  matrem  M  B  ;  in  caput 

illius  S.  'NotinS.  «  !  Colum  M.  '  fria  taobh  Mainge  Ir,  i.  e.  by  thesideof 
the  Maine.  *  =S§2.  '  Aed- M.  '"nomineM.  "  prophetatum  est  ita  M. 
•-  Ir.  p.  19  ;  S  omits  the  rest  of  the  section.  "  consueuerat  M  B;  after  vvhich 
M  T  wrongly  insert  a  second  ita.  "  '  Mo  chuidigh  thu  ',  ol  an  t-easbudh  Ir., 

i.  e.  '  thou  ^art)  my  portion  ',  quoth  the  bishop.  "  Aedhanus  M.  '*  =  S  §  3  ; 
not  in  Ir. 


172  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

Dauitica  sententia  :  '  Pater  meus  et  mater  mea  dereliquerunt  me  ; 
Dominus  autem  assumpsit  me'.'  Et,  sicut  Dauid  oues  patris  sui 
pascebat,  ita  beatus  Mochutu  sues  patris  sui  in  puericia  cum  aliis 
subulcis  custodiebat. 

viii.  Alio  ^  die,  dum  sues  pius  puer  Mochutu  cum  ceteris  pascebat  in 
grandibus  saltibus  fluminis  Mainne,  audiuit  ducem  regionis  Chiaraigi 
prope  fuisse.  Perrexitque  ad  illum  tunc  habitantem  in  quodam  ca- 
stello  nomine  Achad  Dian,  id  est  ager  uelox  ;  et  inuenit  gratiam  in 
conspectu  eius.  Dux  ille  Moeltuli  uocabatur.  Et  ait  dux  ad  sanctum 
puerum  :  '  Veni  huc  cotidie  cum  aUis  subulcis,  et  honor  eis  dabitur 
propter  te.  Desidero  enim  te  uidere.'  Quadam  nocte  manens  ibi 
sanctus  puer  sedit  ante  ducem.  Dux  uero  diligenter  intendebat 
illum  tamdiu,  ut  increparetur  a  coniuge  sua  Noeleathan,  que  fuit  filia 
Moelduin  filii  Edha  Bennain ',  regis  Muminensium,  dicens  ei :  'Cur 
istum  puerum  tam  intente  aspicis  omni  nocte?'  Dixit  ei  dux  :  'O 
mulier,  si  tu  uidisses,  quod  ego  uideo  in  eo,  neminem  aspiceres 
preter  eum.  Video  enim  munile  aureum  *,  mirabiliter  factum,  circa 
coUum  eius ;  et  columnam  ^  igneam  a  capite  eius  usque  ad  celum. 
Et  uideo  domum  reseratam  sursum,  quasi  culmen  non  haberet.  Ab 
illa  ergo  hora,  qua  uidi  hec  signa  de  illo,  asccndit  dileccio  eius  in  cor 
meum.'  Tunc  dixit  ei  ductrix,  vxor  sua :  'Veniat"  igitur  huc,  et 
sedeat  iuxta  te.'  Et  sic  factum  est.  Deinde  sanctus  Carthagus  ali- 
quando  sues  custodiebat  in  siluis',  ahquando  manebat  in  castris  cum 
duce. 

ix.  QuoDAM  die  quoque  uenit  sanctus  senior  episcopus  Carthagus 
per  saltus  amnis  Mainne,  ubi  sanctus  Mochutu  porcos  pascebat ;  et 
canebat  episcopus  cum  suis  comitibus  psalmos  inuicem  per  uiam. 
Cum  autem  sanctus  Mochutu  psalmodiam  illorum  audisset,  inspira- 
f.  6i  ^  tus  Spiritu  Sancto  reliquit  gregem  |  suum,  et  secutus  est  episcopum 
usque  ad  monasterium,  quod  dicitur  Tuaym  *.  Et  cum  sederet'epi- 
scopus  cum  suis  in  hospicio,  sedit  beatus  Mochutu  sub  tecto  deforis, 
nesciente  episcopo  et  habitatoribus  domus.  Illa  silicet  nocte  stupe- 
bat  dux  Moeltuli'"  quod  beatus  Carthagus  ad  se  non  uenit,  nesciens 
quid  factum  est  de  eo.  Et  misit  nuncios  per  regionem  ad  querendum 
puerum  ;  et  invenit  vnus  ex  ipsis  sanctum  Mochutu  sub  tecto  seden- 
tem.  Et  increpauit  eum  multis  uerbis,  et  secum  duxit  inuitum  "  ad 
ducem.  Interrogauitque  eum  dux,  dicens:  'Quare,  fili,  in  nocteprece- 
denti  non  uenisti .''    Respondit  ei  sanctus  puer:  '  Ideo  non  ueni  ad  te, 

•  Ps.  xxvi.  lo.  '  §§  viii-xiii  are  not  in  S.  '  Acdha  Beannain  M. 

*  coroin  orrda  Ir.,  i.  e.  a  golden  crown.  °  columpnam  M.  "  -niet  M. 

'  fo  fedhaibh  na  Mainge  Ir.,  i.  e.  in  the  woods  of  the  Maine.  *  Thuaim  M. 

"  sedet  T.         '"  -tuly  M.         ''  et  du.xit  eum  secum  inuitum  M. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  173 

domine  mi,  quia  delectauit  me  diuinum  carmen,  quod  audiui  a  sanctis 
clcricis,  et  nusquam  audiui  simile  huic  carmini.  Et  illud  indesinenter 
per  uiam  et  in  domo  usque  ad  tempus  dormiendi  cantabant ;  et  solus 
episcopus  post  omnes '  longe  in  nocte  'de'cantabat.  Vtinam  ego, 
domine  dux,  essem  cum  eis,  ut  illud  carmen  discerem.'  Tunc  misit 
dux  ad  episcopum,  ut  ad  se  cicius  veniret. 

X.  Interea  pater  sancti  Mochutu  illi  duci  cenam  magnam 
parauit.  Ccnantibus  autem  illis  in  conuiuio  iocunde,  dux  Moeltuli^ 
sanctum  puerum  Carthagum  ad  se  uocauit,  et  ostendit  ei  gladium, 
scutum,  et  hastam,  et  lunam  arge[n]ti  et  auri,  et  uestimenta  re- 
galia,  ceteraque  mihcie  instrumenta.  Et  dixit  ei :  '  Hec  munera, 
fih,  habe  ;  et  esto  meus  in  vice  patris  tui  comes.'  Sanctus  autem, 
paruipendens  terrena,  respuit  illa.  Tunc  dux  ilh  ait:  'Quid  igitur 
uis  ut  dem  tibi  ? '  Ait  ei  sanctus  :  '  Nolo  ahquid  de  tuis  donis  carnah- 
bus ;  set  uolo  uere  ut  carmen,  quod  a  sanctis  Dei  audiui,  discam.'  Et 
cognouit  dux  gratiam  Dei  in  eo  esse ;  et  promisit  ei  dare,  quod 
quesiuit.  Et  postea  sanctus  Carthagus  episcopus  vocatus  uenit  ad 
ducem  ;  et  commendauit  ei  dux  pium  iuuenem,  Mochutu,  ut  legeret 
et  disceret  apud  eum^  Suscepitque  eum  episcopus  letus,  sciens  eum 
Sancto  Spiritu  plenum  esse.  Mansitque  sanctus  Mochutu  sub  di- 
sciphna  sancti  Carthagi  episcopi,  usque  dum  gradum  sacerdotalem  ab 
eo  accepit. 

xi.  Sa^xtus  *  silicet  Mochutu  multum  speciosus,  sicut  prediximus, 
fuit ;  et  in  diuersis  diebus  in  iuuentute  sua  triginta  iuuencule  uir- 
gines  amauerunt  eum  magno  amore  carnali,  hoc  ^  non  celantes. 
Famulus  autem  Domini  rogauit  Deum  pro  eis,  ut  amorem  carnalem 
mutarent  in  spiritualem.  Ouod  ita  factum  est.  Ille  enim  iuuencule 
per  orationem  sancti  Mochutu  effecte  sunt  uirgines,  et  cellas  et  mona- 
steria  fundauerunt.  Que  loca  sunt  hodie  in  parrochia  sancti  Mochutu. 
Ille  enim  sancte  uirgines  se  ipsas  cum  suis  cellis  Deo  et  sancto 
Mochutu  obtulerunt. 

xii.  DiE  ^  illo  quo  sanctus  Mochutu  sacerdos  factus  est,  Fintanus ', 
filius  Carthind,  cum  filio  suo  ad  sanctum  episcopum  Carthagum  ad- 
uenit,  ut  baptizaret  episcopus  illum  infantem,  et  offerret  eum  epi- 
scopo.  Et  ait  episcopus  :  '  Offer  filiolum  tuum  illi  sancto  adolescenti, 
qui  hodie  consecratus  est ;  et  ipse  eum  baptizet.'  Quod  ille  sponte 
fecit.  Et  interrogauit  sanctus  Mochutu  Fintanum,  quo  nomine  filius 
suus  uocaretur.  Ille  inquit :  '  Furadranus  uocabitur.'  Postquam  iam 
baptizatus  est  ille  infantulus,  prophetauit  de   eo  sanctus  Mochutu ; 

'  os  T  (mark  of  contraction  omitted).  '  -tuly  M.  ^  Ir.  p.  20.  *  In  Ir. 
this  section  follows  §  xxxi.  ^  om.T.  ^  This  section  is  not  in  Ir.  '  Fynnt-  M  ; 
and  so  below. 


174  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

tenensque  manum  eius,  dixit';  '  Ista  manus  crudelis  erit,  et  ob- 
f.  61"  tine|bit  obsides  nepotum  Torna';  (que  gens  est  in  medio  regionis 
Cliiaraigi  ^,  a  monte  Luchra '  usque  ad  mare.)  '  Et  filii  eius  regnabunt 
post  se  in  eternum,  nisi  me  negauerint.  Si  quando  me  et  posteriores* 
meos  negabunt,  regnum  suum  deficiet  ab  eis.'  Quod  uaticinium  sic 
completum  est. 

xiii.  QuoDAM  autem  die,  postquam  sacerdocium  sanctus  Mochutu 
accepit,  sanctus  senex  Carthagus  episcopus,  nutritor  suus,  cum  eo 
ad  supradictum  ducem  Moelthuli "  perrexit.  Et  inuenerunt  ducem  in 
loco  qui  dicitur  Feorann  iux[ta]  litus  Ly^,  a  quo  duces  Chiaraigi 
nominantur.  Et  dixit  episcopus  Carthagus  duci :  '  Hic  est,  domine 
dux,  optimus  meus  filius,  quem  a  te  suscepi.  Bene  legit,  et  bene 
didicit  in  diuersis  scripturis,  et  sacerdotalem  gradum  a  nie  accepit' ; 
et  Dei  gratia  multis  prodigiis  in  eo  apparet.'  Tunc  dixit  dux 
episcopo  :  '  Quid  dabitur  tibi  in  mercedem?'  Respondit  episcopus  : 
'  Volo  ut  offerres  te  ipsum  cum  genere  tuo  post  te  semper  huic 
adolescenti,  famulo  Christi.'  Hoc  primum  dux  propter  iuuenilem 
etatem  sancti  Mochutu  facere  recusauit.  Tunc  episcopus  inclinauit 
se,  et  genua  flexit  coram  sancto  Mochutu,  dicens  ei :  '  Ecce  offero  me 
ipsum  et  ecclesiam  meam  cum  mea  parrochia  Deo  et  tibi,  fili  mi, 
in  sempiternum.'  Hoc  uidens  dux  inuoluit  ad  pedes  sancti  Mochutu  ; 
et  obtulit  corpus  et  animam  suam  cum  prole  sua  post  se  Deo  et 
sancto  Mochutu  in  eternum.  Tunc  sanctus  Mochutu  calcauit  collum 
ducis  pede  suo,  et  mensus  est  eum  in  longitudine  pedibus  suis. 
Tunc  quidam  de  seruis  ducis  increpauit  sanctum  Mochutu,  dicens  ei : 
'  Cur  calcas  superbe  dominum  nostrum  ducem  ?  Honorabile  est 
corpus,  quod  premis'.'  Tunc  sanctus  omisit  metire'  ducem,  dicens: 
'  CoIIum  quod  calcaui  non  decollabitur,  et  corpus  quod  mensus  sum 
non  iugulabitur '".  Et,  nisi  me  prohibuisses,  dux  de  semine  eius  non 
deesset  in  eternum.'  Et  dixit  illi  increpatori:  'Tu  et  nepotes  tui 
semper  uiles  inter  seruos  eritis.'  Benedicens  autem  ducem,  promisit 
ei  celum  et  terram ;  et  ait  illi :  '  Si  quis  de  semine  tuo  offendiculum 
meisposterioribus"  fecerit,  et  debitum  suum"  mihi  non  redd[id]erit, 
regnum  Chiaraigi  non  tenebit.'  Hec  omnia  secunduni  hoc  uaticinium 
complentur. 

xiv.  Postea"  sanctus  iunior  Carthagus  ex  suasione  sui  magistri" 
senioris  Carthagi,  et  ducis  Moelthuli '°,  cellam  ad  australem  plagam 

1  MSS. :  et  dixit.  ^  Kyarraighi  M  ;  and  so  below.  ^  Liiachra  M. 

*  posteros  M.  ^  -tuli  M.  '^  Leamhnoe  B.  '  suscepit  M  B. 

*  primis  M  m.  pr.  "  -ri  M  m.  sec.  '"  an  ball  rerben  mo  troighsi  dhe  .  .  . 
ni  bd  hegal  d6  faobhair  naid  gallra  Ir.,  i.  e.  the  member  which  my  foot  has 
slruck  need  not  fear  weapons  nor  diseases.  'i  posteris  M.  "  meum  M  B. 
"   =S  §  4.         "  magistri  sui  M.         "  -tuli  M. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  175 

Chiaraigi '  inter  montem  Mys  ^  et  flumen  predictum  Mainn',  nomine 
Chell  *  Tulach,  edificauit.  Et  magnas  uirtutes  fecit  ibi ;  et  omnes 
honorificabant  eum.  Hoc "  uidentes  duo  episcopi,  id  est  Diblinus  et 
Domangenus,  inuidebant  sancto  Carthago ;  et  persecuti  sunt  eum  in 
omnibus.  Tunc  sanctus  Carthagus  perrexit  ad  eundcm  ducem 
Moeltuli,  in  suo  castello  iuxta  fretum  Lumnich "  habitantem,  et  nar- 
rauit  ei  omnia,  que  sibi  acciderant  ab  episcopis.  Audiens  dux  illa, 
uenit  ilico  cum  sancto  Mochutu  ad  suam  cellam',  et  castrametatus 
est  in  cacumine  montis  Mys,  et  dormiuit  ibi.  Et  euigilans  aspexit 
inter  montcm  Mys  et  ampnem  Mainn  ;  et  ait  sancto  Mochutu  :  '  O  fili 
mi,  hunc  angustum  agrum  inuidis  episcopis  interim  relinque;  et 
iterum  tuus  erit  cum  suis  habitatoribus  per  seculum.'  Et  hoc 
consilium  multum  sancto  Mochutu  placuit*,  et  fecit  ducem  cum 
benedictione  reuerti.  Relinquensque  sanctus  Carthagus  cellam  suam 
viris  fidelibus,  cepit  ire  solus  in  peregrinalcionem  in  aquilonalem  f.  61  ^* 
Hibernie  plagam. 

XV.  Interea  angelus  Domini  uenit  ad  sanctum  Comgallum  mona- 
sterii  Benchoyr'  abbatem,  et  dixit  illi:  'Veniet  presbiter  iuuenis  et 
sanctus  ad  te,  uolens  trans  mare  pro  Christi  nomine  ire,  quem 
predixi  tibi  quondam,  antequam  natus  esset.  Et  ne  dimittas  illum, 
quia  hoc  mandat  tibi  Dominus ;  set  maneat  tecum  usque  ad  finem 
anni.'  Sanctus  Comgallus  ad  angelum  dixit :  '  Ouomodo  potuero 
cognoscere  eum?'  Respondit  angelus  :  '  Qui  retrorsum  ab  ecclesia 
usque  ad  hospicium  ibit,  ipse  est.'  Volebat  enim  sanctus  Mochutu 
ecclesiam  Dei  semper  aspicere  ".  Deinde  sanctus  Comgallus  dixit 
discipulis  suis :  '  Veniet  in  hac  die  ad  nos  hospes  uenerabilis,  qui  est 
Deo  amabilis.  Angelus  enim  Domini  bis  eum  indicauit  mihi.' 
Postea  sanctus  Carthagus  repente  peruenit  ad  monasterium  Benchor; 
et  fecit,  sicut  angelus  de  eo  predixit.  Et  cognoscens  eum  sanctus 
Comgallus,  gauisus  est  ualde.  Audiensque  Sanctus  Mochutu  a  sancto 
patre  Comgallo  mandatum  Domini  sibi  per  angelum  suum,  mansit 
apud  illum  usque  ad  finem  anni.  Finito  autem  anno,  per  consilium 
sancti  patris  Comgalli  de  mandato  Domini,  reuersus  est  sanctus 
Carthagus  ad  prouinchiam  suam ;  et  multa  loca  Deo  ibi  edificauit, 
et  magnas  virtutes  fecit  in  eis,  et  multi  homines  se  sibi  obtulerunt. 
Factaque  est  parrochia  eius  magna  in  sua  patria.  Ipse  enim  epi- 
scopatum  regionis  Chiaraigi"  accepit. 

•  Kyarraghi  M.  -  Myss  M  ;  and  so  below.  3  frja  Maing  atuaigh,  7  .  .  . 
eglais  n-aile  fria  Maing  anes  a  Machaire  Cholmain  Ir.,  i.e.  to  the  north  of  the 
Maine,  and  another  church  to  the  southof  the  Maine  in  Machaire  Colmain  ;  the 
remainder  of  this  section  and  the  whole  of  §  xv  being  omitted  in  Ir.  *  Ceall  M. 
5  From  this  point  to  the  end  of  §  xx  oiii.  S.  '  Luimnigh  M.  '  cellam 

suam  M  B.  *  placuit  sancto  Mochudu  M  B.  ^  Beannchor  M.  1»  i.  e.  he 
wonld  not  tum  his  back  upon  the  church,  but  walked  backwards ;  0'Hanl.  v.  246. 
*'  Kiarraighi  M. 


176  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

xvi.  PosT  hec  sanctus  Mochutu  loca  et  parrochias  suas'  viris 
fidelibus  commendauit ;  et  ualedicens  illis,  uenit  cum  paucis  per 
australem  IWumenie  partem.  Adiuitque  sanctum  Chiaranum  '^  epi- 
scopum,  filium  Fintani,  qui  edificauit  monasterium  Ros  Giallain^; 
et  interrogauit  eum  dicens:  '  In  quo  loco,  pater,  maior  mea  ecclesia 
erit  in  hiis  partibus  ?  Angelus  enim  Domini  predixit  sancto  Com- 
gallo  quia  fijndabo  maiorem  ecclesiam  meam  in  australi  Hibernie 
plaga.'  Spiritum  iam  prophecie  sanctus  Chiaranus  habebat.  Et* 
respondit  ei :  'Ibis  prius,  care  conserue  in  Christo,  ad  nepotes  NeiP, 
et  clarum  ibi  locum  edificabis  Deo ''.  Manebisque  ibi  sexaginta  annos; 
et  inde  postea  expulsus  eris,  et  reuerteris  ad  istam  Mumeniam ; 
et  tunc  maiorem  ecclesiam  tuam  edificabis.'  Tunc  sanctus  Carthagus 
ait  illi :  '  Accipiam  te,  sancte  pater,  patronum  meum  semper.' 
Dixitque  ei  sanctus  Chiaranus  episcopus :  '  Non,  mi  frater,  ita  erit ; 
set  me  et  ecclesiam  meam  cuni  monachis  meis  tibi  offero  in  sempi- 
ternum.'  Et  ait  sanctus  Chiaranus  sancto  Mochutu  :  '  Furudranus, 
filius  meus,  sit  in  sede  mea  post  me.'  Et  hoc  concessit  sanctus 
Mochutu.  Et  beatus  Furudranus  principatum  post  sanctuni  Chiara- 
num  viginti  annis  tenuit. 

xvii.  Deinde  '  sanctus  Mochutu  ad  regionem  na  n-Dese '  ad  filios 
Ruadani'  perrexit ;  et  illi  se  cum  sua  arce  sancto  Carthago  obtulerunt. 
Item  Colmanus  filius  Cobthay  ",  comes  "  in  eadem  regione,  multam  ter- 
ram  obtulit  sancto  Carthago.  Que  omnia  viris ''  fidelibus  commendauit 
sanctus  Dei.  Ascendit  inde  per  montem  Guae",  qui  est  in  eadem 
regione  na  n-Desy ;  et  respiciens  sanctus  de  eius  cacumine  retror- 
f.  62®  sum,  uidit  |  citra  amnem  Nem  super  ripam  eius  angelos  descendentes 
et  ascendentes  inter  celum  et  terram.  Et  eleuabant  cathedram  argen- 
team  cum  imagine  aurea  in  ea  usque  ad  celum.  In  ipso  iam  loco, 
in  quo  sanctus  angelos  uidit,  post  multum  temporis  ecclesiam  suam 
maiorem  fundauit,  in  qua  ipse  ad  Christum  migrauit. 

xviii.  PosT  hec  sanctus  Carthagus  ad  sanctum  Moluam  filium 
Coche,  tunc  in  sua  ciuitate  Cluain  Ferta,  que  est  in  confinio  Laginen- 
sium  et  Muminensium,  habitantem,  perrexit ;  et  inuenit  sanctum 
Moluam  in  segete  cum  messoribus.  Omnes  iam  discipulos  suos 
sanctus  Carthagus  ad  sua  loca  a  se  remisit,  uolens  uiliter  exire  in 
aliena  patria,  'nisi'  vnum  tantum.  Et  ille  frater,  uolens  habitare  in 
monasterio  sancti  Moluae,  ait  ad  eum  :  '  Pater  sancte,  ego  uolo  hic 
tecum  manere.'     Ait  ei  sanctus   Molua :    '  Ego  concedo  tibi,  frater, 

1  -cliia  sua  T.  '  Ky-  M  ;  and  so  elsewhere.  ^  Ross  Gillain  M. 

*  Ir.  p.  21.         5  Neill  M.         '  om.  M.        '  §§  xvii,  xviii  om.  Ir.         '  Deisi  M  ; 
and   so   below.  *  Ruadh-    M  ;    whicli   (requently  aspirates  consonants. 

"  Cobhthaydh  M.         "  bis  T.  "  om.  M  B.         "  Guah  M. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  177 

si  fucrit  uoluntas  pii  tui  magistri.'  Sanctus  uero  Mochutu,  cum 
piures  a  se  dimisit,  noluit  contcndere  vnum  ;  et  dimisit  illum.  Et 
ipse  solus  egrediens,  duas  scethas  libris  plenas  suis  humcris  im- 
posuit.  Videntes  monachi  sancti  Moluae  eum  sohim  euntem, 
subridcbant,  dicentes:  'Tempus  esset  huic  seniori  manere  in  quodam 
inonasterio ;  nam  soli  seniori  discurrere  dedecus  est.'  Ipsi  iam 
nesciebant  quod  ipse  esset  sanctus  Mochutu ;  paucis  enim  se  ipsum 
indicabat.  Quibus  sanctus  Moluae  dixit :  '  Nolite,  fratres,  dicere  hec ; 
ecce  ucniet  dies,  quando  nostra  congregacio  nostraque  ciuitas  modice 
erunt  in  comparacione  congregationis  et  ciuitatis  ipsius,  quem  hodie 
solum  uidetis  ambulantem.  Ipse  est  siquidem  ^  sanctus  Dei  Cartha- 
gus,  quem  plures  uocant  Mochutu.  Multi  iam  hodie  sub  eo  sunt, 
set  plures  futuri.'    Tu[n]c  penituit  fratres  quod  subridebant  eum. 

xix.  Sancto  itaque  Carthago  in  itinere  ambulante,  duo  fratres 
occurrerunt,  dicentes  ei':  '  Quo  uadis,  pater?'  Sanctus  respondit: 
'Adeo  Colmanum  Eala.'  Fratres  dixerunt  ei :  '  Suscipe  nos 
monachos,  tibi  et  Deo  semper  seruientes.  Apparet  enim  gratia  Dei 
in  vultu  tuo.'  Suscepitque  eos  sanctus.  Cumque  peruenissent  ad 
sanctum  Colmanum,  dixit  ei  sanctus  Carthagus :  '  Domine  pater, 
ego  uolo  tecum  hic  habitare.'  Cui  sanctus  Colmanus  dixit :  'Non 
ita  fiet ;  set  ibis  ad  quendam  locum  mihi  propinqu[u]m,  qui  dicitur 
Rathen^;  tibi  a  Deo  promissum  est,  et  mane  ibi  ;  et  multi  monachi 
in  illo  loco  per  te  Deo  ministrabunt.  Ex  ipso  silicet  loco  tuo  primo 
nomine  uocaberis,  id  est  Carthach  Raithin''.'  Tunc,  accepta  benedi- 
ctione  a  sancto  Colmano,  cum  duobus  suis  fratribus  sanctus  Carthagus 
ad  predictum  locum  perrexit.  Et  ibidem  constituit  cellulam.  Et  fre- 
quenter  se  inuicem  uisitabant  sanctus  Carthagus  et  sanctus  Colmanus. 

XX.  In  illo  videlicet  loco,  Rathin,  sanctus  Columba  Chille'  cellulam 
antea  proposuit  fundare,  et  tres  fasces  virgarum  reliquit,  dicens : 
'  Veniet  alius  post  me  huc,  cui  prefinitus  est  iste  locus  a  Deo ".'  Et  de 
illis  fascibus  sanctus  Carthagus  sibi  primitus  cellulam  edificauit,  ut 
prophetauit  Columba.  In  ipso  loco  maximum  monasterium  edifica- 
tum  est  'a'  sancto  Carthago,  in  quo  ipse  per  quadraginta  annos  vixit ; 
et  in  quo  octingenti  sexaginta'  septem"  monachi  sub  eo  fuerunt '. 
Postquam  iam  sanctus  |  Carthagus  ecclesiam   Raithin  "  fundauit",  f.  62» 

1  siquldem  est  M  B.  2  gi  dicentes  M  B.  '  Raithen  M.  *  Raythen  M. 
'"  Cylle  M.  *  Ir.  add.  :  gurab  dona  tri  slataibh  sin   ro  tionnsgnad  damna 

7  adhbhar  reigleisi  la  Mochuda,  i.  e.  so  that  from  those  three  rods  was  begun 
the  material  and  building  of  his  church  by  M.  '  quadraginta  S,  which  is 

right ;  an  Irish  story  about  Mochuda  gives  the  nuraber  of  his  monks  as 
7  +  7x20+700  =  847,  Ravvl.  B.  512,  {.  142''.  0  710  Ir.  ^  Here  Ir., 

pp.  21-31,  inserts  prematurely  the  story  of  the  expulsion  of  Mochuda  from 
Rathen.  '  Indarba  Mochuda  a  r-Raithin,'  vvhich  exists  as  a  separate  tract,  and 
is  a  different  version  of  §§  liii-lix,  below.         '■'>  Rathin  M.         "  edificauit  M  B, 


178  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

agens  magnas  virtutes  in  ea,  fama  eius  totam  Hiberniam  et  Britan- 
niam  insulam  impleuit.  Et  multi  ad  se  a  diuersis  prouinchiis 
Hibernie  et  Britannie  uenerunt,  et  obtulerunt  se  monachos  Deo  et 
sancto  Carthago  semper.  Sanctus  Carthagus  primitus  fecit  monachos 
suos  multis  diebus  terram'  sarculis  suis"  arare.  Respuebat  primitus 
armenta  a  secularibus.  Reges  autem,  principes,  et  duces  illum 
terris  armentisque,  auro  et  argento,  ceterisque  oblacionibus  locum 
honorificauerunt ;  et  monachi  a  quibusdam  sanctis  de  cultura  terre 
suis  sarculis  excussi  sunt.  Et  beatissimus  Carthagus  a  multis  sanctis 
consecratus  est  episcopus  ;  et  uisitabat  aliquando  parochiam  suam, 
id  est  regionem  Chiaraigi  ^.  Viuebat  autem  inter  monachos  suos 
in  sua  peregrinacione  in  suo  monasterio  Raithin.  Monachi  autem 
et  non  clerici  semper  cum  eo  erant. 

xxi.  Alio^  quoque  die  in  vernali  ^  tempore  uenit  quidam  magus'', 
ut  temptaret  famulum  Dei  Mochuta,  dicens  ei :  '  Dic  in  nomine 
Dei  tui,  malus  ista  modo  producat  folia.'  Sciens  sanctus  Carthagus 
quod  ille  malignus  uellet  detrahere  diuine  potencie,  benedixit  in 
Christi  nomine  arborem,  et  statim  produxit  folia.  Secundo  magus 
dixit :  'Similiter  in  nomine  Dei  tui  produc  florem  in  arborem.'  Et 
signauit  sanctus  pontifex  malum',  et  illico  apparuit  flos.  Tercio 
dixit  magus :  '  Quid  prodest  hominibus  flos,  nisi  secuta  fuerint  et 
poma?'  Et  tercia  uice  benedixit  sanctus"  lignum,  et  apparuerunt 
multa  poma  in  eo.  Dicit  magus  quarto :  '  Dic,  O  Christiane,  ut 
maturescant  poma  in  hora.'  Et  signo  sancto  uir  Domini  benedixit 
malum,  statimque  poma  matura  ceciderunt  in  terram.  Et  uidens 
magus  poma  super  terram,  vnum  ex  ipsis  gustauit,  quod  erat  amarum 
ualde.  [Et  ait] ' :  '  Non  bona  est  hec  uirtus,  que  amaritudinem 
habet.'  Iterum  benedixit  sanctus  episcopus  mala,  et  ilico  sapor 
mellis  apparuit  in  eis.  Tunc  in  vindictam  temptacionis  sue  oculi 
magi  per  annum  cecati  sunt.  Et  ueniens  post  annum  cum  peni- 
tencia,  sanauit  sanctus  Carthagus  oculos  eius ;  et  cum  gaudio  re- 
uersus  est. 

xxii.  Die'"  quadam  uir  quidam  secularis,  cum  filio  suo  surdo  et 
muto,  ad  sanctum  Carthagum  uenit ;  et  rogauit  eum  ut  sanaret  fihum 
suum.  Et  orauit  sanctus  pontifex  ad  Deum  pro  illo",  et  dixit  ei : 
'  Audi,  fili,  et  saluta  nos.'  Tunc  ilico  respondit  puer,  dicens:  '  Ecce 
offero  me  tibi,  O  homo  Dei,  cum  hereditate  mea  semper.'  Et  ex 
illa  hora  sanus  efiectus  est  ille  puer  sensibus  et  membris  suis. 

'  om.  M  B.  2  om.  M  B.  '  Kyarraighi  M  ;  and  so   elsewhere. 

*  =S  §  5  ;  Ir.  p.  31.  '  hiemali  S.  "  Magus  ainm  an  oglaigh  Ir.,  i.  e, 

Magus  was  the  name  of  the  young  man(!).  '  malu  T.  '  -tum  M. 

»  From  B ;  om.  M  T.         "   =S  §  6  (expanded).         >'  Ir.  p.  32. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  179 

xxiii.  Quodam'  die  iiiuenis  quidain  leprosus  ad  sanctum  Mochutu 
uenit^  ostendens  ei  niiseriam  suam.  Et  repentc  coram  omnibus  vir 
sanctus  pro  eo  orando  sanauit  eum  a  lepra  sua. 

xxiv.  Item'  alio  die  quidam  uir,  qui  habuit  tabulatam  faciem,  uenit 
ad  sanctum  Carthagum,  et  orans  vir  sanctus  Dominum  pro  illo, 
sanatus  est  ex  illa  hora  a  turpitudine  vultus  sui. 

XXV.  Alio'  quoque  die  in  vernali  tempore  quidam  homo  pauper, 
qui  in  loco  proxinio  monasterii  Raithin^  habitabat,  venit  ad  sanctum 
Mochutu,  et  postulauit  ab  eo  aratorem  et  duos  boues  ad  arandum. 
In  illo  silicet  tempore  sanctus  Carthagus  animalia  in  monasterio  suo 
non  accipiebat ;  set,  sicut  prediximus,  monachi  eius  in  sarculis  ara- 
bant.  Vocansque  ad  se  uir  sanctus  vnum  seruientem,  Edanum" 
noniine,  dixit  ei :  '  Exi  in  siluam  propinquam,  et  educ  duos  ceruos 
tibi  occurrentes  tecum,  et  uade  |  ad  illum  hominem,  atque  ara  in  illis  f.  62 ■= 
per  istud  uer.'  Ille  ilico  obediuit  sancto  Dei,  et  fecit,  sicut  sibi  pre- 
ceptum  est.  Arauitque  in  ceruis  apud  illum  pauperem  in  illo  uere. 
Postea  redeuntes  ad  sua  loca  cerui,  ille  minister  Aedanus^  reuersus 
est  ad  sanctum  Mochutu'. 

xxvi.  QuoDAM*  die  homo  quidam  demoniosus  adductus  est  ad 
sanctum  episcopum  Carthagum ;  et  ilico  uir  sanctus  demonium  ab 
illo  in  nomine  sanctissime  Trinitatis  abiecit.  Et  rediit  sanus,  gra- 
tula[n]s '  Deo,  ad  sua. 

xxvii.  Alio"  die  sanctus  Dei  Carthagus,  lassis  et  occupatis"  fra- 
tribus  in  aliis  rebus,  ipse  ad  molendinum  perrexit,  ut  pararet  fratribus 
annonam.  Hoc  scientes  nouem  latrunculi,  qui  odiebant  sanctum 
Dei,  uenerunt  ut  occiderent  eum.  Et  vnumquemque  secundum 
ordinem  dux  eorum  mittebat  ad  sanctum  iugulandum,  scientes  quod 
uir  Dei  non  clamaret  neque  rebellaret.  Et  nullus  eorum  molendinum 
intrare  ualebat,  prohibente  illos'-  flam[m]a  ignea,  que  nutu  Dei, 
gratia  beati  viri  liberandi,  contra  eos  iuxta  ostium  molendini  intus 
apparebat.  Set  vnusquisque  eorum  per  foramen  ostii  aspiciebat 
sanctum  Mochutu  aliquando  vigilantem,  aliquando  leuiter  dormientem ; 
sompnus  enim  oppresserat  sanctum.  Dormiens  uir  sanctus,  mola 
de  cursu  ilico  cessabat ;  iterumque  uigilans,  statim  mola  uelociter 
currebat.  Reuertens  vnusquisque  eorum  ad  suum  ducem  in  proxima 
silua  sedentem,  annunciabat  ei,  que  uidebat  in   molendino.    Tunc 

'   =  S  §  7.  '  raucis  petens  uocibus  ut  .  .  .  mundari  .  .  .  mereretur  S. 

'=558  ('expanded^ ;  not  in  Ir.      *  not  in  S.      ^'  Rathin  M  ;  and  so  elsewhere. 
'  Aedh-  M.  '  Mochudum  M.  «   =  S  §  9  (expanded).  '  gratias 

agens  M  B.         '"  §5  xxvii-xxx  not  in  S  ;  the  Ir.  version  of  §  xxvii  is  somewhat 
different.  "  MS.  occubatis.  '*  eos  M. 

N  2 


i8o  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ipse  dux  cum  furore  ad  molendinum  surrexit,  uolens  in  ire  impetu 
sanctum  occidere;  et  ipse  uidit  que  alii  videbant.  Reuersus  ille 
ad  socios  suos,  dixit  eis :  '  Expectemus  hic,  donec  ipse  rediet  de 
molendino  ;  et  tunc  iugulabimus  eum.'  Et  post  breue  interuallum 
uenit  sanctus  Mochutu  ad  suam  cellam,  portans  onus  suum  de  farina. 
Currentesque  ilh  ad  sanctum,  nuUo  modo  iugulare  potuerunt'  eum; 
quia  uolentes  arma  vibrare,  manus  eorum  siccabant  -.  Rogauitque 
ergo '  sanctus  Mochutu,  ut  non  impedirent  eum  uenire  ad  fratres ; 
et  promisit  ilhs  in  sua  fide  se  reuersurum  statim  ad  eos,  ut  ociocius 
eum  occiderent.  Et  dimittentes  sanctum  a  se,  deposuit  onus  suum 
in  coquina ;  et  statim  promtus  ad  martirium  reuersus  est  ad  latrones. 
Discipuli*  autem  putabant  eum  exisse  in  secreto  loco  ad  orandum. 
Illi  uero  temptantes  multis  modis  eum  occidere,  nuUo  modo  potue- 
runt.  Ipsi  hec  uidentes  signa,  penitentiam  egerunt ;  et  obtulerunt 
se  Deo  et  Mochutu ;  et  sub  eius  cura'  usque  ad  diem  mortis  sue 
perseuerauerunt.     Sancta  postea  et  gloriosa  eorum  opera  narrantur. 

xxviii.  Alio  die  angelus  Domini  ad  sanctum  Carthagum  in  suo 
monasterio,  Rathen,  uenit,  et  dixit  ei  :  '  Mandauit  tibi  Dominus  de 
celo,  ut  hodie  exeas  ad  filium  Fidhaich  "^  ducem  tue  regionis  Chiaraigi, 
ut  des  illi  sacrificium ;  quia  in  confinio  mortis  est,  et  cicius  migrabit 
de  hoc  seculo.'  Querimoniam  faciens  sanctus  ad  angelum,  quomodo 
potuisset  ire  tam  cicius,  raptus  est  ab  angelo  in  curru  igneo  in  aera, 
et  depositus  est  ad  arcem  ipsius  ducis  in  fine  Chiaraigi  Luachra. 
Statimque  uir  Dei  dedit  illi  communionem  corporis  et  sanguinis 
Christi ;  obtulitque  ei  dux  m[u]lta  munera.  Et  postea  migrauit  ad 
celum.  Beatissimus  autem  pontifex  Carthagus  eodem  die  reductus 
est  ad  suam  ciuitatem,  Rathen,  et  inuenit  ibi  fratres  horam  nonam' 
celebrantes. 

f.  62  <*  xxix.  QuoDAM  die  uenit  |  sanctus  Mochutu  ad  predictum  sanctum 
Colmanum  in  suo  monasterio,  Lann  Ifla*,  manentem,  ut  ueniens 
secum  leuicianam  signaret  in  suo  monasterio,  Rathen  ;  quia  mos 
sancto  Colmano  erat  cum  angelis  loca  leuicianariim  signare.  Et 
donatum  est  a  Deo  sancto  Colmano,  ut'  filii  mortis  non  resurgerent '" 
in  leuicianis,  quas  ipse  signaret.  Dixitque  beatus  Colmanus  sancto 
Carthago :  'Vade  ad  cellam  tuam  ;  et  in  quinta  feria  post  te  ibo.' 
Tunc  sanctus  Mochutu  uenit  ad  suum  locum ;  et  expectauit  ibi 
sanctum  Colmanum  usque  in  quintam  feriam,  et  non  uenit  ad  eum. 
Et  reuersus  est  sanctus  Carthagus  ad  beatum  Colmanum,  dicens  ei "  : 

'  potuerunt  iugulare  M.  ^  -bantur  M.  ^  om.  M.  <  Ir.  p.  33.  ^  cura 
eius  M  B.  ^  Fidaidh  M.  '  for  esparta  na  manach  Ir.,  i.  e.  at  the  monks' 

vespers.  ^  Eala  M.  ^  otii.  M.  ^^  go  na  teisedh  ifrannach  inn 

dogres  Ir.,  i.  e.  that  no  one  doomed  to  hell  should  ever  enter.        "  Ir.  p.  34  ;  in 
which  the  latter  part  of  this  section  is  somewhat  different. 


m 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  i8i 

'Cur,  pater,  non  implesti  quod  promisisti?'  Respondit  ei  sanctus 
Colmanus,  dicens  :  '  Exiui,  et  lcuicianam  signaui  cum  angelis  mecum. 
Reuertcre,  et  sicut  uidcbis  signa  minima  constituta  per  seriem  in 
australi  plaga  celle  tue,  ita  leuicianani  constitue.  Et  ne  tibi  uideatur 
modica ;  quia  alia  maior  tibi  ab  angelis  in  alia  tua  ciuitate,  in  australi 
Hybernie  regione,  signabitun'  Et  reuersus  sanctus  Cartliagus,  ita 
inuenit  leuicianam  signatam,  sicut  sanctus  Colmanus  dixit. 

XXX.  Eodem'  tempore  quidam  clerici  a  fine  Chiaraige  trans  montem 
Luachra,  ad  cellam  beatissime  uirginis  Yte,  in  regione  Hua  Conail  - 
positam,  uenerunt.  Puerque  paruulus  in  comitatu  eorum  erat. 
Intuens  sancta  Yta  illum  puerum  fleuit.  Et  interrogauerunt  clerici 
sanctam  Dei,  dicentes :  '  O  sancta  mater,  cur  contristaris  in  aduentu 
nostro  ? '  Respondit  eis  uirgo  :  '  O  feliciter  hic  puer  natus  est ;  quia 
humus  leuiciane  in  qua  ipse  requiescet,  super  filium  mortis  non 
exibit.  Et  vtinam  ego  in  illa  sepulta  essem.'  Dixerunt  ei  clerici : 
'  In  qua  leuiciana  iste  sepelietur?'  Respondit  sancta  Ita^:  'In 
leuiciana  sancti  Mochutu,  que  adhuc  signata  non  est ;  et  quando 
signabitur,  gloriosa  erit.'  Quod  ita  completum  est;  nam  ille  puer 
monachus  sancti  Mochutu  postea  erat.  Et  sepultus  est  in  leuiciana 
ciuitatis  sancti  Mochutu,  nomine  Less*  Mor  (que  tunc  non  erat 
habitata),  sicut  prophetauit  sancta  Yta. 

xxxi.  Ano'^  quoque  tempore  quidam  puer*  in  ciuitate  Rathen 
quodam  casu  de  ponte  precipitatus  est,  et  mersus  est  in  ampne,  qui 
est  per  ciuitatem  Rathen ;  et  non  inuentum  est  corpus  eius  die  ac 
nocte.  Crastino  autem  die,  inuento  corpore  eius  longe  a  ciuitate 
Rathen,  reductum  est  ad  sanctum  Carthagum.  Et  misertus '  sanctus 
Carthagus  illius,  quia  vnicus  filius  patris  sui  erat,  resuscitauit  eum 
a  morte  coram  omnibus.  Nutriuitque  eum  in  seculari  habitu  multo 
tempore.  Et  cum  e[ss]et  'ille'  adolescens,  misit  eum  sanctus  Car- 
thagus  ad  regionem  suam,  id  est  Delbna.  Et  genuit  filios  et  filias 
in  patria  sua.  Et  ipse  'se'  cum  prole  sua  et  hereditate  obtulit  Deo 
et  sancto  Carthago  in  eternum.  In  seruicio  'iam'  monasterii  Rathen 
semen  illius  manet*. 

xxxii.  QuoDAM  autem  tempore  sanctus  pontifex  Carthagus  a  sua 
parrochia,  regione'  silicet  Chiaraigi,  cum  multis  muneribus  uenit 
ad  suam  ciuitatem  Rathen.  Et  cum  iter  ageret,  nox  super  illum 
cecidit  iuxta  stagnum  Muchinne  "  in  fine  Delbna ;  et  per  uiam  egre- 

1  Not  in  Ir.  '  Conaill  M.  '  Yta  M.  *  Lyoss  M.  =   =  S  §  lo 

(expanded).  ^  aon  mac  righ  Dealbhna  Ir.,  i.  e.  the  only  son  of  the  chief  ol" 

Delvin.  '  MSS.  wrongly  insert  esl.  ^  Here  Ir.  inserts  §  xi  above,  and 

then  goes  on  to  §  xxxvii  below,  omitting  the  intermediate  sections.  S  omits 
§§  xxxii-xxxvii     clusive.  "  in  regione  M.  '"  Mainne  B. 


i82  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

diens  inuenit  cratem  stridentem^  et  mobilem  in  competis  positam, 
f.  63"  que  ab  artificibus,  qui  |  molendinum  in  aque  ductu  supradicti  stagni 
faciebant,  causa  ludendi  facta  est.  Et  cum  eleuata  esset  cratis, 
magnum  faciebat  sonitum  ;  quem  cum  accole  ^,  qui  in  uillis  proximis 
habitabant,  audissent,  uenerunt  uelocius  cum  magno  clangore  et 
ululatu  uocum,  ut  scirent  incognitam  rem.  Talia  audientes  comites 
sancti  Carthagi,  ualde  timuerunt,  et  equi  eorum  in  fugam  uersi  sunt, 
deponentes  onera.  Et  uix  postea  retenti  sunt  per  deuia.  Sciens 
uero  sanctus  Carthagus  veritatem  illius  rei,  dixit  illis  artificibus : 
'  Dispersi  per  diuersas  regiones  ridiculosi  et  inutiles  eritis,  et  mo- 
lendinum  istud,  quod  a  uobis  fabricatur,  semper  non  perficietur.' 
Et  nepotes  eorum  uocantur  nepotes  Fenna,  qui  sunt  uagi  post  patres 
suos. 

xxxiii.  PosT  hec  sanctus  Mochutu  peruenit  ad  locum  qui  dicitur 
Cluain  Brenaind,  et  pecierunt  discipuli  eius  poma  ab  habitatoribus 
illius  loci,  que  in  illo  loco  habundabant.  Et  recusante  familia  ville 
dare  poma  sancto,  dixit  ipse  :  '  Ex  hoc  anno  poma  in  lignis  istis 
semper  non  nascentur.'    Quod  uaticinium  in  euum  completur. 

xxxiv.  Habuit  beatissimus  pontifex  Mochutu  duodecim  disci- 
p[u]los  in  suo  monasterio  Rathen  ualde  humiles,  id  est  Mochue 
filius  Mellani,  et  ipse  primus  monachus  in  monasterio  Rathen  factus 
est.  Et  Mochommoc  filius  Uairt;  et  tres  filii  Nascaind,  quorum 
nomina  Gobanus '  et  Sraphanus  et  Lasreanus  ;  atque  Molua,  Lugair  *, 
et  Mochommoc  filius  Cuait^,  et  Aidanus,  et  Fiachna  et  Mochomnioc'* 
postea  episcopus,  et  Findlug'.  Et  hii  omnes  incredibiliter  obedientes 
erant ;  et  sanctus  Carthagus  uoluit  ®  onus  eorum  alleuare  ante  obitum 
suum.  Constituit  eis  cellas,  ut  aliquod  solacium  in  senectute  haberent 
propter  nimiam  obedienciam  in  iuuentute  sua.  Et  prophetauit  multa 
bona  de  illis. 

XXXV.  Prophetauit  siquidem  sanctus  Carthagus  de  supradicto 
Mochua  filius  Mallani^  signans  ei  cellam  in  loco  qui  dicitur  Cluain 
da  Chrann  ",  in  proximo  ciuitatis  Rathen,  dicens  :  '  Care  fili,  non  hic 
erit  resurrectio  tua,  set  in  alio  loco  tibi  a  Deo  constituto.'  Et  sic 
factum  est.  Prophetauit  quoque  sanctus  pater  Carthagus  de  discipulo 
suo  Fiachna,  ordinans  ei  cellam  prope  Coningnib"  ;  et  dixit  ei  :  '  Non 
hic  erit  tua  resurrectio,  fili '-  mi,  set  tenebis  alia  tria  loca ;  et  tamen 
reliquie  tue  apud  Aidanum'^  sodalem  tuum  in  fine  nepotum  Torna 
condite  erunt";  et  ibi  erit  resurrectio  tua,  et  ipse  locus  ex  nomine 

1  sic  B  ;  MSS.  se  ridentem.  ^  accule  T.  s  Gobb-  M.  «  -gayr  M. 

5    Cuaid  M.       «   -coemog  M  B.       '  Fyndlugh  M.        »  uolens  M.        '  Mell-  M. 
1»  Chrand  M.         "  -nibh  M.         '=  MS.  filii.         "  Aedh-  M.         "  erant  M. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  183 

tuo  nominabitur.  Itcm  constituens  ipsi  Aidano  sanctus  pontifex 
Mocliutu  ccllani  in  regione  nepotum  Torna,  prope  montem  Luachra, 
prophetice  dixit  ei :  'Veniet'  dies  quando  reliquie  condiscipuli  tui 
Fiachni^  ad  te  deferentur;  et  nomen  cius  super  istum'  locum  erit 
in  eternum.'  Que  omnia  sic  completa  sunt.  lam  ille  locus  scotice 
Chcll  Fiachni^nominatur,  qui  priusCella  AidaniRed'h'aire°uocabatur. 
Et  aha  de  ahis  uaticinatus  est. 

xxxvi.  Alio  tempore  quidam  infantulus,  qui  in  adulterio  natus  est, 
allatus  est  occulte  ad  ciuitatem  Rathen,  et  dimissus  est  ibi  iuxta 
ecclesiam.  Et  nutriuit  illum  sanctus  Carthagus,  quousque  fecit  eum 
episcopum.  Et  cunctis  nescientibus  parentes  ilHus,  et  quo  nomine 
uoca]retur,  reuelauit  eis  sanctus  Carthagus  per  propheciam,  dicens  :  f,  63^ 
'  Hic  infans  Dimma  uocabatur,  qui  est  fihus  Cormaci  de  semine 
Eathach  ; '  (a  quo  nominati  nepotes  Eathach).  Et  omnes  magnifi- 
cabant  propheciam  sancti  Carthagi,  qui  genealogiam  beati  infantis 
Dimmai,  nemine  sibi  indicante  nisi  Spiritu  Sancto,  [exposuit"].  Di- 
xitque  sanctus  Carthagus  beato  Dimmai,  cum  esset  episcopus  factus  : 
'  Exi  cito  ad  patriam  tuam,  id  est  ad  regionem  Hua  n-Eathach,  in 
australi  Mumenie  parte  ;  quia  ibi  resurrectio  tua  erit.  Et  genus  tuum 
paricidium  de  fratribus  suis  perficiet,  si  non  cito  perueneris  ad  illos 
prohibendos.'  Tunc  statim  sanctus  episcopus  Dimmai  ad  patriam 
suam  progressus  est ;  et  ahus  sanctus  episcopus,  nomine  Cuanna, 
de  discipuhs  sancti  Carthagi ',  egressus  est  cum  eo  p[er]egrinus, 
plenus  gratia  Dei.  Et  sanctus  Dimma,  predicans  diuinum  preceptum 
suis,  fecit  eos  pacificos.  Construxit  iam  monasterium  in  sua  patria, 
quod  cum  semetipso  et  tota  sua  parrochia*  sancto  Carthago,  dile- 
ctissimo  suo  magistro,  obtulit.  Vite  sue  cursum  felicem  ibi  beatus 
episcopus  Dimma,  ut  sanctus  Carthagus  uaticinatus  est,  finiuit. 

xxxvii.  Quodam"  tempore'"  sanctus  antistes  Carthagus  de  ciuitate 
sua  Rathen  "  in  prouinchia  Mumenie  perrexit,  et  intrauit  in  regionem 
que  dicitur  Chiaraigi  Curchi^-.  Tunc  rex  Mumenie,  Carbreus'^  filius 
Crimthain,  in  eadem  regione  in  quodam  presidio  in  campo  Cuirchi'* 
erat ;  et  ueniens  procella  ignea''  repente,  prostrauit  plurimos  de 
castris  regis"' ;  inter  quos  fihus  regis,  nomine  Aedus,  et  regina  eius, 
nomine  Cuman,  duoque  optimi"  equi  currus  regis  mortui  sunt. 
Rogauit  ergo  rex  sanctum  episcopum  Carthagum,  ut  resuscitaret 
filium  suum,  et  reginam,  et  ceteros.  Videns  iam  sanctus  pontifex 
fidcm  illorum,  orauit  pro  eis  ad  Dominum.     Et  iussit  eis,  ut  sur- 

*  Venies  T.         2  -na  M  ^  istud  T.  *  Ceall  Fiachna  M.         ^  Aedhani 

Redhaire  M.  «  From  B  ;  om.  H  T.  '  -gii  M.  *  familia  B.  »  quoddam  T. 
'»  die  M.  "  Raithen  M.  ^-  Kyarraighi  Churci  M.  "  Cair-  M  ;  Corc  righ 
Muman  Ir.  "  Cuyrci  M.  ''  caor  tinedh  Ir.,  i.  e.  a  ball  of  fire.  '^  MSS. 
wrougly  insert  et.  "  equi  optimi  M. 


i84  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

gerent ;  et  reddidit  eos  regi  viuos.  Et  omnes  hionores  dederunt 
sancto  Carthago ;  et  obtulit  ei  rex  Corpreus  multas  oblaciones  de 
terra  et  seruis.  Vnus  autem  de  illis  seruis  disceptauit'  superbe 
contra  sanctum  Mochutu,  nolens  ei  seruire.  Et  dixit  pontifex  pro- 
phetice  :  '  Semen  tuum  in  eternum  extinguetur.  Et  hereditas  tua, 
pro  qua  contra  me  bellas,  mea  semper  erit.  Et  quicumque  abstulerit 
a  me  quod  mihi  fuit '  oblatum ',  auferetur  ab  eo  celum  et  terra  ■*.'  Et 
ille  homo  cum  semine  suo  cicius  perierunt. 

xxxviii.  Aliquando^  sanctus  senior  Mocuthu  zonam  auream  cuidam 
duci,  qui  uocabatur  Fergus  filius  Chrymthin",  qui  tentiginem''  gra- 
uissimam  paciebatur,  cum  benedictione  sua  misit.  Et  ut  tenuit 
dux  zonam  benedictam  a  sancto  Dei  circa  lumbos  suos,  statim 
sanatus  est. 

xxxix.  QuoDAM*  tempore  Cathal  filius  Aeda,  rex  Mumenensium, 
in  supradicta  regione  Chiaraigi  Chuyrchi  fuit,  qui  magnis  doloribus 
surdus  et  luscus  multo  tempore  efifectus  est.  Perueniens  illuc  san- 
ctus  episcopus  Carthagus,  rogauit  eum  rex  et  sui  amici,  ut  in  Christi 
nomine  se  sanaret.  Et  orans  sanctus  Dei  pro  rege,  signauit  signo 
sancto  oculos  eius  et  aures;  et  illico  sanatus  est  ille  ab  omni  dolore. 
satis  uidens  et  bene  audiens.  Tunc  rex  'Kahal''  arcem  suam,  id 
est  Hillean'"  Kathail,  et  Ross  Beg",  et  Ross  Mor,  et  insulam  Pich, 
in  freto  Eoain '"  positam,  Deo  et  sancto  Carthago  obtulit  in  eternum. 
In  illo  iam  loco,  id  est  Ross  Beg",  sanctus  Dei  quosdam  fratres 
posuit,  ut  edificarent  ibi  Deo  cellam''.  Qui  locus  est  clarus  satis. 
f.  63''  In  insula  autem  Pich  sanctus  ipse  antistes,  Mochutu,  |  cepit  mona- 
sterium  edificare,  et  mansit  ibi  annum  integrum.  Et  post  finem  "anni' 
tres  de  supradictis  obedientibus  discipulis,  id  est  tres  filios  Nascaind, 
Gobbanum"  episcopum,  et  Sraphanum  presbiterum,  et  beatum 
Lasreanum,  et  sanctissimum  episcopum  Domangenum,  nutricium 
eorum,  ad  eos  conseruandos  (quia  ipse  ordinauit  eos  in  conspectu 
sancti  Carthagi  episcopi  in  monasterio  Rathen'=),et  duodecim  fratres 
cum  eis  ibi  reliquit.  Et  postea  reuersus  est  sanctus  pater  Mochuta 
ad  suam  ciuitatem  Rathen.  In  illa  iam  insula  locus  sanctissimus  est, 
et  viri  religiosi  semper  ibi  manent'". 

xl.  Transiens'"  sanctus  senior  Mochutu  per  regionem  Mumenen- 
sium,  transuadauit  ampnem,  qui  quondam  Nem  dicebatur,  modo 
autem  Aband  Mor,  id  est  ampnis  magnus  dicitur.     Et  uidit  vir  Dei 

1  MSS.  decept- ;  decert-  B.  =  fuit  om.  T.  '  abl-  M.  *  terram  T. 

^   =S  §  12  ;  5§  xxxviii,  xxxix  are  not  in  Ir.  ^  Crymthani  M.  '  lenti- 

ginem    B;    ydropisis   morbo   laborantem   S.  ^   ^S    §    13;    Quoddam   T. 

"  Kathal  M.  1«  Hylean  M.  "  Beag  M.  "  EoVain  M.  "  cellam  Deo  M. 
"  Golb-  M.  15  Raithen  M.  "  erant  M.  "  =S  §  14;  Ir.  p.  35. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  185 

pomum  magnuni  in  mcdio  uadi  natans  ;  et  apprehendit  illud,  porta- 
batque  in  manu  sua.  Ab  illo  ergo  die  illc  locus  Ath  Ubla  uocatur, 
id  est  uadum  ponii  ;  quod  est  in  terra  virorum  Maige.  Et  auriga 
suus '  postulavit  illud  a  sancto  Mocluitu  ;  et  noluit  ei  darc,  dicens 
prophetice  :  '  Rem  mirabilcm  de  isto  pomo  pcr  me  faciet  hodie  Deus 
meus.  Inuenienius  enim  hodie  fiHam  Cuano  filii  Chelcain^,  ducis 
huius  regionis,  ante  castellum  patris  sui,  que  habet  manum  dexteram 
aridam  et  adherentem  lateri  suo.  Et  ipsa  per  hoc  malum  a  me 
gratia  Christi  sanabitur.'  Quod  sic  completum  est.  Videns  sanctus 
Mochutu  illam  filiam  ludentem  cum  ceteris  filiabus  in  platea  castelli, 
diuertit  ad  eani,  et  dixit  ei :  '  Accipe,  filia,  hoc '  pomum.'  Tunc  illa 
manum  sinistram,  sicut  ei  erat  in  consuetudine,  porrexit.  Negauitque 
sanctus  dare  ei,  dicens :  '  Non,  set  porrige  dexteram  tuam.'  IUa 
autem  repleta  fide  ccpit  aridam  mouere  ;  et  ilico  sanguine  et  ualitudine 
nianum  solutam  porrexit,  et  accepit  malum  de  manu  sancti.  Tunc 
omnes  gauisi  sunt,  admirantes  miraculum.  Et  ait  dux  Cuanus  in 
illa  nocte  filie  sue :  '  Elige,  cara  filia,  de  regalibus  Mumenie  iuuenibus, 
quem  vis  sponsum  habere ;  et  inueniam  eum  tibi.'  Illa  respondit 
ei :  '  NuIIum  alium  eligam,  nisi  illum,  qui  manum  meam  soluit.' 
Tunc  dux  dixit  ad  pontificem  :  'Audis  quod  dicit  filia?'  Respondit 
sanctus  Carthagus :  '  Da  mihi  illam,  et  dabo  eam  Filio  Dei  sponsam, 
qui  sanauit  manum  suam.'  Tunc  dux  Cuanus  dedit  filiam  suam,  nomine 
Flandnait*,  cum  hereditate,  quam  ipsa  habuit  in  op[p]ido,quod  dicitur 
Feic^,  super  ripam  supradicti  fluminis  Neme,  Deo  et  sancto  Carthago 
in  eternum.  Ipse  dux  Cuano "  incredibiliter  largus  erat.  Sanctus  iam 
illam  sanctam  uirginem  ad  suam  ciuitatem  Rathen  duxit.  Et  ipsa  ibi 
cum  aliis  sanctemonialibus  in  cella  seorsum  in  magna  felicitate  vixit, 
quousque  sanctus  pater  Carthagus  cum  populo  suo  a  rege  et  principi- 
bus  Temorie'  a  sua  ciuitate,  Rathen",  sicut  audituri  eritis,  expulsus 
est.  Ipsam  enim  sanctam  uirginem  Flandnait'  cum  ceteris  secum 
duxit.  Postquam  autem  sanctus  Mochutu  suam  ciuitatem  Less  '"  Mor 
fundauit,  misit  sanctam  uirginem  Flandnait  *  ad  suam  hereditatem, 
ut  cellam  ibi  edificaret.  Et  construxit  sancta  Flandnait^  claram 
cellam  in  op[p]ido  predicto  Feic  ^,  que  dicitur  Cluain  Dallain.  Et  ipse 
locus  in  propria  parrochia  sancti  episcopi  Carthagi  constat. 

xli.  Manens"  sanctus  Mochutu  aliquando  in  quodamloco  in  regione 
Mumenensium,  comitibus  suis  di.xit :  'Audio  hic  uocem  puerorum 
legentium '-  de  nostro  monasterio  Rathen  ;  et  per  hoc  scio  quia  hic 
locus  noster  erit.'    Quod  postea  completum  est.  f.  63'' 

^  sua  M.  2  Chelcani  M.  ^  accipe  iam  hoc  M.  *  Flannait  M. 

*  Feich  M.  «  Cuanus  M.  '  Thcm-  M.  »  Raithen  M.  «  'Flannaid'  M. 
'"  Lioss    M.  "  §§    xli-xliv  are   not   in   Ir. ;    §§  xli-lii  are  not  in   S. 

'^  legensium  T ;   Laginensium  M  B. 


i86  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

xlii.  Alio  die  aduenit  sanctus  Columba  Chille^  ad  sanctuin  Cartha- 
gum  in  sua  ciuitate  Rathen  manentem,  et  salutans  senem,  dixit  ei : 
'  Diligis  hunc  locum,  sancte  pater  ? '  Respondit  sanctus  Mochutu  : 
'  Vere  diligo.'  Columba  dixit :  '  Non  te  conturbet,  quod  tibi  dicam. 
In  hoc  iam  loco  resurrectio  tua  non  erit.  Inuidia  enim  contra  te  in 
isto  loco  a  rege  Temorie,  et  filiis  eius,  et  principibus,  per  quorundam 
clericorum  suasionem  insurget.  Et  ipsi  post  tempus  expellent  te 
de  isto  loco.'  Tunc  sanctum  Columbam,  qui  erat  ueridicus  propheta, 
beatissiinus  pater  Carthagus  interrogauit :  '  Vbi  erit  resurreccio 
mea?'  Sanctus  Columba  respondit :  'Vbi  quondam  exercitum 
magnum''  angelorum  super  ripam  ampnis  Neme  de  cacumine 
montis  Cuae'  uidisti  eleuantem  cathedram  argenteam  cum  statua 
aurea  in  medio  eius  usque  ad  celum  *,  ibi  erit  resurreccio  tua. 
Ecclesia  tua  illa  cathedra  argentea  est ;  tu  uero  es  statua  aurea  in 
medio  eius.'  Scientes  ambo  sancti  quod  ita  foret,  benedixerunt 
Dominum. 

xliii.  Alio  quoque  die  quidam  sacerdos  et  monachus  sancti 
Carthagi  de  aquilone  Mumenie  ad  monasterium  Rathen  aduenit  ; 
et  genua  flexit  coram  sancto  patre,  ut  moris  erat  monachis  de  uia 
uenientibus,  dicens :  '  Compleui  pater,  ut  mihi  uidetur,  ordinem 
regule,  et  mandata  tua,  ex  quo  die  perrexi  usque  nunc  ;  nisi  quod 
fratrem  meum  secularem  mutaui  mecum  huc  de  seculo  sine  per- 
mis[s]ione  tua.'  Respondit  ei  sanctus  senex  '^  Mochutu,  dicens  : 
'  Vade,  frater,  sessum  tuum  in  pace.  Dico  tibi  uere  quia  si  tu  exisses 
in  montem  in  tua  regione,  et  exclamasses  uoce  altissima  de  cacumine 
eius,  et  uenissent  tecum  omnes,  quicunque  clamorem  tuum  audissent, 
ad  sanctum  habitum,  utique  omnes  cum  gaudio  accepissem.'  Tunc 
latitudinem  caritatis  sancti  patris  sui  Carthagi  ualde  admirati  sunt  in 
isto  uerbo,  gratias  Deo  agentes. 

xliv.  DiE  quodam  sanctus  senex  Carthagus  circa  horam  nonam 
dixit  monachis  suis :  '  Hodie  non  manducabimus,  quousque  vnus- 
quisque  vestrum  confessionem  suam  mihi  reuelabit.  Vnus  enim  ex 
uobis  inimiciciam  per  odium  alicui  fratri  cogitat.'  Tunc  fratres 
reuelantes  ei  conscientiam  suam,  confessus  est  ei  vnus  dicens : 
'  Molendinatorem  nostrum,  pater,  non  diligo,  immo  odio.  Cum  enim 
uado  ad  molendinum,  ipse  non  vult  mecum  onera  de  equis  tollere, 
neque  uasa  de  farina  implere,  et  adhuc  non  vult  mecum  super  equos 
eleuare  ;  et  male  mihi  facit  in  omni  re,  et  amarus  et  horridus  contra 
me  est  semper.  Deus  scit,  ego  nescio,  pro  qua  causa  hec  facit. 
Et  modo  cogitaui,  si  quando  uenissem  ad  eum,  et  fecisset  mihi 
similiter,  percutere  eum  usque  ad  mortem.'     Respondit  ei  sanctus 

'  Cylle  M.  2  magna  magnum  T.  ^  Cuah  M  B.  *  See  §  xvii. 

^  om.  M  B. 


I 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  187 

senex  Mochutu  :  'Audi,  frater,  prophetam  dicentem  :  "  Declina  a 
malo,  et  fac  bonum'."  Igitur  secundum  meum  consilium  fac  il[l]i 
bonum,  et  ilie  de  bonitate  tua  corde  compungetur,  et  amici  eritis 
quamdiu  viuetis.'  Et  frater  ipse  omnibus  viribus  suis  fratri  molen- 
dinatori  placebat  tribus  diebus  ;  set  tamen  molendinator  de  malo  suo 
adhuc  non  commotus  est,  nec  frater  de  odio.  Interrogauit  sanctus 
sencx  Mochutu  in  die  tercio  confessionem  ab  illo  fratre.  Et  ille  ait : 
'  Hec  est  mea  confessio  ;  iam  non  amo  molendinatorem.'  Dixit  ei 
sanctus  pater:t'Hac  iam  nocte  ille  corde  compungetur,  et  nonf.  64° 
comedet  cras,  usque  dum  peruenies  ad  eum.  Et  comede-  cum  eo. 
In  ipso  enim  p[ra]ndio  amicicia  replebit  uos,  et  in  vita  vestra  amici 
eritis.'  Et  ita  omnia  contingerunt.  Ille  monachus  Spiritu  Sancto 
per  doctrinam  sancti  Carthagi  repletus  est,  qui  uocabatur  Coimanus 
tilius  lone.  Et  glorificauerunt  fratres  diuinam  inspiracionem  in  suo 
sancto  sene. 

xlv.  Alio  '  quoque  die  duo  monachi,  genere  Britones,  salutauerunt 
se  inuicem,  dicentes :  '  Senex  iste  eger  est ;  set  tamen  cito  non 
morictur.  Et  dubium  non  est,  quia  coequales  in  pietate  et  sancti- 
tate  illi  semper  non  inuenientur  hic.  Et  iam  si  ipse  occubuisset, 
post  eum  vnus  ex  nobis  eligeretur.  Igitur  occidamus  eum ;  quia, 
sicut  diximus'',  non  morietur  per  se  cito.'  Et  fecerunt^  consilium, 
ut  in  postrema  parte  noctis  sequentis  demergerent  eum  ^  in  ampnem 
propinquum  occulte.  Et  inuenientes  eum  solum  in  loco  secreto 
orantem,  sicut  erat  ei  consuetudo,  diligenter  eum  loris  in  pelle 
ligauerunt ;  et  deinde  inter  se  portauerunt  ad  ampnem.  Tunc 
occurrit  eis  portantibus  quidam  religiosus  monachus  *,  cui  erat  mos 
sacratam  in  postrema  noctis  parte'  circuire  leuicianam.  Et  mirans 
interrogabat  eos,  dicens  :  '  Quid  portatis  in  hac  hora  ? '  Illi  dixerunt : 
'  Vestimenta  quorundam  fratrum  ad  lauandum.'  Ille  autem,  instigatus 
Spiritu  Sancto,  non  credidit ;  et  dixit  eis:  '  Deponite,  ut  uideam.' 
Onere  autem  deposito,  inuentus  est  ibi  sanctissimus  noster  patronus 
Carthagus.  Ille  iam  monachus  prepositus  loci  ipsius  erat.  Et  ait  ad 
illos  contristatus  :  '  Pessimum  opus  facere  uoluistis.'  Tunc  paulatim 
sanctus  senex  Mochutu  dixit :  '  Fili,  bonum  mihi  esset ',  quia  mter 
sanctos  annumeratus"  essem  martyres.  Malum  autem  illis,  quia  cum 
luda,  proditore  Domini  sui,  luissent  dampna.  Ipsi  me  uoluerunt 
occidere,  ut  preessent  fratribus  meis.  Nec  ipsi  malifici,  neque  ullus '" 
de  genere  eorum  successores  mei  erunt ;  set  de  genere  eius  per 
quem  Deus  me  liberauit,  me'a'  sede  semper  successores  mei  erunt. 
De    gente   autem    Britonum    in   mea    ciuitate  quidam  ridiculosi  per 

'  Ps.  xxxvi.  27.  ^  commede  T.  ^  Ir.  p.  35.  *  predix-  M  B. 

°  oin.  T.  <>  Ir.  p.  36.  ■^  parte  noctis  M.  *  esset  mihi  M. 

»  connum-  M  B.  "  oiii.  T. 


i88  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

seculum  erunt.'  Et' ita  facta' sunt  omnia.  Ille  enim  monachus,  qui 
sanctum  liberauit,  de  gente  Chiaraigi  erat,  de  qua  gente  successores 
sunt  semper  sancti  Carthagi. 

xlvi.  SicuT  superius  diximus -,  multis  diebus  non  accipiebat  sanctus 
Mochutu  uaccas,  nec  boues,  neque  equos  ;  set  monachi  sui  sarculis 
et  pedibus  omni  anno  arabant,  et  in  humeris  suis  onera  portabant. 
Veniens  autem  sanctus  Finanus ",  cognatus  sancti  Carthagi,  de  Roma, 
increpauit  eum,  dicens  :  '  Cur,  Carthage,  super  homines  rationabiles 
seruicium  irrationabilium  animalium  imponis  ?  Causa  enim  hominis 
omnia  animalia  facta  sunt.  Et  nunquam  in  hoc  loco  gustabo,  nisi 
solues  monachos,  Christi  famulos,  ab  opere  indigno.'  Tunc  sanctus 
pater  Carthagus  permisit  monachis  suis  propter  honorem  sancti 
Finani'  boues  et  equos  habere. 

xlvii.  PosTEA  sanctus  Lacteanus^  abbas,  misertus  sancto  patri 
Mochutu  et  monachis  eius,  cum  triginta  uaccis  et  tauro,  et  duobus 
armentariis  et  duobus  lusciscis^  et  uassis  ad  ciuitatem  Rathen  per- 
rexit.  Et  in  proximo  loco  ciuitati  abscondit  sua  ;  et  exiuit  in  mona- 
f.  64''  sterio,  simulatoque  dolore,  quesiuit  lac''.  Statim  minister  indicauit 
patri  Mochutu  quod  sanctus  Lacteanus  lac  causa  infirmitatis  quesisset. 
Tunc  sanctus  Mochutu  pateram  repleri  aqua  iussit  ;  et  benedicens 
illud,  factum  est  lac  nouum  quasi  nuper  mulsum ;  et  allatum  est  sancto 
Lacteano '.  Sanctus  uero  Lacteanus,  sciens  diuinitus  quod  factum 
est,  benedixit  illud,  et  iterum  conuersum  in  aquam'  est.  Et  ait :  '  Lac 
postulaui,  et  non  aquam.'  Hec  dicta  et  facta,  magister  hospitum 
inter  sanctos  ministrabat.  Sanctus  Lacteanus  dixit  coram  omnibus  : 
'  Pater  noster  Carthagus  bonus  monachus  est ;  set  successores  sui " 
non  facient  lac  de  aqua.'  Dixitque  ministro  :  '  Dic  sancto  Mochutu, 
quia  non  manducabo  in  hoc  loco,  nisi  ipse  elemosinam,  quam  tuli 
fratribus  istius  loci,  suscipiet.'  Et  promisit  sanctus  Carthagus  illam 
suscipere.  Tunc  discipuli  sancti  Lacteani '  vaccas  cum  ceteris 
monachis  sancti  Mochutu  assignarunt.  Et  sanctus  Mochutu  ait  ad 
sanctum  Lacteanum :  '  Nolui  a  quoquam  uaccas  in  hoc  loco  recipere  ; 
set  tamen  pro  honore  et  timore  tuo  suscepi.'  Cui  ait  sanctus  La- 
cteanus :  '  Ab  hoc  die  habundancia  semper  rerum  temporalium  apud 
tuos,  et  multitudo  virorum  religiosorum  in  ciuitate  tua,  in  qua  migrabis 
ad  Christum,  per  seculum  erit ;  de  hoc  enim  loco  expulsus  eris.' 
Post  hec  sancti  se  salutantes  inuicem,  fraternitatem  inter  se  hic  et  in 
futuro  firmauerunt. 

xlviii.  In  quodam  autumpno  prepositus  suus'"  ad  sanctum  Car- 
thagum  uenit,  dicens :    '  Pater,  messores  sufficienter  non  possumus 

*  LactlieanuB  M  ;  Lasianus  Ir. 
M.         '  in  aquam  conuersum 


1  om.  T.              2  §  XX. 

'  Fyn- M. 

5  sic  M  T  :  lustisiis  B. 

s  Ir.  p.  37.         '  Lacth 

M  B.             9  om.  T. 

i»  om.  M. 

VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  189 

inuenire;  et  segites  multum  maturate  sunt.'  Cui  respondit  sanctus 
Mochutu  :  '  Vadc,  care,  in  pace ;  Dcus  dabit  nobis  cito  bonos  mcs- 
sores.'  Secundum  iam  ucrbum  sancti  pontificis  angeli  Dei  ucnerunt 
et  maiorem*  segitem  monachorum  sancti  Carthagi  messuerunt,  et  in 
vnum  aceruum  congregaucrunt.  Fratres  cum  ceteris  tale  opus 
uidentes,  admirati  sunt;  et  laudes  Christo  dederunt,  magnificantes 
sanctitatem  sui  senioris. 

xlix.  T.^NTA  ^  obediencia  monachorum  sancti  Carthagi  erat,  ut  [si] 
preciperetur  alicui  eorum  a  quoquam  seniore,  ilico  mitteret  se  in 
igncm.  Verbi  gratia :  Quidam,  cum  essent  panes  in  clibano,  ad  iu- 
niorem  fratrem  dixit :  '  Panes  uruntur,  adiuua  eos  cicius.'  Lamina 
enim  ferrea,  de  qua  panes  de  clibano  tollebantur,  tunc  de  suo  cecidit 
manubrio.  Ille  autem  frater,  ut  audiuit  uocem  imperantis,  per  ignem, 
qui  erat  in  ostio  clibani,  exiliuit,  et  panes  suis  manibus  in  calidissimo 
clibano  proiecit ;  et  nullo  modo  caliditas  clibani  uel  panum,  neque 
ignis  ardens  in  ostio  clibani  nocuit  ei. 

I.  Alio  die  cum  essent  monachi  sancti  Mochutu  foris  iuxta  riuum 
operantes,  vnus  senior  pro  necessitate  ad  alium  fratrem,  nomine 
Colmanum,  dixit  :  '  Colmane,  uade  in  termam.'  Tunc  statim  duo- 
decim  Colmani  simul  cum  uestimentis  in  termam  exierunt,  audientes 
quod  Colmanus  uocabatur.  Et  ceteri  edificabantur,  quod  tot  fratres 
in  aquam  exierunt  pro  vna  uoce  induti. 

li.  Pacienciam  magnam  monachi  sancti  Carthagi  in  tormentis  et  in 
aduersis  habebant ;  ut  probatum  est  in  aliquo  monacho  de  cuius 
corpore  vermes  scatentes  ^  in  uestigiis  eius  coram  fratribus  cadebant. 
Et  sine  excusacione  infirmitatis  opus  suum  cotidianum  faciebat.  Et 
ipse  infirmus  uidebatur,  et  pallor  et  macies  apparebant  in  illo ;  et  de 
eo  dolebant  fratres.  Quodam  autem  die  sanctus  senex  Carthagus 
per  obseruanciam  *  regule  causam  doloris  sui  quesiuit  ab  illo.  Ille 
frater  nolens  ostendit  ei  latera  sua  lacerata  cum  torce.  Tunc  sanctus 
Mochutu  dixit  ei :  '  Quis  tibi  hanc  superstitiosam  et  intollerabilem 
rem  fecit?'  Monachus  respondit :  '  Alio  die  lignum  grauissimum 
a  silua  trahentes  fratres,  zona  mea  fracta  est.  Et  |  uidens  prior  f-  64' 
camisiam  meani  circa  crura  mea  posuit  hanc  torcem  asperam  ^  circa 
latera  mea  acriter.  Et  exinde  putrefacte  sunt  carnes  mee.'  Sanctus 
senex  ait  ei :  '  Cur  non  soluisti  iterum  ? '  Et  respondit :  '  Quia  non 
est  meum  istud  corpus.  Et  prior,  qui  posuit,  non  resoluit.'  Et  erat 
plenus  annus,  ex  quo  illud  contigit.  Aitque  fratri  sanctus  Mochutu  : 
'  Magnum  tormentum  sustinuisti,  frater.  Ideo  elige  ut  sanus  hodie 
sis,  an  ad  celum  pergas.'     Et  ait  frater:  'Quid  mihi  in  hoc  seculo 

*  -re  T.  2  §§  xlix.,  1.,  om.  Ir.  s  MSS.  scandentes.  *  pro 

obseruancia  M  B.  '  MSS.  -rem. 


igo  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

est  ? '  Et  elegit  tunc  migrare  ad  celum.  Acceptaque  sancta  com- 
munione,  ilico  migrauit  ad  Cliristum.  Prior  a  sancto  patre  et  fratribus 
de  amaritudine  indiscrecionis  sue  correptus  est'. 

lii.  MuLiER  quedam,  nomine  Brig,  habens  manum  aridam  et 
adherentem  lateri  suo,  ad  sanctum  Carthagum  cum  suo  marito*  uenit, 
et  rogauit  sanctum  in  nomine  Christi,  ut  manum  illius  sanaret.  Et 
tunc  muher  pregnans  erat.  Porrexitque  illi  sanctus  pontifex  manum 
cum  pomo  suam,  sicut  fihe  ducis  Cuanonis  fecit  ^,  dicens  ei :  '  Manum 
aridam  ad  accipiendum  pomum  hoc^  eleua.'  Et  celeriter  manus 
illius  arida  sanata  est.  Et  accepit  pomum  de  manu  sancti.  Et  cum 
gustasset  illa  pomum,  cicius  enixa  est  infantem  sine  dolore  partus. 
Et  cum  gaudio  magno  redierunt  ad  sua. 

liii.  Sicut''  beatissimus  propheta  Columba  et  alii  sancti  propheta- 
uerunt,  quod  esset  sanctissimus  senex  Carthagus  a  sua  ciuitate  in 
fine  uite  sue,  Rathen ",  expulsus  ;  principes  Midi  cum  rege  Temorie, 
adherentes  illis  quidam  clerici  in  ciuitate  Cluain  Airaird',  decre- 
uerunt  eum  inde  expellere.  Illi  iam  principes,  uenientes  ad  ciuitatem 
Rathen*,  dixerunt  ad  sanctum  Mochutu  :  '  De  hac  ciuitate,  et  de  ista 
omni  regione,  uade  cum  tuis  ;  et  quere  tibi  locum  in  alia  prouinchia.' 
Respondit  eis  sanctus  senex  Carthagus :  '  Vo!o  hic  vitam  meam 
consummare ;  multis  enim  annis  in  hoc  loco  Deo  seruiui,  et  pene 
cursum  uite  mee  consummaui.  Ideo  de  hoc  loco  non  discedam,  nisi 
manum  meam  violenter  aliquis  traxerit ;  ne  mihi  ab  hominibus  insta- 
bilitas  in  hac  etate  deputetur,  quia  dedecus  est  in  senio  hinc  et'  inde 
uagare.'  Tunc  illi  principes  reuersi  sunt  ad  regem  Temorie,  nomine 
Blaithmecc  filium  Aeda  Slane  ;  et  accusauerunt  sanctum  Mochutu 
coram  rege  in  multis  mendaciter.  Et  rogauerunt  regem  ut  ipse 
ueniret  ad  sanctum  expellendum  de  suo  loco.  Venitque  ^"  rex  cum 
illis  in  magno  comitatu.  Interea  beatissimus  pater  Carthagus  pro- 
phetauit  monachis  suis,  dicens  :  '  Vos,  dilectissimi,  preparate"  et  ligate 
onera  vestra ;  quia  cito  violenta  temptacio  ad  uos  ueniet.  Per 
principes  enim  huius  regionis  expulsi  erimus  de  hoc  loco  nostro 
carissimo.'  Venientes  autem  rex  Blaithmecc  cum  '^  ducibus  et  prin- 
cipibus  nepotum  Neill,  et  fratre  suo  Diarmoidh  ",  et,  ut  perhibentur, 
cum  filiis  suis,  castrametati  sunt  iuxta  ciuitatem  Rathen.  Tunc  rex 
fratrem  suum  Diarmaid "  cum  multis  ad  expeUendum  sanctum 
Mochutu  per  vim  de  ciuitate  Rathen  misit.  Diarmaid  enim,  frater 
regis,  accepit  sponte  expellere  per  vim  sanctum.  Adueniens  ille 
sanctum   Carthagum   in   choro  orantem   inuenit";   stabat"  ipse   in 

'  Ir.,  having  already  given  the  expulsion  of  Mochuda,  omits  all  from  this 
point  to  the  middle  of  §  Ixi.  *  marito  suo  M  B.         ^  §  xl.        *  MSS.  hunc. 

'    =S  §  i6.  '  Rathen  n/?e>- ciuitate  M.  '  Hayaird  M.  '  ciuitathen 

Raythen  M.  "  oit:.  M.  '"  -que  o)«.  T.  "  propar-  M.  ^^  cum  bis  M  m.  pr. 
13  -moid  M  ;  and  so  elsevjhere.        ^'  -moyd  M.       ^^  om.  T.        '"  enim  add.  M. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  191 

uestibulo  chori.  Et  intcrrogauit  sanctus  senex  illum,  dicens :  '  Pro 
qua  causa  huc  uenisti  ? '  Diarmaid  respondit :  '  Frater  meus,  rex 
Blaithmecc,  ct  duces  Midi  miserunt  me,  ut  ]  manum  tuam  teneam,  et  f.  64'' 
eiciam  te  cum  tuis  de  hac  ciuitate.'  Dixit  ei  sanctus  :  '  Fac,  sicut  vis  ; 
parati  enim  sunius  omnia  pro  Christo  pati.'  Diarmaid  respondit : 
'  In  eternum  hoc  nefas  non  faciam.  Sanctus  enim  Dei  es.'  Tunc 
sanctus  Carthagus  dixit  ei :  '  Possidebis  partem  in  celo  ;  et  rex  eris 
cicius  in  loco  fratris  tui.  Et  facies  tua,  que  ante  me  uertitur*,  ante 
hostes  semper  non  uertetur-.  Obprobrium  uero,  quod  dabit  tibi  rex 
modo,  frater  tuus.  eo  quod  non  perficis  opus  ad  quod  missus  es,  in 
laudem  et  benedictionem  erit  tibi.  Set  tamen,  quia  cogitasti  mihi 
mala  in  corde  tuo,  et  prompcior  ceteris  me  expellere  eras,  filius  tuus 
post'  te  non  regnabit.'  Tunc  dominus  Diarmaid  ad  fratrem  suum 
regem  reuersus  est  in  castra,  dicens,  quod  non  potuit  sancto  Dei 
nocere.  Et  rex  per  iram  dixit  fratri  suo :  '  Ruanaid  est  laicus  iste  *.' 
Respondit  ei  Diarmaid  :  '  Verum  erit ;  quia  ita  promisit  mihi  seruus 
Domini  Mochutu.'  Tunc  omnes  laudantes  illum,  vna  uoce  clamabant  : 
'  Vere  Ruanaid  *  ipse  est.'  Et  sic  nominatur  ipse  usque  in  hodier- 
num  diem. 

liv.  TuNC  ^  principes  supradicti  sortem  inter  se  miserunt,  ut  scirent 
quis  eorum  teneret  cum  rege  manum  sancti  Carthagi  de  sua  sede. 
Et  cecidit  sors  super  principem  Cluana.  Deinde  rex  cum  potenti- 
bus  suis  ciuitatem  intrauit ;  et  inuenerunt  sanctum  senem  cum  suis 
fratribus'  in  ecclesia  collectis.  Tunc  quidam  uir  diues,  nomine 
Cronanus,  alta  uoce  dixit :  '  Celeriter  facite  opus  ad  quod  uenistis.' 
Dixit  ei  sanctus  pontifex  :  '  Celerem  mortem  tu  habebis  ;  set  tamen 
quia  multa  munera  mihi  in  Christi  nomine  obtulisti,  et  pius  fuisti 
nobis  usque  nunc,  diuites  de  semine  tuo  per  seculum  erunt.'  Que 
ita  completa  sunt.  Ille  enim  subitam  subiit  *  mortem  ;  et  nepotes 
eius  diuites  semper  sunt. 

Iv.  Alius  uir,  nomine  Dubhsulech ',  oculum  suum  vnum  per  illu- 
sionem  clausit,  irridens  sanctum  Mochutu  et  suos  monachos.  Et 
aspiciens  sanctus  episcopus  illum,  dixit  ei :  '  Ita  eris  luscus  et  ridi- 
culus  usque  ad  obitum  tuum ;  et  de  semine  tuo  multi  similiter 
erunt.'  Et  sic  completum  est ".  Item  alius  uir,  nomine  Caillche, 
crepitum  magnum  faciebat  de  labiis  suis  in  subsannacionem  sancti 
Carthagi  "  et  suorum  monachorum.  Sanctus  ait  ei :  '  Desentiriam  '- 
cicius  pacieris,  et  inde  morieris.'  Et  ita  contigit  illi.  Heu  nefas  et 
malum  multis  flebile  tunc  factum  est.    Rex  enim  Blaithmecc  iratus, 

'  veritus  est  M  ;  verita  est  B;  but  vertitur  is  clearly  right,  and  is  confirmed 
by  Ir.  -  verebitur  B  (not  M).  '  tuus  post  bis  T.  <  iste  laycus  M. 

*  -naydh  M  ;  cf.  C6ir  Anmann  §  134.       "  §§  liv-lxii  are  not  in  S.        '  fratribus 
suis  M.      «  sibi  M.        ^  -suileach  M.        "  om.  T.         "  -gii  M.        "  diss-  M. 


192  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

et  princeps  Cluana  apprehendentes  honorabilem  manum  sanctissimi 
decrepiti  antistitis  Mochutu',  eum  cum  suis  de  sua  ciuitate  Rathen 
sine  ulla  reuerencia  expulerunt.  Simihter  et  satelhtes  eorum  sanctis 
monachis  faciebant.  Tunc  ululatus  et  fletus,  lamentaciones  heu  et 
ue  ab  utroque  sexu,  ab  omni  habitu  per  ciuitatem  erant.  Et  plures 
siquidem  de  excrcitu  regis  de  sanctorum  miseria  dicebant". 

Ivi.  In  pede  cuiusdam  monachi  podagra  erat  et  pro  illo  sanctus 
episcopus  totum  rogauit  consilium,  ut  infirmum  monachum  in  Christi 
nomine  dimitterent  manere  in  suo  monasterio.  Et  ilh  omnes  re- 
spuerunt.  Tunc  sanctus  Carthagus  uocauit  ad  se  fratrem  illum,  et 
iussit  in  Christi  potencia  dolori,  ut  relinqueret  pedem  monachi,  et 
exiret  in  pedem  Colmani  principis',  qui  ualde  ei  resistebat.  Et  ilico 
podagra  reliquit  pedem  monachi,  et  apprehendit  pedem  Colmani 
M.  f.  98  •*.  principis  ■" ;  |  et  stetit  ibi  fortiter  in  vita  illius.  Monachus  autem  sur- 
rexit  incolumis,  et  cum  sancto  magistro  suo  ualide  perrexit.  Item 
alius  senior  de  monachis  sancti  Carthagi  ilico  in  monasterio  Raithen 
migrare  optauit,  quia  ibi  promissit  suam  stabilitatem.  Et  dans  sanctus 
Mochudu  ei  licentiam,  accepit  ille  senior  sacrificium  de  manu  sancti 
f.  99"  episcopi,  et  coram  omnibus  migrauit  ad  celum.  Se|pultusque  est, 
sicut  optauit,  in  ciuitate  Raithen. 

Ivii.  Egrediens  beatissimus  senex  Carthagus  de  suo  monasterio, 
intrauit  leuicianam  fratrum  flens,  petensque  benedictionem  inibi 
iacencium,  fundensque  orationem  pro  eis  ad  Christum,  sepulcrum 
cuiusdam  monachi,  qui  erat  multo  tempore  ante  sepultus,  diuino 
nutu  apertum  est.  Et  subito  coram  presentibus  mortuus,  eleuans 
capud  extra  sepulcrum,  exaltauit  uocem  et  dixit :  '  Sanctissime 
noster  Deo  nutritor,  Mochuda,  benedic  nobis  filiis  tuis,  et  per  bene- 
dictionem  tuam  resurgentes,  ibimus  omnes  tecum.'  Respondit  ei 
sanctus  pater,  dicens :  '  Nouum  opus  non  faciam,  id  est  resurre- 
ctionem  tot  hominum  ante  resurrectionem  totius  humani  generis.' 
Mortuus  iterum  dixit:  'Cur,  pater,  relinquis  nos,  promittentes  vni- 
tatem  nostram  tibi,  et  tu  nobis  tuam  ? '  Sanctus  Mochudu  ait : 
'  Audi  hoc  prouerbium,  fili :  "  Necessitas  mouet  decretum  et  con- 
sihum."  Set  hic  requiescite  in  sepulcris  vestris,  et  in  die  resurre- 
ctionis  nostre  cum  omnibus  monachis  meis  reuertar  ad  uos  usque 
ad  illam  crucem,  que  est  in  foribus  huius  ciuitatis'',  et  simul  omnes 
ibimus  ad  iudicium  Dei.'  Et  hec  dicens  sanctus,  mortuus  se  recol- 
legit  in  sepulcro,  et  firmatum  est  super  eum.    Et  ualedicens  sanctus 

'   Mochuda   antistitis  M  B.  ^  sic   MT;   dolebant  B,  perhaps  rightly. 

'  According  to  the  '  Indarba  Mochuda '  this  was  Colman  mac  hua  Telduib,  abbot 
of  Clonard.  '  Here  a  leaf  is  lost  in  T  ;  from  this  point  to  the  middle  of  §  l.xiv 
is  taken  frora  M.  ^  This  word  is  contracted  and  doubtful ;  ecclesie  B. 


I 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  193 

episcopus  mortuis,  egressus  est  foras  extra  ciuitatem  cum  populo  suo 
usque  ad  crucem,  que  dicitur  Crux  Angclorum. 

Iviii.  Ibi  conuersus  est  sanctus  senex  Carthagus  ad  regem,  et  dixit 
ei :  '  Respice,  O  rex,  celum  sursum,  et  terram  deorsum.'  Et  respexit 
rex.  Dixitque  ei  sanctus:  '  Nec  terram  necque  celum  iam  possidebis. 
De  regno  cnim  tuo  terreno  cito  expulsus  eris ;  et  tuus  frater  Diar- 
moid,  quem  increpasti,  eo  quod  dedit  mihi  honorem,  regnabit  coram 
te.  Et  eris  despectus  ab  omnibus,  ita  ut  sine  cibo  in  castris  eius 
aliqua  nocte  oblivisceris  pro  tua  despectione.  Et  tu  cum  prole  tua 
in  malo  morieris,  et  nemo  de  semine  tuo  post  breuissimum  tempus 
erit.'  Et  maledicens  sanctus  Mochudu  regem,  pulsauit  manu  sua 
paruum  cymbalum  super  regem,  et  super  semen  eius.  Quod  cym- 
balum  scotice  dicitur  Clog  rabhaydh  Blaithmecc  ;  id  est,  cymbalum 
extinguens  Blaithmecc  ',  eo  quod  per  pulsacionem  eius  rex  Blaithmecc 
cum  semine  suo  extinctus  est  uelocius.  Rex  iam  Blaithmecc  plures 
filios  et  filias  habebat,  set  pro  nichilo  omnes  cum  patre  suo  per  male- 
dictionem  sanctissimi  senis  Carthagi  exierunt.  Et  dixit  ad  principem, 
qui  manum  eius  tenuit:  '  Seruus  eris  ante  obitum  tuum,  quia  expel- 
leris  de  principatu  tuo,  et  semen  tuum  pene  extinctum  erit.*  Et  ita 
i!Ii  accidit.  Item  ad  alium,  qui  manum  suam  traxit,  dixit :  '  Cur 
meam  '  manum  '  -  tenuisti  de  sede  mea  ? '  Ille  respondit :  '  Ne 
Mumenensis  hic  in  patria  Midhi  tantum  honorem  haberet.'  Vir 
sanctus  ait  ei :  'Sub  confusione  facies  |  tua  semper  erit;  et  nianus,  f.  99* 
que  me  extraxit,  maledicta  erit.'  Et  ilico  oculus  illius  in  capite  suo 
fractus  est.  Post  hec  conuersus  sanctus  Mochuda  ad  principem  et 
populum  ciuitatis  Deirmaige,  dixit :  '  Discordia  pessima  inter  uos 
suscitabitur,  et  inde  dampna  paciemini  multa  ;  suscitastis  enim  magna 
parte  discordiam  istam  contra  me.'     Et  ita  illis  contigit. 

lix.  Deinde  iussus  est  sanctus  asperrime  pergere  in  viam  suam 
a  rege  et  populo.  Perrexitque  sanctus  in  viam  cum  discipulis  suis, 
qui  erant  numero  octingenti  sexaginta  septem,  et  coequalis  numerus 
in  ciuitate  Rathen  in  sepulcris  mansit.  Et  plures  in  aliis  locis  per 
H}'berniam  de  discipulis  sancti  Mochudu  viui  et  defuncti  fuerunt.  Et 
qui  secuti  sunt  sanctum  senem  Carthagum  de  ciuitate  Rathen,  pleni 
gratia  Dei  erant.  Et  plures  ex  eis  postea  sancti  episcopi  et  abbates 
facti,  loca  Deo  edificauerunt.  Sanctus  noster  senex  Mochuda  piis- 
simuset  humil[l]imus  erat,sicutinhac  re  probatur.  Ipse  enim  magnam 
turbam  leprosorum  in  sua  ciuitate  in  cella  seorsum  cum  dignitate 
I  magna  habebat,  et,  quamdiu  ualitudo  corporis  dimisit  ei,  ipse  frequen- 

'  The  writer  takes  the  name  as  a  sentence  :  '  clocc  ro  baid  Blaithmacc,'  i.  e. 
j  the  bell  which  destroyed  Bl.  ;  more  probably  it  is :  '  clocc  robaid  Blaithmeicc,' 
ili.  e.  the  bell  of  the  proclamation  (i.e.  excommunication)  of  Blathmac. 
P  mantiiii  added  by  rubricator. 


194  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

tissime  ministrabat  eis.  Audientes  iam  leprosi  sanctum  Mochudu 
curam  leprosorum  gerentem,  de  diuersis  Hybernie  prouincliiis  uenie- 
bant  ad  eum  ;  et  recipiebat  eos  uir  Dei.  Quos  duxit  secum  de  ciuitate 
Rathen  ad  aliam  suam  ciuitatem  Lyoss  Mor,  et  constituit  eis  ibi  locum, 
in  quo  adhuc  leprosi  manent  cum  honore,  secundum  dignitatem  suam 
a  sancto  patre  Mochuda. 

Ix.  Pergentes  in  viam  suam  invite  discipuli  sancti  Carthagi  cum 
curribus  et  plaustris,  inuenerunt  in  quadam  magna  silva  robor 
magnum  transuersum  in  via.  Tunc  unus  de  turba  dixit  ad  sanctum 
Mochuda :  '  Pater,  non  possumus  pergere  uiam  causa  hgni  magni 
iacentis  in  via,  quia  silua  densissima  est  in  circuitu.'  Et  signans  uir 
Dei  manu  sua  Hgnum,  dixit :  '  In  nomine  Domini  mei  lesu  Christi 
surge,  hoc  robur ;  et  sta  in  statii  tuo.'  Statimque  surrexit  arbor, 
et  stat  usque  hodie  in  statu  suo  pristino,  habens  aceruum  lapidum  ad 
radices  suos  in  signum  virtutis. 

Ixi.  Prima  mansio  sancti  Carthaghi,  postquam  a  ciuitate  Rathen 
uenit,  erat  in  monasterio  quod  dicitur  Druym  Cuylinn,  quod  est  in 
confinio  Mumenensium  et  Laginensium  et  nepotum  Neill ;  set 
tamen  in  terra  est  nepotum  Neill,  in  plebe  que  dicitur  Fyr  Ceall, 
in  qua  estetiam  supradicta  ciuitas.  In  quo  monasterio  sanctus  abbas 
Barrynd  miraculis  fulget.  Deinde  ad  ciuitatem  sancti  Kyarani 
episcopi,  que  dicitur  Saiger,  peruenit.  Exinde  autem  ad  locuni, 
in  quo  nunc  est  ciuitas  sancti  Cronani,  Ross  Cre  ;  et  pernoctauit 
ibi  sine  hospicio,  quamuis  a  sancto  Cronano  invitatus  est.  Ipse 
.99"  enim  cenam  sancto  Mochudo  preparauit.  |  Set  sanctus  Mochuda 
noluit  ad  illum  exire,  dicens  :  '  Ad  virum  qui  hospites  euitauit,  et  in 
gronna  deserti  cellam  suam  edificauit,  de  uia  plana  non  ibo,  set 
bestias  heremi  habeat  sibi  hospites.'  Hec  uerba  audiens  sanctus 
Cronanus,uenit  ad  sanctum  Carthagum,  et  per  iussionem  eius  sanctus 
Cronanus  cellam  iuxta  gronnam  deseruit.  Et  ipsi  ambo  mona- 
sterium,  ymmo  ciuitatem,  que  dicitur  Ross  Cre,  in  qua  ipse  pater 
sanctus  Cronanus  iacet,  assignauerunt.  Postea  sanctus  Mochuda 
uenit  per  regionem  Hele  ad  regalem  Mumenie  ciuitatem,  Cassel. 
Crastino  autem  die  rex  Caissil,  nomine  Failbe,  uenit  ad  sanctuni 
Mochuda,  et  obtulit  ei  locum,  ut  constitueret  ibi  sanctus  monasterium. 
Et  ait  sanctus  Mochuda  regi:  'Adhuc  non  est  concessum  nobis  a  Deo 
manere,  sed  ibimus  ad  locum  nobis  a  sanctis  viris  indicatum.'  Tunc' 
nuncii  regis  Laginensium  ad  regem  Mumenie,  Failbe,  uenerunt, 
rogantes  ut  pro  societate  ad  adiuuandos  Laginenses  exiret.  Omnes 
enim  prouinchie  aquilonales  conuenerunt,  ut  deuastarent  Laginen- 
sium  regionem,  et  pugnarent  contra  eos.  Set  eo  tempore  oculus 
regis  Failbe  aliquo  euentu  fractus  est,  et  erat  luscus.     Et  noluit  rex 

>  Ir.  p.  38. 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  195 

exire  causa  pudicicie,  ne  videretur  ab  extraneis  agminibus  luscus. 
Videns  sanctus  pontifex  uerccundiam  regis,  benedixit  oculum  eius ; 
et  ilico  ibi  sanatus  est  antc  omnes.  Et  ualcdicentes  sibimet  ipsis,  rex 
Failghe'  et  sanctus  senex  Mociiuda,  vnusquisque  in  uiam  suam 
exiuit.  Rex  quidem,  congregato  e.xercitu,  ad  regem  Laginensium 
perrexit.  Et  ipsi  ambo  septentrionis  prouinchias  in  fugam  dederunt 
magnam. 

Ixii.  Pater  autem  sanctus  Mochuda  ad  plebem  Muscraighi  Hirthir 
venit,  et  susccpit  euni  benigne  Aedanus  comes  ipsius  plebis,  et 
obtulit  ei  uillam  que  dicitur  Hj'sseal.  Et  benedicens  uir  Dei  ipsum 
comitem  cum  semine  suo,  inde  in  regionem  na  n-Desi  uenit.  Et 
pertransiens  campum  Femyn,  stetit  in  loco  qui  dicitur  Ard 
BVenaind,  super  ripam  fluminis  Siuri.  Et  conuenerunt  ad  eum 
ibi  Melochtric,  dux  na  n-Desi,  et  alius  nobilis,  Suibhne,  altercantes 
in  magna  iracundia  in  contencione  alicuius  terre.  Et  illos  diuino 
nutu  sanctus  Mochuda  pacificauit,  et  dimisit  eos  pacificos.  Et  dux 
ille  obtulit  sancto  Mochuda  illum  locum  cum  agro  propinquo ;  et  ibi 
vir  Dei  cellam  assignauit,  ubi  est  hodie  magna  uilla  que  dicitur 
Aird  Finayn,  cum  maxima  parrochia  in  circuitu  in  honore  sancti 
Mochudu.  Interea  uxor  ipsius  ducis  Meilochtrig,  filii  Cobhtayg, 
que  erat  filia  supradicti  regis  Caissel,  Failbe  Flann,  vidit  sompnium; 
videlicet  cuturnices  pulcerrimas  uolantes  per  aera  trans  campum 
Femyn,  et  vna  ex  illis,  que  erat  precellencior  et  maior  ceteris  que 
sequebantur,  sedit  in  gremio  ducis  Melochtrig.  Illa  iam  domina 
expergefacta  de  sompno,  ilico  narrauit  marito  suo,  duci,  quod  uiderat. 
Dixitque^  ei  dux  :  'Bonum  sompnium  vidisti,  O  mulier;  et  cito 
implebitur.  Hec  est  iam  interprejtacio  eius.  Aues  uolantes  sunt  f.  99" 
sanctus  Mochuda  et  monachi  sui  in  celesti  conuersacione,  ipse  autem 
est  precellencior  et  maior  omnibus ;  sedere  quoque  in  gremio  meo 
est,  id  est  locum  resurrectionis  in  mea  regione  ipse  habebit,  et  gratia 
magna  nobis  et  nostre  patrie  inde  erit.'  Fidele  sompnium  bone 
femine  apparuit,  et  uera  interpretacio  eius  'fideliter'^  a  glorioso  et 
probato  Christiano  duce  diuinitus  ostensa  est. 

Ixiii.  Altero*  die  perrexit  sanctus  pontifex  Mochuda  ad  predictum 

ducem,  Melochtrig,  et  petiuit  ab  eo  agrum,  in  quo  fundaret  ecclesiam 
suani.  Respondit  ei  dux:  '  Hic  magnus  locus  non  potest  esse  in 
angusto  loco.'  Dixitque  ei  sanctus  Mochuda  :  '  Deus,  qui  misit  nos 
ad  te,  ostendet  tibi  dare  nobis  aptum  locum.'  Tunc  dux  dixit  ei : 
'  Habeo  regionem  in  altera  parte  montis  Chua  super  ripam  fluuii 
Neme  ;  bona  in  silua  et  piscibus,  set  timeo  si  est  angusta.'  Sanctus 
Mochuta  ait :     '  Non  angusta  set  spaciosa  erit.     Ipsa  iam  terra  multis 

'  sic  JI.         -  Ir.  p.  39.  2  fideliter  added  by  rubricator.         '  cf.  S.  §  i6. 

O  2 


196  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

diebus  a  Deo  nobis  presignata  est ;  in  qua  et  resurrectio  nostra  erit. 
Tunc  gloriosus  dux  na  n-Deisi,  Melochtrig,  filius  Cobhthaigh,  illam 
regionem,  in  qua  nunc  est  ciuitas  Mochuda,  Lyoss  Mor,  coram  multis 
testibus  obtulit'.  Et  benedixit  sanctus  senior  Carthagus  ipsum  ducem 
cum  sua  coniuge,  et  Hberis,  et  populo ;  et,  accepto  honore  et  Hcencia 
ab  eo,  iter  suum  trans  montem  Cuae  direxit,  et  in  campum  Cech- 
nemin  uenit,  ad  cellam  que  dicitur  Ceall  Clochayr;  et  preparauit 
sanctus  pater  ilhus  loci,  Mocuae  Miannain,  secundum  posse  suum 
cenulam  sancto  Mochuda  cum  suis  omnibus.  In  qua  quidem  de 
genere  potandi  non  plus  erat  quam  vnum  modicum  dolium  de 
ceruisia.  Mansitque  ibi  sanctus  Mochuda  cum  omni  populo  tribus 
diebus  et  tribus  noctibus,  et  ipse  sanctus  abbas^  Mocuae  Miannain 
propinabat  ceruisiam  de  dolio  niinistris  in  crateribus  sufficienter 
omni  populo.  Et  plenum  adhuc  erat  dolium  de  ceruisia.  Crescebat 
enim  liquor,  sicuti  oleum  sub  benedictione  Helye.  Tunc  vnus  de 
discipulis  sancti  Mochuda  alta  uoce  coram  omnibus  dixit :  '  Si 
uoluerimus  hic  esse,  donec  hec  cena  deficiet,  longo  tempore  hic 
manebimus ;  hec  enim  cena  Dei  dono  non  minuitur,  set  crescit 
cotidie.'  Hoc  audiens  sanctus  episcopus  Mochuda,  ait  ei :  '  Verum 
dicis,  frater;  tempus  iam  nobis  est  eundo.'  Et  ius[s]it  omnes,  ut  in 
uiam  suam  de  loco  exirent.  Et  sanctus  Mocuae  Miannain  ipsum 
cum  suo  loco  Deo  et  sancto  Mochuda  obtulit.  Incipiens  sanctus 
Mochuda  de  illo  loco  exire,  statim  ceruisia  in  illo  dolio  usque  ad 
feces  decrescit. 

Ixiv.  Post'  hec  perrexit  sanctus  Carthagus  per  campum  Chech- 
nemin  ad  predictum  flumen,  Nem,  ad  locum  qui  scotice  dicitur 
Ath  Medhoin,  id  est  uadum  alu[e]i,  in  quo  non  transuadant  nisi  pauci 
fortes,  bene  scientes  natare,  in  magna  siccitate  estiui  caloris,  invnda- 
cione  plenius  absente  marina  ;  inundacio  enim  maris  eo  loco  sursum 
contra  flumcn  usque  ad  ciuitatem  Lyoss  Mor  uadit,  quasi  quinque 
miliaribus  ;  et  tunc  mallina  impleuit  alueum  fluminis.  Sanctique  * 
[quaesiuerunt  ^,  si  ibi  ulla  nauigii  esset  commoditas,  et  dixerunt  quod 
non.  Tunc  sanctus  pater  '■,  fiducia  plenus,  accessit  ad  ripam  fluminis 
propius ;  imperauitque  mari  ac  torrenti  amnis,  ut  in  nomine  Domini 
Christi  sisterent  ad  tempus  fluxum  et  impetum  suum,  et  redirent 
seruis  Domini  sui.  Et  signo  crucis  facto  findunt  se  equora  et  aque, 
T.  f.  66"  et  apparuit  terra  et  arena]  |  per^  diuisi  ponti  arida,  et  reuolute  in  latus 

*  Ir.  omits  the  rest  of  the  section.  ^  written  albas.  ^    =S  §  17. 

*  Here  ends  the  text  of  M,  a  folio  being  lost  ;  and  the  text  of  T  does  not  begin 
again  after  the  lacuna  (see  p.  192,  note  4)  tiU  a  few  lines  lower  down.  The 
missing  part  is  supplied  from  B.  ^  B  has  quaesiuit  S.  Carthagus.      I  have 

altered  i/uaesitti/  to  qitaesitteriDtt  to  suit  the  context  in  M.  ^  cum  duobus  ex- 

imie  sanctitatis  uiris,  Colmano  scilicet  atque  Moluo  acld.  S.  '  Here  T  resumes 
after  the  lacuna. 


i 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  197 

geniinum  aque  ad  instar  muri  dextera  et  leua  steterunt,  nudataque 
tel[l]us  spoliatur  aquis  cognotis.  Et  post  sanctos  turba  pedestris 
intrat ;  alii  in  curribus  et  plaustris,  sicuti  portati  erant  per  terram, 
per  diuisum  fretum,  secundum  similitudinem  lordanis  fluminis'  sub 
losue,  siccis  pedibus  perrexerunt  Alcius  iam  et  alcius  in  modum 
collis  surgebat  flumen,  similiter  et  mare.  Et  cum  sanctissimus 
sencx  Mochutu  posterior  ceteris  de  litore  uenisset,  benedixit  illum 
locum,  et  iussit  aquis  redire  in  cursum  suum.  Et  uocatur  ille 
locus  scotice...-,  quod  sonat  latine  locus  benedictionum.  Obcur- 
rentibus  aquis  inuicem,  perturbacionem  maximam,  quasi  rixantes, 
fecerunt. 

Ixv.  Deinde  gloriosus  pontifex  Carthagus  cum  suis  per  quendain 
campulum  scotico  nomine  Madh^  Scheth,  latino  autem  campus 
scuti,  ad  locum  sibi  predestinatum  a  Deo,  oblatum  autem  a  supra- 
dicto  duce  na  n-Desi,  exiuit.  Et  castrametati  sunt  in  eo.  Postea 
benedicens  pontifex  cum  ceteris  sanctis  illum  agrum,  circulum  ciui- 
tatis  assignauerunt.  Et  uenit  ad  eos  quedam  uirgo,  nomine  Coemell, 
que  cellulam  habebat  in  illo  agro  ;  et  interrogauit  eos,  dicens  :  'Quid 
vultis  hic  agere,  serui  Dei  ? '  Respondit  ei  sanctus  pontifex 
Mochutu  :  '  In  Dei  uoluntate  paramus  atrium  modicum  hic  sepire 
circa  sarcinas  nostras.'  Et  ait  sancta  uirgo  :  '  Non  paruum  atrium  erit, 
set  magnum.'  Sanctus  pater  Mochutu  ait :  '  Verum  erit,  quod  dicis, 
Christi  ancilla.  Nam  ex  hoc  nomine  iste  locus  semper  uocabitur 
Less  Mor  scotice,  latine  autem  atrium  magnum.'  Et  illa  sancta  uirgo 
se  cum  cellula  sua  sancto  Mochutu  obtulit,  in  quo  loco  monasterium 
sanctimonialium est  hodie  in ciuitate Less Mor.''  Et, sicut Colmanus Eala 
predixit  °,  leuiciana  sancti  Mochutu  in  sua  ciuitate  Less  Mor  ab  angelis 
assignata  est,  in  qua  ipse  sepultus  est.  Et  sola  Dei  scientia  nouit 
numerum  sanctorum,  qui  in  illa  post  eum  sepulti  sunt  usque  hodie. 
Egregia  iam  et  sancta  ciuitas  est  Less  Mor,  cuius  dimidium  est 
assilum  in  quo  nulla  mulier  audet  intrare  ;  set  plenum  est  cellis  et 
monasteriis  sanctis  Et  multitudo  virorum  sanctorum  semper  illic 
manet.  Viri  enim  religiosi  ex  omni  parte  Hibernie,  et  non  solum, 
set  ex  Anglia  et  Britannia  confluunt  ad  eam,  uolentes  ibi  migrare 
ad  Christum.  Et  est  ipsa  ciuitas  posita  super  ripam  australem 
fluminis  quondam  dicti  Nem,  modo  auteni  Abann  Mor,  id  est  ampnis 
magnus,  in  plaga  regionis  na  n-Desi. 

Ixvi.  QuoDAM  die  quidam  magus,  cui  displicebat  quod  sanctus 
Mochutu  illuc  uenisset,  uenit  ad  eum  temptans  eum,  et  rogans  ut, 
si   seruus    Dei  esset,  ramum  aridum  sine  cortice,  quem  ille  secum 

■  MS.  flumine.  ^  There  is  no  lacuna  in  the  HS.,  but  the  Irish  name  of 

Ithe  place  has  been  accidentallj-omitted.    Perhaps  itwas  'Ait  na  m-bennachtan '. 
I '  MS.  Mhad.         *  Ir.  omits  all  from  here  to  the  end  of  §  Ixvii.  '  §  xxix. 


198  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

tulerat,  faceret  in  nomine  Dei  sui  fructum  habere.  Videns  vir 
sanctus  quia  ille  uellet  diuine  potencie  detraliere,  benedixit  ranium 
aridum ;  et  ilico  protulit  corticem  et  folia,  florem  et  fructum,  ut 
magus  temptauit.     Et  magus,  admirans  talem  potenciam,  recessit. 

Ixvii.  Alio  die  quidam  homo  pauper  postulauit  a  sancto  Mochutu 
indiscrete  lac  et  ceruisiam.  Tunc  erat  sanctus  senex  iuxta  fontem, 
et  benedixit  fontem  ;  et  statim  motus  est  fons  in  lac,  deinde  in  cerui- 
siam,  postea  in  vinum.  Et  iussit  illi  honiini,  ut  toUeret  quantum 
f.  66''  uellet.  Itaque  mansit  fons,  donec  postea  |  sanctus  Mochutu  per 
[orationem'  suam,  fontem  in  pristinum  statum  restituit.  Veniensque 
angelus]  Domini  de  celo,  dixit  ad  s[anctum  Mochutu  :  '  Usque  ad 
diem  iudicii  uirtutibus]  fons  iste  plenus  erit.'  Et  [manet  fons  iste 
usque  hodie  in]  asylo  ciuitatis  Liss  Mor.  Et  in  om[ni  fonte,  quem 
sanctus  bene]dixit,  gratia  sanandi  languores  apperi[tur]. 

Ixviii.  [PosT  hec,  artifici]bus  diuersas  edes  monasterii  fortiter  et 
incessa[nter  edificantibus,  sanctus  Mo]chutu  cepit  magnum  habere 
tedium  de  strepitu  [laborantium].  Vires  -  enim  corporis  eius  pre 
magno  labore  et  nimia  sen[ectute  deficere  cepe]runt.  Et  communi 
consilio  fratrum  quendam  locum  tunc  securum,  qui  hodie  dicitur 
[Cel]la  Mochutu,  ubi  est  claruni  monasterium  in  ualle  iacenti  sub 
magno  monasterio  in  sue '  ciuitatis  Less  Mor  medio,  cum  paucis 
ministris  adiuit,  et  mansit  ibi  pleno  anno  et  sex  mensibus.  Ducebat 
iam  heremiticam  vitam,  soli  Deo  viuens  in  teoria.  Et  post  tempus 
a  fratribus  et  sanctis  decrepitis  senioribus  uisitabatur,  quibus  ipse 
sue  dulcissime  doctrine  fluenta  largiter  infundebat,  et  monita  salutis 
vniuscuiusque  uite  congrua  dabat.  Ipse  enim  sanctus  patronus 
noster  Mochutu  seniorum  leuamen  erat,  infirmorum  salus,  lugencium 
solamen,  desperancium  firmacio,  dubitancium  certa  fides,  iuuenum 
stabilitas. 

Ixix.  CuM^  iam  uideret  sanctus  pater  Mochutu  sanctos  seniores  et 
omnes  fratres  in  uallis  descensione  et  ascensione  pro  ipso  uisitando 
laborantes,  sciensque  diem  obitus  sui  diuinitus  uenisse,  uocauit  ad  se 
ce[no]bium  suum,  et  iussit  se  portari  in  superiora  ad  fratres,  ne  de 
sua  visitacione  molestiam  haberent.  Set  uolens  omnipotens  et 
misericors  Deus  seruum  suum  carissimum  de  molestia  huius  uite 
et  egritudine  ducere,  suique  laboris  premio  remunerare,  aperti  sunt 
celi,  et  missus  est  exercitus  angelorum  cum  ineffabili  triumpho  ad 

'  The  top  of  f.  66  is  miitilated  in  T.  A  possible  reason  for  this  mutilation  is 
suggested  in  the  notes  to  §  i  ot'  Vita  Declani.  B  omits  the  remainder  of  this 
section  after  itcllet,  and  also  some  words  at  the  beginning  of  §  Ixviii.  Evidently 
Ihe  editor  was  dependent,  like  ourselves,  on  T.  Ir.  also  fails  us  here.  The 
words  and  letters  in  brackets  are  supplied  mainly  by  retranslation  from  the  late 
Irish  Life  (see  Introduction).  ^  Ir.  p.  40.  ^  jig_  ^^^/j  j^  .  probably 

a  wrong  anticipation  of  iiiedio.  *    =S  §  19, 


VITA  SANCTI  CARTHAGI  199 

cum.  Vidensque  sanctissimus  noster  patronus  Mochutu  apertos  sibi 
ceios,  et  angelos  ad  se  uenientes,  fecit  se  ibi  in  medio  uallis  deponi, 
na'r'ransque  sanctis  senioribus  que  uidebat,  iussit  sibi  corpus  et 
sanguinem  Christi  aficrri,  et  mandabat  fratribus  diuina  precepta. 
Ibi  iam  foris,  ubi  est  crux  sancta  que  dicitur  crux  migracionis,  post 
plurmia  data  salutis  monita,  acceptoque  corporis  et  sanguinis  dominici 
saeramento,  inter  sanctorum  seniorum  et  fratrum  multitudinem,  et 
ualedicens  illis  pie  et  modeste,  cunctosque  secundum  ordinem 
deosculans,  diuina  iussione  cum  angelis  pi[i]ssimus  noster  nutritor, 
sanctissimus  senex  Mochutu  episcopus,  pridie  idus  Maii  migrauit 
ad  Christum.  Cui  est  honor  et  gloria  atque  potestas  cum  Deo  Patre 
in  vnitate  Spiritus  Sancti  in  secula  seculorum.    Anien.' 

EXPLICIT    UITA   SANCTI    CaRTHAGI 
EPISCOPI    ET   CONFESSORIS 

'  Here  S  adds  :  Antiphona  de  eo  ad  Magnificat : 

Gloriose  presul  Christi,  uenerande  Carthace, 
Apud  Deum  tuo  sancto  nos  iuua  precamine  ; 
Ut  de  terra  omni  sorde,  et  abluto  crimine, 
In  celesti  semper  tecum  colletemur  culmine. 


Vita  sancti  (Sliaraiu  abbatis  tie  (STIuaiu 
mic  j^ois 

f.  144"*  Incipit  vita  sancti  Kiarani^  abbatis  et  confessoris 

i.  Sanctus  ''■  abbas  Kyaranus  de  plebe  Latronensium '  que  est  in 
regione  Midhi,  id  est  in  medio  Hybernie,  ortus  fuit ;  cuius  pater  Beon- 
nadus''  uocabatur,  qui  erat  artifex  curruum,  et  ipse  erat  diues  ;  qui 
accepit  vxorem  nomine  Derercha,  ex  qua  genuit  quinque  filios  et 
tres  filias.  E  quibus  erant  quattuor  sacerdotes,  et  vnus  diaconus, 
qui  hoc  ordine  creati  sunt  cum  hiis  nominibus  :  primus  Lucennus°, 
secundus  Donanus,  tertius  iste  sanctus  Kyaranus  abbas,  quartus 
Odranus,  quintus  Cronanus,  qui  erat  diaconus.  Tres  quoque  filie 
Lugbeg  et  Raichbe "  et  Pata  vocabantur.  Lugbeg  et  Raichbe  due  | 
f.  145"  sancte  uirgines  fuerunt.  Pata  autem  primo  coniugata,  set  postea 
sancta  vidua  erat.'  Cum  autem  ipse  Beonedus  artifex  tributis 
Ainmereach',  regis  Temorie,  ualde  premeretur,  devitans  grauitatem 
tributi,  exiit  a  regione  sua,  id  est  a  finibus  Midhi  in  regionibus 
Conacthorum ;  habitauitque  ibi  in  Campo  Aei  apud  Crimthanum  regem ; 
ibique  genuit  sanctum  Kyaranum,  cuius  est  hec  vita.  Et  natiuitas 
eius  a  mago '  predicti  regis  prophetata  est,  dicens  coram  omnibus  : 
'  Filius,  qui  est  in  vtero  uxoris  Beoedi  artificis,  honorabilis  erit  coram 
Deo  et  hominibus ;  et  sicut  sol  lucet  in  celo,  ita  ipse  per  suam 
sanctitatem  in  Hybernia  lucebit.'  Postea  sanctus  Kyaranus  natus  est 
in  provinchia  Connachtorum  in  campo  silicet  Aei,  in  castello  quod 
dicitur  Raith  Crimthain,  et  baptizatus  est  a  quodam  sancto  dyacono 

^  At  the  foot  of  the  column  is  a  pedigree  in  Irish  agreeing  very  nearly  with 
that  in  LL.  348'',  but  diifering  widely  from  that  in  L.  3975.  It  states  that 
Ciaran  was  *  do  fir-Vlltaibh  Emhna',  i.  e.  of  the  genuine  Ultonians  of  Emain. 
=  =S  §§  I,  3;  Ri  f.  91^  R2  f.  i2-)<^;  L.  3982  ff.  §  i.  runs  thus  in  R:  Vir 
gloriosus,  et  uita  sanctissimus  abbas,  Queranus,  ex  patre  Boecio,  matre  Darercha 
ortus  fuit.  Hic  traxit  originem  de  aquilonali  parte  Hibernie,  Aradensium  silicet 
genere.  Diuina  quoque  gratia  a  puerili  etate  sic  ipse  illustratus  est,  ut,  quahs 
foret  futurus,  luculenter  appareret.  Erat  [cras  R^  R^]  enim  tanquam  lucerna 
ardens  eximia  caritate,  ut  non  solum  feruorcm  pii  cordis  et  deuocionem  erga 
hominum  inopiam  releuandam  freuel-  R'  R*]  exhiberet  ;  verum  et  in  creatu- 
rarum  irrationabilium  necessitatibus  infatigabilem  ostenderet  affectum.  Et  quia 
tanta  lucerna  non  debuit  sub  modio  abscondi,  ideo  a  puerili  etate  cepit  miracu- 
lorum  prodigiis  coruscare.  ^  do  Latharnaibh  Maighi  Molt  L.  *  Beoid  L  ; 

Beoid,  id  est  Boeus  S.  ^  Lucoll  L.  "  Rathbeo  L.  '  Hic  uir 

sanctus   .1.  annis   ante    natiuitatem    suam   a   sancto   Patricio   preuaticinatus  est 
S  add.  *  Ainmire  mac  Colgan  L.  '  Called  Lugbrann  in  L.     In  L  and  S 

the  prophecy  takes  the  usual  form  of  '  currus  sonat  sub  rege '. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  201 

qui  scotice  "Diarmaid'  vocabatur;  set  postea  nominatus  est  lustus. 
Congruum  enim  crat  ut  iustus  a  lusto  baptizaretur.  Et  nutritus  est 
sanctus  Kyaranus  apud  parcntes  suos  in  loco  predicto,  et  gratia  Dei 
per  omnia  apparebat  in  eo. 

ii.  Quadam'  die  equus  optimus  Aengussi,  filii  Crimhthani  regis 
predicti,  repente  mortuus  est,  et  ualde  contristatus  est  de  morte 
optimi  equi  sui.  Et  cum  ille  contristatus  obdormisset,  apparuit  ei  in 
sompnis  vir  splendidus  ^,  dicens  ad  eum  :  '  Noli  contristari  de  equo 
tuo ;  'est'  enim  inter  uos  puerulus,  sanctus  Kiaranus,  filius  artificis 
Beoedi,  qui  potest  per  Dei  gratiam  suscitare  equum  tuum.  Ipse 
infundat  aquam  in  os  equi,  orans,  et  in  faciem  ;  et  iUco  resurget 
sanus.  Et  tu  ofTeres  puero  oblacionem  pro  equo  tuo  suscitato.' 
Expergefactus  Aengus,  filius  regis,  de  sompno,  narrauit  hec  verba 
amicis  suis.  Venitque  ipse  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum,  et  duxit  eum  ad 
locum  in  quo  equus  erat  mortuus.  Infundensque  pius  puer  Kyaranus 
aquam  in  os  et  in  faciem  equi',  ilico  surrexit  a  morte,  et  stetit  validus 
coram  omnibus ;  et  illum  agrum  *,  qui  erat  magnus  et  optimus,  filius 
regis  sancto  Kiarano  in  eternum  optulit. 

iii.  Alio*  die  mater  sancti  Kyarani  increpauit  eum,  dicens  :  '  Ceteri 
pueri  prudentes  mel  cotidie  de  agris  et  mellifluis  locis  afferunt 
parentibus  suis.  Hic  autem  noster  filius,  simplex  et  mitis,  nichil 
mellis  nobis  affert.'  Hanc  vocem  matris  improperantis  sibi  audiens 
sanctus  puer  Kyaranus,  perrexit  ad  fontem  propinquum,  et  vas  inde 
impleuit  aqua  ;  et  benedicens  illud  factum  est  aqua  mel  optimum, 
et  dedit  matri  sue.  Stupentes  autem  parentes  eius  miraculum, 
miserunt  illud  mel  ad  lustum  ^  diaconem,  baptizatorem  eius,  ut 
videret  ipse  miraculum  per  puerum  quem  ipse  baptizauit  factum 
a  Deo.  Ille  iam  hoc  audiens  et  videns,  gratias  Christo  egit,  et  orauit 
pro  puero. 

iv.  Sa^xtvs' puer  Kyaranus  peccora  parentum  suorum  custodiens 
psalmos  legebat  apud  sanctum  Diarmatum  ;  set  ualde  nobis  doctrina 
ipsa  mirabili  modo  facta  est.  Nam  sanctus  Kiaranus  in  austraU 
parte  campi  Aei  peccora  custodiebat ;  sanctus  Diarmatus  in  aquilonali 
parte  eiusdem  campi  habitabat,  et  campus  magnus  inter  illos  erat ;  et 
sic  de  longe  in  otiis  verbis  se  invicem  salutabant  trans  campi  spacia, 
et  senior  docebat  puerum  de  sua  cella  per  campum,  et  puer  super 
petram  in  agro  sedens  legebat.  Que  petra  usque  hodie  colitur, 
posita    ibi*    cruce  |  Christi,  que    ex    nomine    Kyarani    nominatur.  f.  145'' 

'    =S  §  3  ;  R'  f.  91",  R'  f.  128»  ;  L  4021  ff.  "  aingel  De  (i.  e.  angelus 

Dei^  L.  '  secundum  quod  angelus  illum  docuit  R  add.  *  Called  :  Tir  na 

Gabrai  (  =  terra  equi)  L.  *   =S  §  4 ;  R'  R^  u.  s.  ;  L.  4028  ff.  «  sancto 

Dermicio   .   .   .   cognomento   lusto   R.  '   =L  4038  ff.   i^not  in  S   or   R). 

6  MS.  ibbi. 


202  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

Sancti  iam  sic  se  diuino  nutu  a"u'diebant,  alii  autem  eos  non  audie- 
bant  ^. 

V.  Quodam  "^  die  cum  sanctus  Kyaranus  peccora  custodiret,  vacca 
coram  eo  vitulum  genuit.  In  illa  hora  videns  pius  puer  lupum 
niiserum  et  macerum  et  esurientem  ad  se  venientem,  famulus  Dei 
dixit  ei :  '  Vade  miser,  et  commede  illum  vitulum'.'  Et  deuorauit  eum. 
Cumque  sanctus  pastor  cum  peccoribus  suis  ad  domum  venisset, 
vacca  illa  querens  vitulum  suum,  fortiter  clamabat.  Hoc  videns 
Derercha,  mater  sancti  Kyarani,  ait  ei :  '  O  Kyarane,  vbi  est  vitulus 
istius  vac[c]e  ?  Redde  eum,  quamuis  ex  mari  uel  ex  terra  ;  tu  enim 
perdidisti  eum,  et  cor  matris  eius  magnam  miseriam  habet.'  Audiens 
sanctus  Kiaranus  hec  verba,  reuersus  est  ad  locum  vbi  vitulus  deuora- 
tus  est,  et  ossa  eius  in  sinum  suum  collegit ;  et  reddiens  deposuit  ea 
ante  vaccam  plorantem.  Et  statim  diuina  pietate  propter  sanctitatem 
pueri  vitulus  coram  omnibus  surrexit,  et  sanus  stetit  super  pedes 
suos  ludens  cum  matre  sua.  Tunc  clamor  presencium  in  laude  Dei 
ortus  est,  benedicentes  puerum. 

vi.  ExiENs*  pius  puer  Kyaranus  ad  quandam  villam  propinquam, 
laici  crudeles  et  maligni  dimiserunt  canem  ferocissimum  ad  eum,  ut 
deuoraret  eum.  Videns  iam  sanctus  Kyaranus  rapidum  canem  ad  se 
venientem,  versum  psalmigraphi  arripuit,  dicens  :  '  Domine,  ne  tradas 
bestiis  animam  confitentem  tibi  ^.'  Cum  canis  fortiter  curreret,  capud 
eius  diuino  nutu  intrauit  in  circo  vituli,  et  percussit  caput  suum 
ligatus  circo  contra  lignum  in  quo  illud  uinctum  pendebat,  quousque 
caput  suum  fregit.     Hoc  autem  viso,  timuerunt  illi  multum. 

vii.  Alio"  die  quidam  latrones  de  aliena  terra  venientes,  invenerunt 
sanctum  Kiaranum  solum  iuxta  peccora  sua  legentem ;  et  cogita- 
uerunt  iugulare  eum,  et  rapere  peccora  eius  ;  et  appropinquantes 
ad  eum  tali  afFectu,  cecitate  percussi  sunt,  et  nec  manum  neque 
pedem  mouere  potuerunt,  donec  penitentiam  egerunt,  rogantes  eum 
pro  lumine  suo.  Tunc  pius  pastor  videns  eos  de  malignitate  con- 
uersos,  orauit  pro  eis,  et  statim  soluti  sunt  in  lumine  suo ;  et 
redeuntes  gratias  agebant,  et  narrabant  pluribus. 

viii.  QuoDAM  die  pauper  quidam  venit  ad  sanctum  Kyeranum 
querens  vaccam  ab  eo.  Tunc  sanctus  Kieranus  rogauit  matrem 
suam  ut  vac[c]a  daretur'  pauperi  ;  set  mater  noluit  audire  eum. 
Hoc  videns  sanctus  Kieranus  adduxit  secum  pauperem  foras  cum 
peccoribus ;    et   ibi   dedit  ei   bonam   vaccam  cum   vitulo.     Set   ipse 

1  A  fox  carries  Ciaran's  psalter  between  hitn  and  his  master  L  add.  ^  =  S  §  6 ; 
Ri  f.  92'',  R'  f.  128'*  ;  L  4082  ff.  3  7  na  bris  7  na  hith  a  chnamha  L  add., 

i  .e.  and  do  not  break  or  eat  its  bones.  '   =S  §  5  ;   L.  4034  ff.     Not  in  R. 

'  Ps.  l.\.\iii.  19.  °   =S  §  7  ;  L  4090  iT.  '  dararetur  m.  pr. 


i 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  203 

vitulus  intcr  duas  vac[c]as  erat ;  et  ambe  diligebant  euin.  Sciens 
pius  pucr  quod  non  prodesset  illa  vac[c]a  sine  vitulo,  vtramquc  cum 
suo  vitulo  illi  pauperi  dedit.  Pro  quibus  crastina  die  quatuor  vac[c]e 
ab  aliis  oblate  sunt  in  elymosinam  sancto  Kiarano,  quas  ipse  sue 
matri  se  increpanti  dedit ;  et  tunc  matrcm  suam  racionabiliter 
admonuit ;  et  ipsa  deinceps  timebat  eum. 

ix.  CuLTRUM  auunculi  sui  Beoani  sanctus  Kiaranus  altero  die 
cuidam  homini  indigenti  largitus  est ;  pro  quo  |  similiter  altera  die  f.  145' 
quatuor  cultros  recepit.  Quatuor  enim  fabri  a  villa  que  dicitur 
Cluain  Cruimvenerunt,  habentes  quatuor  cultros,  [quos]  in  elymosinam 
sancto  Kyarano  tradiderunt ;  quos  sanctus  puer  illi  pro  suo  cultro 
reddidit. 

X.  Altera  die  sanctus  Kyaranus  bouem  illius  auunculi  homini 
petenti  donauit.  Cui  ait  ille :  '  Fili,  quomodo  hodie  arare  potero, 
dum  bouem  meum  alteri  dedisti?'  Cui  sanctus  puer  ait :  '  Pone 
hodie  equum  tuum  cum  bouibus  in  aratro,  et  cras  habebis  boues 
sufficienter.'  Et  statim  positus  equus  cum  bobus  sub  iugo  in  loco 
bouis  donati  domitus  factus  est;  et  tota  die  apte  sub  iugo  quasi  bos 
arabat.  Crastino  autem  die  quatuor  boues  in  elimosinam  oblati  sunt 
sancto  Kierano,  quos  ipse  auunculo  suo  pro  ipsius  boue  tradebat. 
llomines  enim  audientes  et  videntes  signa  magna  per  sanctum 
Kyaranum  facta,  postulabant  oraciones  eius,  et  ofiferebant  ei  obla- 
ciones. 

xi.  QuoDAM  ^  die  pater  sancti  Kiarani  quoddam  vasculum  regale  de 
domo  regis  Furbithi  attulit,  ut  haberet  illud  per  aliquot  dies  ;  et  illud 
uas  diligebat  rex.  Set  sanctus  Kiaranus,  pauperibus  elimosinam 
postulantibus  in  Christi  noniine,  non  habens  aliud,  illud  regis  vas 
tradidit  eis.  Hoc  audiens  rex  iratus  est  nimis,  et  iussit  ut  sanctus 
Kiaranus  in  suo  seruicio  captiuus  esset.  Pro  qua  itaque  causa  beatus 
Kiaranus  in  captiuitatem  ductus  est,  et  erat  seruus  in  domo  regis 
Furbithi ;  et  impositum  est  ei  opus  pro  asperitate,  id  est  ut  molam 
cotidie  ad  farinam  faciendam  verteret.  Set  mirabiliter  sanctus  Kiara- 
nus  sedens  legebat  iuxta  molam,  et  mola  sola  absque  manu  quidem 
hominis  velociter  currebat,  et  molebat  coram  omnibus  farinam. 
Angeli  enim  Dei  pro  sancto  Kyarano  molebant,  et  homines  eos  non 
videbant.  Et  non  post  multum  tempus  quidam  homo  de  regione 
Mumenie,  id  est  de  gente  na  n-Desi,  qui  vocabatur  Hiernanus, 
stimulatus  diuino  nutu,  venit  cum  duobus  vasculis  optimis  illius  regis 
vasculo  similibus,  eiusdem  generis,  eiusdem  vtilitatis,  et  obtulit  ea  in 
elymosinam   sancto   Kiarano.     Audiens    rex    miraculum    de    mola, 

•  =  S  §  8 ;  L  4095  ff.,  which  agree  in  giving  a  rather  different  version  of  the 
incident. 


204  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

recepit  illa  duo  uascula,  deditque  libertatem  suam  sancto  Kiarano. 
Ante  enim  per  iram  mercedem  noluit  accipere  pro  eo.  Et  sic  sanctus 
Kiaranus  de  seruitute  regis  liberatus  est.  Et  benedixit  sanctus 
Kiaranus  illum  hominem  cum  sua  nacione,  per  quem  ipse  suam 
libertatem  invenit. 

xii.  Quodam'  die  cum  sanctus  Kieranus  [esset]  in  loco  qui  dicitur 
Cluain  inn  Sythe,  vidit  nauim  super  flumen  positam,  et  zabulum  super 
ripam  fluminis ;  et  erat  in  eo  rota  de  uirgis  contexta  plena  spicis 
igne  supposito,  ut  siccarentur  ad  triturandum  secundum  morem  occi- 
dentalium,  id  est  Britanie  et  Hybernie.  Et  dixit  sanctus  Kyaranus 
prophetice  sociis  suis  secrete  :  '  Illa  nauis  que  est  super  aquas  hodie 
comburetur,  et  zabulum  quod  est  super  terram  mergetur.'  Illis 
contradicentibus  et  admirantibus,  ait  eis  :  '  Expectate  modicum,  et 
videbitis  oculis  vestris.'  Et  ilico  illa  nauicula  de  aqua  super  terram 
eleuata  est,  et  posita  in  canapam,  ut  rime  et  fracture  eius  ibi  coniun- 
f-  145'' gerentur.  Et  accenso  rogo,  illa  cana|ba  combusta  est,  et  nauis  in 
medio  eius  similiter  combusta  est.  Zabulum  autem  eruentes  viri 
fortes  e  terra,  proiecerunt  illiid  de  ripa  in  flumen,  sicut  famulus 
Domini  prophetauit  -.  Audientes  et  videntes  talem  prophetiam  de 
rebus  contrariis,  Christo  gloriam  dederunt  qui  tale  donum  dat  seruis 
suis. 

xiii.  Alio'  die  cum  sanctus  Kiaranus  de  agris  in  domum  suam 
venisset,  homines  in  obuiam  eius  venerunt.  Quibus  ipse  ait:  'Vnde 
modo  venistis?'  Illi  dixerunt :  'A  domo  Beoedi  artificis  venimus 
modo.'  Ait  eis  :  '  Numquid  ibi  pro  Christo  congruam  leticiam  in- 
venistis?'  Illi  dixerunt:  '  Non.  Mulierem  autem  illic  reperimus 
asperam,  que  nobis  potum  tantum  pro  hospitalitate  non  dedit.'  Hoc 
audiens  sanctus  Kyaranus  benedixit  eis,  et  venit  velociter  ad  domum 
suam,  et  intrans  domum  neminem  in  ea  invenit,  oc[c]upati  enim 
erant  foris  homines  eius  in  operibus.  Tunc  beatus  Kyaranus,  zelo 
Dei  commotus,  omnem  cibum,  quem  invenit  in  domo  parentum, 
dissipauit ;  lac  iam  super  terram  effudit,  butirum  cum  stercore  ouium 
commiscuit,  panem  canibus  proiecit,  ita  ut  nemini  prodesset.  Indi- 
cabat  enim  rectum  esse  ut  quod  pro  Christi  nomine  hospitibus  non 
est  datum,  in  perditionem  ab  hominibus  daretur,  ne  talis  cibus 
commederetur.  Post  paululum  mater  eius  venit,  et  videns  domum 
suam  ita  conuersam,  voluit  vlulare ;  mirabatur  enim  ualde  quid 
domui  sue  accidit.  Et  ponens  sanctus  Kiaranus  racionem,  illa  sedata 
est,  promisitque  emendacionem ;  et  multi  audiencium  caritatiui 
effecti  sunt. 

'  =  L  4297  ff..  aecording  to  which  this  incident  took  place  in  Arran  (after 
§  XX  infraj.         "  According  to  L  the  wind  blew  it  into  the  sea.  ^   =S  §  10. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  205 

xiv.  Alio  '  die,  cum  sanctus  Kyaranus  in  curru  cum  patre  suo 
sederet,  axis  currus  in  duas  partes  confractus  est  in  campi  medio  ; 
et  contristatus  est  pater  sancti  cum  suis.  Tunc  sanctus  Kyeranus 
bcncdixit  axem,  et  statim  reintegratus  est  sicut  prius  fucrat;  et 
postea  per  totam  diem  in  curru  prospere  abierunt. 

XV.  Post'  hoc  sanctus  Kyaranus  voluit  relinquere  parentes  suos, 
et  ad  scoiam  sancti  Finniani  exire,  qui  erat  vir  sapiens,  pollens  in 
omni  sanctitate,  ut  in  illa  cum  ceteris  sanctis  Hybernie,  qui  erant 
ibi,  scripturas  legeret.  Postulauitque  a  parentibus  suis  ut  vac[c]a 
sibi  ad  scolam  duceretur,  causa  lactis  eius  pro  sustentacione  eius ; 
set  mater  eius  hoc  renuit,  dicens:  '  Alii  qui  sunt  in  illa  scola  vac[c]as 
non  habent.'  Tunc,  accepta  licentia  et  benedictione  parentum  (set 
matri  displicebat,  volebat  enim  eum  secum  semper  habere),  sanctus 
Kyaranus  perrexit  in  viam  suam ;  et  veniens  ad  armentum  parentum 
suorum  benedixit  vnani  vac[c]am,  et  iussit  ei  in  nomine  Domini, 
ut  sequeretur  se.  Et  statim  ipsa  vac[c]a  secuta  est  eum  cum  vitulo 
suo  nuper  nato,  et  quocunque  ipse  ibat,  vac[c]a  post  eum  ambulabat 
usque  ad  ciuitatem  Cluain  Irayrd,  que  est  in  confinio  Laginensium 
et  nepotum  Neill,  set  tamen  in  terra  nepotum  Neill  ipsa  ciuitas 
est  posita.  Cumque  sanctus  Kyeranus  illic''  peruenisset,  faciebat 
terminum  in  pasturis  inter  illam  vac[c]am  et  vitulum  suum  'de  baculo 
suo' ;  et  nec  illi  vllo  modo  ausi  sunt  vnquam  transire  vestigia  baculi 
sancti,  et  nec  transibant  illud ;  set  uac[c]a  lambebat  vitulum  suum 
trans  uestigium  baculi,  et  congruis  horis  in|tacto  lacte  veniebant  in  f.  146" 
domum  suam.  Et  illa  vac[c]a  fusca  erat,  que  uocabatur  Odhiir 
Kyarain,  cuius  fama  semper  manet  in  Hibernia;  ipsa  enim  copiam 
lactis  maximam  habebat  incredibiliter  hoc  tempore,  et  lac  eius  cotidie 
inter  scolam  diuidebatur,  et  sufficiebat  multis.  Pellis  itaque  eius 
usque  hodie  honorifice  in  ciuitate  sancti  Kiarani  manet ;  miracula 
enim  gratia  Dei  per  illud  fiunt.  Et  hanc  gratiam  pre  omnibus 
maiorem  habet,  sicut  veteres  sancti,  id  est  discipuli  sancti  Kiarani, 
nobis  tradiderunt,  quia  diuinitus  ostensum  est,  quod  omnis  homo 
qui  mortuus  fuerit  super  eam,  vitam  eternam  cum  Christo  possidebit. 

In  scola*  iam  sanctissimi  magistri  Finniani  plures  sancti  Hybernie 
erant ;  id  est  duo  sancti  Kiarani  et  duo  sancti  Brendani,  et  Columba 
aliique  multi ;  et  vnusquisque  eorum  in  die  suo  molam  propriis 
manibus  molebat ;  set  angeli  Dei  pro  sancto  Kiarano  molebant,  sicut 
ei  fecerunt  in  sua  captiuitate. 

xvi.  FiLiA  regis  Temorie '  ducta  est  ad  sanctum  Finnianum,  ut 
apud  sanctum   Dei  psalmos  et  alias  scripturas   legeret,  et  votum 

>   =S  §  II.  2   =S  §  12;   Ri  f.  91'-,  R=f.  128";   L  4103  ff.;  in  R  this 

follows   immediately   on    §    iii.    supra.  ^    ad   sacrum   coUegium   sancti 

Fynniani  R.  •   =S§  13;  L^iigff.  ^   =L  4128  ff.,  vvhich  calls  him 

king  of  Cualann. 


2o6  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

virginitatis  promitteret ;  et  illa  promittente  sua  sponte  virginitatem 
suam  Ciinsto  obseruare,  pater  Finnianus  ait  sancto  Kiarano :  '  Fili, 
legat  apud  te  ista  virgo  ancilla  Christi,  filia  regis  terreni,  interini, 
quousque  cella  uirginum  sit  ei  edificata.'  Quod  opus  sanctus  Kiaranus 
obediens  accepit ;  et  legit  apud  eum  uirgo  psalmos  et  alias  lecciones. 
Et  cum  sanctus  pater  Finnianus  illam  uirginem  in  cellam  et  alias 
sanctas  uirgines  constitueret,  patres  beati  interrogauerunt  sanctum 
Kiaranum  de  moribus  et  honestate  eius ;  dixitque  eis  Kiaranus : 
'  Vere  nec  honestatem  morum  necque  corporis  cognosco  ;  quia  nouit 
Deus  quod  nunquam  faciem  eius  vidi,  necque  aliquid  de  ea,  nisi 
inferiorem  partem  vestimentorum  eius  quando  a  parentibus  suis  ve- 
niebat ;  necque  aliquid  coIIoqu[u]tus  sum  cum  ea  nisi  suam  leccionem 
tantum.'  Illa  enim  commedebat  et  dormiebat  apud  quandam  sanctam 
viduam.  Et  uirgo  similiter  testimonium  de  sancto  Kiarano  dice- 
bat.  Multi  iam  per  alia  testimonia  eorum  in  uera  religione  firmati 
sunt. 

xvii.  Sanctus'  Kiaranus  euangelium  Mathei  apud  sanctum  patrcm 
Finnianum  cum  aliis  legebat ;  et  cum  peruenisset  in  medio  libri  vbi 
dicitur :  '  Omnia  quecumque  vvltis  ut  faciant  uobis  homines,  ita  et 
vos  facite  illis  -,'  dixit  sanctus  Kiaranus  ad  sanctum  Finnianum : 
'  Pater,  sufficit  mihi  hoc  dimidium  huius  libri  quod  legi,  ut  illud  opere 
compleam,  et  vere  sufficit  mihi  ad  docendum  hec  sola  sententia.' 
Tunc  vnus  de  scola  ait  ad  omnes :  '  Ex  hac  hora  congruum  nomen 
est  Kiarano  Leath  Mallia '  (id  est  dimedium  Mathei).  Cui  sanctus 
senior  Finnianus:  '  Non  ;  set  congruum  nomen  ei  est  Lcath  n-Einnn' 
(id  est  dimedium  Hibernie);  '  parrochia  enim  eius  per  medium 
Hibernie  dilatabitur.'  Et  hec  prophetia  multam  invidiam  contra 
sanctum  Kiaranum  suscitauit. 

xviii.  Auo''  die,  cum  sanctus  Kieranus  solus  esset  in  cella  sua*, 
venit  ad  mensam  ut  cibum  sumeret,  et  volens  post  benedictionem 
gustare,  dixit :  '  Benedicite.'  Vidensque  quod  nullus  respondit : 
f.  146  '  '  Dominus,'  |  surrexit  a  mensa,  nichil  manducans.  Similiter  crastina 
die  fecit,  surgens  adhuc  a  mensa  sine  commestione.  Tercio  uero  die 
sic  triduo  ieiunus  veniens  ad  mensam,  dixit  :  '  Benedicite  ; '  et  ecce 
uox  de  celo  dixit  ei :  '  Dominus  benedicat  tibi,  lasse  Kiarane ;  grauis 
est  iam  peticio  tua.  Sufficit  enim  homini,  cum  sit  solus,  cibum  suum 
in  nomine  Dei  summi  benedicere,  et  postea  sumere.'  Et  sic  sanctus 
Kiaranus  gratias  agens,  panem  tertio  die  commedit  ^. 

xix.  QuoDAM  *  tempore  perrexit  ad  regem  Themorie,  qui  uocabatur 
Tuathal  Maelgharb,  eo  quod  esset  asper,  ut  liberaret  quandam  femi- 

'  cf.  L  4142,  which  gives  a  difTerent  version.  ^  Matt.  vii.  12.  ^  =  S  §  9. 
*  cum  .  .  .  solus  iter  ageret  S.  ^  et  .  .  .  iter  impleuit  S  add.  '  =  R'  f.  91 '', 
R'  f.  128'' ;  L  4267  ff.     In  R  §  xix  runs  thus  :   '  Una  dierum  ad  regem  quendam, 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  207 

nam  scruitiiti  initiste  rctentam  apud  regcm  illum  ;  set  rex  non  dimisit 

ei  feminam.     Tunc  sanctus  Kiaranus  bencdixit  illam,  et  preccpit  ei 

ut  sccum  ad  suos  pergerct.    At  illa  statim  surgens  de  domo  regis 

intcr  turbas  hominum  perrexit,  et  nemo  illorum  eam  vidit,  donec 

ipsa  ad  amicos  suos  incolumis  peruenit.     De  hoc  rex  cum  ceteris 

mirabilia  Dei  multum  mirabantur. 

XX.  Alia  '  vice  intrauit  sanctus  Kyaranus  regionem  cuiusdam  ducis 

Connactorum-,  ut   simili   modo   quandam   muHerem   sibi   non  recte 

seruientem  ab  eo  postularet ;   sedensque  ibi  sanctus  Kiaranus,  'ecce' 

tres  viri  cum  tribus  donis  in  elemosinam  venerunt  ad  eum ;   id  est 

vnus  vac[c]am,  alter  sagum,  alius  sartaginem  ei  obtulerunt ;   et  hec 

tria  dona  iHco  sanctus  Kyeranus  pauperibus  se  rogantibus  coram 

duce  dedit.     In  eadem  iam  hora  pro  hiis  donis  alia  maiora  recepit 

coram  duce ;    videlicet  pro  sartagine  cacabum  trium  metretarum,  et 

pro  vno  sago  duodecim  saga,  et  pro  vna  vac[c]a  duodecim  vacce  ab 

aliis  oblate  sunt  ei.     Que  sanctus  Kiaranus  aliis  viris  sanctis  prope 

habitantibus  misit.     Hec  omnia  videns  dux  iHe  benigne  largitus  est 

muherem  illani  sancto  Kiarano  liberam,  que  gaudens  et  gratias  agens 

ad  sua  exiuit  ^. 

Tuath[a]Ium  nomine,  pro  cuiusdam  ancille  liberacione  intercessurus  accessit. 
Cumque  regem  deuote  pro  ea  rogaret,  ac  preces  famuli  Dei  quasi  deliramenta 
sperneret,  nouam  artem  liberacionis  eiusdem  cogitans.  semet  ipsum  regi 
seruiturum  pro  ipsa  decreuit.  Veniente  autem  eo  domum  in  qua  puella  molebat, 
clause  iam  fores  illi  patuerunt.  Intransque,  alterum  se  illi  Paulinum  episcopum 
exhibuit.  Nec  mora,  rex  iilam  emancipauit,  et  insuper  Dei  famulo  suum 
indumentum  donauit.  Quod  ille  accipiens,  continuo  pauperibus  distribuit.' 
The  reference  to  Bede,  H.  E.  ii.  12,  should  be  noted.  L  resembles  R,  but  is 
shorter.  *    =  L  4272  ff.  ^  i.  Furbaidi  L  ;  cf  §  x  supra.  ^  Instead  of 

§  XX  R  has  the  following :  Nocte  quadam  contigit,  ut  eum  doctor  egregius 
Finnianus  cum  annona  frumenti  ad  molendinum  transmitteret.  Regulus  uero 
quidam  prope  habitans,  quendam  de  discipulis  uiri  Dei  illuc  aduenisse  intelligens, 
carnes  et  ceruisiam  ei  per  ministrum  destinauit.  Cumque  illi  exenium  tanti  uiri 
presentaret,  respondit  ipse  :  *  Vt  commune,'  inquit,  *sit  fratribus,  totum  in  os 
molendini  proice.'  Quod  cum  nuncius  compleret,  in  farinam  totum  mutatum 
est.  Quo  audito,  rex  uillam,  in  qua  manebat,  cum  omnibus  bonis  suis  in  per- 
petuum  dedit  illi.  Set  Keranus  suo  condonauit  magistro.  Ibidem  enim 
monasterium  postea  constructum  est.  Panis  uero  de  illa  farina  factus,  uelut 
caro  et  ceruisia  fratribus  sapiebat,  et  eos  sic  recreabat.  (R^  f  93**?  R^  f  128'' ; 
cf.  L  4161  ff.,  which.  however,  expandsand  adds.  R  then  continues.)  Transacto 
autem  temporis  spacio,  accepta  magistri  sui  licentia  et  benedictione,  ad  sanctum 
Nynnidum  in  quadam  insula  [sic  S  ;  silua  R'  R- ;  Colgan  cites  this  passage  in 
AA.  SS.  p.  113"  with  the  false  reading  siliia.  The  island  is  Inis  Maighe  Samh, 
or  Inishmacsaint ;  cf.  Mart,  Don.  Jan.  18]  stagni  Erny  commorantem  properauit. 
Then  comes  the  raising  of  the  three  murdered  monks  (  =  S  %  14),  and  then  the 
incidents  given  in  §§  v  and  vi  supra  ;  after  which  is  added  (R^  f.  92*^,  R-  f.  129**)  : 
Alio  tempore,  solo  eo  in  insula  illa  relicto,  pauperem  quendam  audiuit  in  portu, 
ignem  sibi  dari  rogantem.  Erat  enim  iam  frigidum  tempus  ;  set  ratem  non 
habuit,  ut  pauperis  peticioni,  licet  multum  desideraret,  satisfaceret.  Et  quia 
caritas  omnia  sustinet,  ticionem  ardentem  in  stagnum  proiecit,  et  feruore  [-rem 
MSS.]  dilectionis  mittentis  in  aquis  preualente  [lens  MSS.],  ad  pauperem  usque 
peruenit.  Aliquando  uero  ibidem  moratus  homo  Dei,  cum  licentia  Nynnidi  ad 
sanctum  Endeum  Arnensem  abbatem  properauit ;  and  so  continues  with  §  xxi. 


2o8  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

xxi.  PosT^  hec  sanctus  Kiaranus  perrexit  ad  insulam  nomine  Ara, 
que  est  in  occeano  ad  occassum  vltra  Hyberniam  aliquo  spacio.  Et 
ipsa  insula  semperab  Hybernia  hiabitatur,  in  qua  multitudosanctorum 
virorum  manet,  et  innumerabiles  sancti,  omnibus  incogniti  nisi  soli 
Deo  omnipotenti,  ibi  iacent.  Et  multis  diebus  in  duro  seruicio 
sanctus  Kyranus  sub  sanctissimo  abbate  Henna  liabitauit,  et  magna 
miracula  per  eum  ibi  ostensa  sunt,  et  opera  sanctitatis  adhuc  in  ea 
narrantur.  Cumque  ibi  esset  sanctus  Kiaranus  visionem  hanc  mira- 
bilem  vidit ;  similem  quoque  visionem  sanctus  Enna  vidit ;  id  est 
arborem  magnam  fructiferamque  super  ripam  fluminis  Synna  in 
medio  Hibernie,  cuius  vmbra  protegebat  Hiberniam  omni  parte  ;  et 
rami  eius  vltra  Hiberniam  fluebant  in  mare.  Crastino  autem  die 
sanctus  Kiaranus  istam  visionem  sancto  Enna  narrauit,  quam  statim 
sanctus  pater  Enna  interpretatus  est,  dicens :  '  Arbor  illa  fructifera 
quam  vidisti,  et  ego  similiter  vidi,  tu  ipse  es,  fili  mi,  qui  coram  Deo 
et  hominibus  magnus  eris  ;  et  honor  tuus  Hiberniam  complebit,  et 
vmbra  adiutorii  pietatis  et  gratie  tue  proteget*  eam  a  demonibus, 
plagis,  et  periculis,  et  fructus  tuus  pluriniis  longe  lateque  proficiet. 
f.  146°  Ex  imperio  ergo  Dei  |  vade  tu  sine  mora  ad  locum  in  quo  erit 
resurreccio  tua,  qui  tibi  a  Deo  ostensus  erit,  ut  multis  ibi  proficias.' 
Et  ibi  sanctus  Kiaranus  consecratus  est  sacerdos ;  et  postea  ex 
iussione  sancti  patris  Enna,  et  cum  eius  oracione  et  benediccione  et 
omnium  sanctorum  qui  in  illa  insula  Ara  erant,  sanctus  Kiaranus 
venit  ad  Hyberniam. 

xxii.  OuoDAM^  die  iter  agens  sanctus  Kyaranus,  occurrit  ei  in  via 
quidam  pauper,  et  peciit  ahquid  ab  eo  in  elimosinam,  et  dedit  ei 
sanctus  Kyaranus  cassulam  suam ;  ipse  autem  postea  ibat  in  pallio 
tantum.  Declinauitque  iter  suum  ad  insulam  Cathi*,  que  est  in  ostio 
occiani  contra  occassum,  in  freto  silicet  Luimnich,  inter  regiones 
Kiarraighi  et  Corco  Baiscind  possita;  in  qua  senex  sanctissimus 
Senanus  erat,  qui  primus  in  illa  insula  habitauit.  Bestia  enim 
venenosa  et  valde  nociua  ab  antiquis  temporibus  ipsam  insulam  sola 
possidebat,  quam  sanctus  Senanus  in  virtute  Dei  inde  longe  ad 
quoddam  stagnum  expulsit ;  et  est  clara  et  sancta  ciuitas  hodie  in 
illa  insula  in  honore  sancti  Senani.  Cumque  appropinquaret  sanctus 
Kiaranus  ad  illam  insulam  Cathi,  sanctus  Senanus  spiritu  previdit 
aduentum  eius  et  nuditatem,  et  misit  nauigium  ad  eum  portandum 
in  insulam,  et  accipiens  casulam  oc[c]uIte  ipse  in  manibus  suis,  exiit 
in  obuiam  eius  ad  portum  insule.  Vidensque  beatissimus  Senanus 
sanctum  Kyaranum  ad  se  iii  pallio  venientem,  increpauit  eum  iocu- 
lariter,  dicens  :    '  Nonne  pudor  est,  quod  sacerdos  in  vno  pallio  sine 

>   =L4289ff.  ;  RiR^u.  s.  "  proproteget  m.  pr.  '   =Rif.  92'', 

R2  f.  129  <■ ;  L  4305  ff.  *  Cathaci  R. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  209 

ciicullo  ambulat'?'  Cui  sanctus  Kiaranus,  subridens,  ait:  'Hec 
nuditas  mea  mox  consolacionem  recipiet;  nam  cassula  mihi  esi  sub 
uestimento  senioris  mei  Senani.'  Et  inansit  sanctus  Kiaranus  per 
aiiquot  dies  apud  sanctum  Senanum  in  diuinis  misteriis  uacantes  ;  et 
societatem  et  fraternitatem  inter  se  fecerunt.  Et  postea  sanctus 
Kiaranus  in  osculo  pacis  in  viam  suam  perrexit. 

xxiii.  Veniens-  iam  beatus  Kiaranus  a  sancto  Senano  exiit  ad 
fratres  suos  Luchennum^  et  Odranum,  qui  habitabant  in  cella  que 
dicitur  Yseal,  id  est  ymus  locus ;  et  habitauit  cum  eis  ad  tempus. 
Et  fratres  sui  constituerunt  sanctum  Kiaranum  elimosinarium  suum, 
et  magistrum  hospitum.  Luchennus  autem,  qui  fuit  senior  etate, 
abbas  illius  loci  erat,  et  Odranus'  prior.  Aliquando,  legente  sancto 
Kiarano  foris  in  agro^  contra  solem,  subito  vidit  hospites  lassos 
hospicium  intrantes ;  consurgensque  ipse  cito,  librum  suum  oblitus 
est  foris  apertum  usque  in  crastinum.  Et  ipse  constituens  hospites 
in  domo,  et  pedes  eorum  lauans,  ac  diligenter  ministrans  eis,  nox 
interim  aduenit.  In  illa  silicet  nocte  magna  pluuia  pluit ;  set  Dei 
nutu  liber  apertus  inuentus  est  siccus  et  aridus  ;  nulla  enim  gutta 
pluuie  tetigit  eum,  et  tota  terra  humida  erat  in  circuitu  eius.  De  hoc 
sanctus  Kiaranus  cum  suis  fratribus  laudes  Christo  persoluit. 

sxiv.  luxTA*  illum  locum  sancti  Kiarani  quedam  insula  in  quodam 
stagno  erat,  in  qua  quidam  dominus  cum  suis  satellitibus  in  sua 
municione  habitabat ;  et  clamor  et  tumultus  eorum  oraciones  sancto- 
rum  in  sua  cella  impediebant.  Hoc  videns  sanctus  Kyeranus,  exiit 
ad  oram  stagni,  et  orauit  ad  Dominum  ibi,  ut  aliquid  solacii  ab  |  illa  f.  146'' 
insula  daret  eis.  Et  sequenti  nocte  mota  est  illa  insula  cum  suo 
stagno  diuina  potentia  longius  in  alium  locum,  ubi  clamor  wlgi  illius 
insule  non  perueniebat  ad  sanctos  Dei.  Et  videtur  usque  hodie 
locus  stagni,  vbi  prius  fuerat,  pars  arenosa,  et  pars  humida  in  signuin 
uirtutis. 

XXV.  Quodam'  die,  cum  operatus  esset  sanctus  Kiaranus  foris  in 

agro,  venit   ad   eum   pauper   quidam   rogans  sibi  elemosinam  dari. 

In  illa  hora  currus  cum  duobus  equis  a  quodam  domino,  id  est  filio 

Crimthanni',   sancto  Kiarano   oblatus   est ;   quos   equos   cum  curru 

jsanctus    Kiaranus   illi   pauperi   dedit.     Deinde'   cum   fratres   sancti 

1  Kiarani  non  possent  magnitatem  caritatis  ipsius  sustinere,  ipse  enim 

lcotidie  substantiam  eorum  pauperibus  diuidebat,  dixerunt  ei:  'Frater, 

Irecede  a  nobis ;   iam  non  possumus  simul  tecum  esse  in  vno  loco, 

„  *  Marginal  note  in  M  :  Sacerdotes  olim  cucullati.  '^  =R'  u.s.,  R'^  f.  129*  ; 
IL  4317  ff.  3  ad  cellam  .  . .  Luctigerii  Ri,  Luctigerini  R^.  ■•  MS.  ordinarius. 
|p  in  cimitherio  R.  «   =  Ri  f.  93  «,  R^  u.  s.  ;  L  4327  ff.  '   =  Ri  R=  u.  s. ; 

.  4324  f.         *  iEnghus  mac  Crimthain  L  ;  cf.  §  ii  supra.         '   =  L  4332  fl'. 

•LL'MMKR.  P 


2IO  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

et  fratres  nostros  Deo  seruare  et  nutrire,  pre  nimia  largitate  tua.' 
Quibus'  sanctus  Kiaranus  respondit :  '  Si  ergo  in  isto  loco  mansissem 
non  Ysseal'  (id  est  ymus)  'esset;  id  est  non  paruus  set  altus,  id 
est  magnus  et  honorabilis.'  Hiis  dictis,  benedixit  sanctus  Kiaranus 
fratribus  suis,  et  accipiens  cetlias  suas  cum  libris  in  humeris  suis, 
perrexit  inde  ;  et  egressus  pusillum  a  loco,  occurrit  ei  in  via  ceruus 
mitissime  expectans.  Sanctus  ipse  Kiaranus  posuit  cethas  suas  super 
eum ;  et  quocumque  ceruus  ibat,  beatus  Kiaranus  sequebatur  eum. 
Et  perueniens  ceruus  ad  stagnum  Rii,  quod  est  in  oriente  Connach- 
torum,  stetit  contra  insulam  Angin,  que  est  in  illo  stagno.  Tunc 
sanctus  Kyaranus  intellexit,  quod  ad  insulam  illam  se  Dominus 
uocasset ;  et  dimittens  ceruum  cum  benediccione,  intrauit  illam  in- 
sulam,  et  habitauit  ibi.  Et  audita  fama  sanctitatis  eius,  longe  lateque 
vndique  convenerunt  ad  eum  boni  homines,  et  fecit  sanctus  Kiaranus 
eos  monachos  suos.  Multeque  elimosine  de  diuersis  rebus  sancto 
Kiarano  cum  suis  a  fidelibus  dabantur.  Set  quidam  presbyter,  nomine 
DanieP,  ad  quem  insula  Angin  pertinebat,  invidia  diaboli  instinctus, 
cepit  sanctum  Kyaranum  cum  suis  de  illa  insula  fortiter  expellere. 
Sanctus  uero  Kiaranus,  volens  benefacere  suo  persecutori,  misit  ei 
per  legatos  fideles  donum  regium,  quod  sibi  datum  est  in  elymo- 
sinam,  id  est  antilum  aureum  bene  ornatum.  Quod  presbyter  videns, 
in  primis  renuit  accipere ;  set  postea,  suadentibus  viris  fidelibus, 
gratulanter  accepit.  Et  uenit  ipse  presbyter  Daniel,  repletus  Dei 
gratia,  et  insulam  Angin,  que  erat  in  sua  pos[s]essione,  Deo  et  sancto 
Kiarano  in  eternum  obtulit. 

xxvi.  Alio'  die  cum  esset  sanctus  Kiaranus  in  illa  insula  Angin, 
audiens  uocem  hominis  insulam  volentis  intrare  in  portu,  dixit 
fratribus  suis  :  '  Ite,  fratres  mei,  et  materiam  abbatis  vestri  post  me 
huc  adducite.'  Fratres  autem,  cito  nauigantes,  invenerunt  adole- 
scentulum  laicum*  in  portu,  quem  despicientes  reliquerunt  ibi  ;  et 
reuersi,  dixerunt  ad  sanctum  Kiaranum  :  '  Neminem  ibi  invenimus, 
nisi  puerum  Iaicum,qui  in  siluis  errauit  profugus ;  hicclamat  in  portu, 
cuius  rusticitas  longe  est  ab  abbacia.'  Quibus  sanctus  Kiaranus  ait : 
'  Nauigate  sine  mora,  et  adducite  eum  cicius ;  quia,  Domino  mihi 
reuelante,  ex  uoce  eius  agnoui  quod  ipse  post  me  abbas  vester  erit.' 
f.  147  "  Hoc  audientes  fratres,  ilico  |  adduxerunt  eum  ;  et  sanctus  Kiaranus 
illum  totondit,  et  sedule  legit  apud  eum,  et  replebatur  gratia  Dei 
de  die  in  diem  ;  qui  post  beatissimum  Kiaranum  sanctus  abbas  fuit. 
Ipse  enim  est  beatus  Aengus  fihus  Luigse''. 

^  Quibus  ipse  acquiesce[n]s,  et  uale  in  Domino  faciens,  ad  insulam  quandam 
se  transtulit,  nomine  Anginam  R  ;  which  substitutes  for  the  remainder  of  the 
section  a  long  discourse  on  Ciaran's  virtues.  ^  do  Breatnaibh  dho  L,  i.  e.  he 
was  a  Briton.  »   =  R'  f.  93'',  R''  f.  129'' ;  L  4349  S.  *  illiteratura  R. 

'  Enna  [v.  I.  Oenu]  mac  hui  Laigsi  L  ;  Oenius  R. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  211 

xxvii.  Euangelium'  sancti  Kierani  a  quodam  fratre  illud  habente 
in  nauigio  incaute  in  stagnum  cecidit,  et  multo  tempore  erat  in  eo 
sub  aquis,  et  non  inuentum  est.  Die  autcm  quadam  estiuo  tempore 
vacce  intrauerunt  stagnum,  ut  pro  nimio  ardore  se  in  aquis  rcfrigera- 
rent ;  cumque  de  lacu  redissent  vac[c]e,  sarcina  cetfie,  que  erat  de 
pelle  facta,  in  qua  ciiangelium  positum  erat,  circa  pcdem  vacce 
adhcsit,  ct  sic  vacca  in  pede  cetham  traxit  secum  ad  terram  ;  et 
inuentus  est  liber  cuangelii  in  cetha  pellicea  putrifacta  siccus,  et 
aridus,  atque  candidus,  sine  vllo  humore,  acsi  conditus  esset  in 
biblioteca.     De  hoc  sanctus  Kiaranus  cum  suis  gauissus  est  ^. 

xxviii.  Post'  hec  quidam  vir  de  Mumonia,  silicet  de  gente  Corco 
Bascind,  nomine  Donnanus,  venit  ad  sanctum  Kia'ra'num  in  insula 
Angin  manentem.  Cui  quodam  die  sanctus  Kiaranus  ait :  '  Quid 
queris,  pater,  islis  finibus  ? '  Sanctus  Donnanus  respondit  :  '  Quero, 
domine,  locum  ad  manendum.vbi  Christo  seruiam  in  peregrinacione.' 
Dixitei  sanctusKiaranus:  'Mane,pater,in  istoloco;  egoenim  vadamad 
alium  locum  quendam  ;  scio  enim  quia  non  est  hic  resurrectio  mea.' 
Tunc  sanctus  Kyaranus  insulam  Angin  cum  supellictili  sancto 
Donnano  concessit,  et  venit  ad  locum  qui  dicitur  Ard  Mantain, 
iuxta  flummen  Sinna;  et  nolens  in  loco  illo  habitare,  dixit  :  '  Nolo 
habitare  in  isto  loco  ;  habundancia  enim  magna  huius  seculi  hic  erit, 
et  mundana  iocunditas  ;  et  difficile  anime  discipulorum  meorum  ad 
celum  poterunt  ire,  si  hic  habitauero  ;  locus  enim  iste  ad  seculares 
pertinet.'  Postea  reliquit  sanctus  Kiaranus  locum  illum,  et  venit  ad 
locum  qui  quondam  dicebatur  Tj'prait  *,  modo  autem  Cluain  meic 
Nois  vocatur^  Et  veniens  ad  ipsum  locum,  dixit  :  '  Hic  habitabo  ; 
multe  enim  anime  in  hoc  loco  exibunt  ad  regnum  Dei  ;  et  in  hoc  loco 
mea  resurreccio  erit.'  Deinde  beatissimus  Kiaranus  cum  suis  habi- 
tauit,  et  cepit  magnum  monasterium  ibi  fundare  ;  et  multi  vndique 
veniebant  ad  eum,  et  parrochia  eius  per  circuitum  multum  dilatata 
est ;  et  nomen  sancti  Kiarani  per  totam  Hiberniam  multum  celebratur. 
Et  clara  ac  sancta  ciuitas  in  ipso  loco  in  honore  sancti  Kiarani 
creuit,  cuius  nomen  Cluain  meic  Nois  vocatur;  que  est  in  occidentali 
plaga  regionis  Nepotum  Neill  super  ripam  orientalem  fluminis 
Synna,  contra  provinchiam  Connactorum ;  in  qua  siue  reges  siue 
duces  nepotum  Neill  et  Connactorum  apud  sanctum  Kiaranum 
isepeliuntur.      Flumen   enim    Synna,  quod   est  fructiferum  ualde  in 

iuersis  piscibus,  regiones  Neill,  id  est  Midhi,  et  provinchiam 
Connactorum  diuidit.  Et  volens  sanctus  Kiaranus  ponere  tignam 
suis   manibus  in   primo  edificio  illius  ciuitatis,  magus  quidam  dixit 

=  L  4356  ff.  2  Hence  the  place  called  Port  in  t-Sosceoil  (i.e.  Portiis 

Euangelii)  in  Hare  Island  L.  ^   =  Ri  R^  u.  s.  ;  L  4361  ff.,  which  adds 

leveral  particulars.  <  Ard  Tiprat  L,  probably  rightly.  ^  Cluaynensis 

ippellatur  ciuitas  R  ;  which  omils  the  rest  of  the  section. 

P2 


212  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ei :  '  Hora  ista  non  est  bona  ad  incipiendum  ;  signum  enim  huius 
hore  contrarium  principiis  edificiorum  est '.'  Tunc  ipse  sanctus 
Kiaranus  posuit  tignam  in  angulo  domus,  dicens :  '  Contra  signum 
tuum  figo  tignam  istam  in  terram,  mage,  quia  de  arte  magorum  non 
f-  '^''curo;  set  in  nomine  Domini  mei,  lesu  Christi,  omnia  opera  |  mea 
facio.'  De  hoc  ille  magus  cum  suis  fidem  sancti  Kiarani  in  Deo  suo 
admirans,  laudauit. 

xxix.  CuM  '  essetsanctus  Kiaranus  in  sua  ciuitate  Cluain  meic  Nois, 
optima  cassula  aquodam  homine  oblata  est  ei  in  elimosinam  ;  et  voluit 
sanctus  Kyaranus  illam  predicto  sancto  seniori  Senano  in  insulam  Cathi 
manenti  mittere  ;  set  non  potuit  statim  invenire  conductum,  quia  longa 
via,  et  aspera,  atque  difficilis,  per  confinia  diuersarum  regionum  a 
ciuitate  sancti  Kiarani  Cluain  meic  Nois,  que  est  in  medio  Hybernie, 
usque  ad  insulam  Cathi  in  ostio  occeani  positam.  Tunc,  iubente  sancto 
Kiarano,  posita  est  cassula  super  flumen  Synna,  et  dimissa  est  sola 
cum  flumine,  et  pefuenit  sicca  super  aquas  usque  ad  insulam  Cathi ; 
et  nemo  vidit  eam,  dum  peruenit  illuc.  Flumen  iam  Synna  a  ciuitate 
Cluain  meic  Nois  vadit  in  freto  Luimnich,  in  quo  insula  Cathi  constat. 
Et  ait  sanctus  Senanus  fratribus  suis  repletus  spiritu  prophetie  : 
'  Ite  ad  litus  maris,  et  hospitem  ibi  sedentein,  donum  viri  Dei,  ad 
nos  cum  honore  deducite.'  Fratres  autem,  nichil  interrogantes, 
perrexerunt  ad  mare,  et  invenerunt  ibi  cassulam  siccam  et  aridam ; 
intacta  enim  erat  ab  aquis.  Et  accipiens  eam,  sanctus  senex 
Senanus  gratias  egit  Deo  ;  et  erat  in  custodia  venerabili  illa  cassula 
apud  sanctum  Senanum,  quasi  diadema  sanctum. 

XXX.  QuiDAM  ^  puer  de  familia  sancti  Kiarani,  qui  dicebatur  Crithir 
Cluana^,  eo  quod  ipse  erat  ingeniossus,  set  ipse  noci[u]us  et  petulcus, 
fugit  a  sancto  Kiarano  ad  ciuitatem  Saigyr,  in  aquilonali  Mumonie 
plaga,  id  est  in  terra  Hele  positam,  ad  alium  Kiaranum  sanctissimum 
senem  episcopum.  Et  inanens  ille  puer  apud  sanctum  episcopum  per 
aliquot  dies,  more  suo  diabolico  accepit  potum  fratrum,  et  effudit  super 
ignem,  et  extinxit  inde  ignem  consecratum^  Et  sanctus  senex  Kiara- 
nus  nolebat  ignein  alium  in  suo  monasterio,  nisi  consecratum  ignem 
a  pascha  usque  ad  pascha  sine  extinccione.  Et  audiens  sanctus  senex 
Kiaranus  quod  fecit  puer  Crithir",  valde  displicuit  ei,  et  dixit :  '  Corri- 
gatur  inde  in  hoc  seculo  a  Deo.'  Ille  audiens  sanctum  senem  iratum 
sibi,  egressus  est  de  ciuitate  Saigyr ;  et  perueniens  modicum  spacium 
a  ciuitate,  occurrerunt  ei  luppi,  et  occiderunt  eum  ;  set  nec  corpus 

1  MS.  hz  (habet).  ^    =  L  4310  ff.  '    =^4424^.  <  i.  e.  Crithir  of 

Cluain  [meic  Nois] ;    the  MS.  reads   Cluana  Crithire  ;  L  has  Crichid  Cliiana, 
but  Crithir,  which  means  Spark,  is  probably  right.  ^  isin  cuchtair  (i.  e.  in 

the  kitchen)  (uid.  L.  ^  MS.  Crithire. 


i 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  213 

eius  tetigerunt,  postquam  mortuus  fuit,  sccundum  similitudinem 
inophete  illius  a  leone  occisi  ^  Audiens  auteni  sanctus  iunior 
Kiaranus  puerum  suum  apud  scnem  Kiaranum  fuisse,  perrexit  ad 
euin  ;  et  illo  die  quo  predicta  facta  sunt,  venit  ad  ciuitatem  Saigyr,  et 
receptus  est  cum  honore  dcbito  a  sancto  sene  Kiarano  episcopo.  Et 
ait  sanctus  iunior  Kiaranus  abbas  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum  episcopum : 
'  Redde  mihi,  sancte  pater,  discipulum  meum  viuum,  qui  apud  te 
occissus  est.'  Cui  senex  sanctus  Kiaranus  dixit :  '  Prius  pedes  vestros  ^ 
lauari  oportet,  set  ignem  non  habemus  in  monasterio,  ut  aqua  vobis 
calificetur ;  et  scitis  quia  discipulus  vester  ignem  consecratum  extinxit. 
Igitur  petite  nobis  a  Deo  ignem  consecratum.'  Tunc  sanctus  iunior 
Kiaranus  abbas,  filius  artificis,  extendit  manus  suas  in  oracionem  ad 
Deum ;  et  ilico  ignis  de  celo  in  sinum  eius  venit,  et  inde  focus  accensus 
est  in  monasterio.  Sanctus  autem  senex  |  Kiaranus  episcopus  orauit  f.  147 ' 
ad  Deum  pro  illo  iuuene  a  luppis  occiso,  et  ilico  a  morte  crudeli  ipse 
surrexit  sanus,  apparentibus  in  eo  cicatricibus  morsuum  lupporum. 
Et  benedicens  omnibus,  cibum  et  potum  cum  sanctis  sumpsit ;  et 
postea  multis  diebus  vixit.  Tunc  duo  sancti  Kiarani  societatem  et 
fraternitatem  inter  posteros  suos  in  celo  et  in  terra  fecerunt ;  et  dixe- 
runt  ut,  si  quis  vellet  nominare  vel  petere  aliquid  ab  vno  eorum,  eos 
ambos  nominaret,  et  peteret ;  ipsi  enim  audirent.  Post  hoc  sanctus 
iunior  Kiaranus  abbas  dixit  ad  seniorem  Kyaranum  episcopum  :  '  In 
tuo  loco,  pater,  honor  et  habundancia  diuiciaruni  manebit.'  Cui  ait 
sanctus  senex  Kiaranus  episcopus  :  '  In  tuo  quoque  loco,  fili  karissime, 
vigor  religionis  et  sapientie  usque  ad  finem  seculi  constabit.'  Hiis 
dictis,  acceptoque  osculo  pacis  et  benedictione  sanctissimi  senis 
Kiarani  episcopi,  iunior  sanctus  Kiaranus  cum  suis  et  predicto  iuuene 
Crithir  ad  suam  ciuitatem  Cluain  meic  Nois  regressus  est. 

xxxi.  QuoDAM '  die  cum  fratres  sancti  Kiarani  in  messe  laborarent, 
per  solis  ardorem  sustinentes  sitim,  miserunt  ut  frigida  aqua  eis 
portaretur.  Quibus  sanctus  Kiaranus  respondit  per  nuncium : 
'  Eligite  vos,  fratres  mei,  vtrum  bibetis,  ut  extinguatis  sitim  vestram 
pro  necessitate,  an  paciemini  in  siti  vsque  ad  uesperam,  vt 
per  vestrum  laborem  hodie  in  siti  et  sudore  habundancia  sit  fratri- 
bus  qui  in  hoc  loco  futuri  sunt ;  et  vos  ipsi  non  eritis  vacui  a 
mercede  a  Deo  in  celis.'  Fratres  responderunt :  '  Nos  eligimus  ut 
posterioribus  nostris  sufficiencia  sit,  et  nos  ipsi  mercedem  paciencie 
et  sitis  habeamus  in  celo.'  Et  sic  fratres  in  siti  illa  die  leti,  sole 
feruente,  laborauerunt.  Vespere  autem  facto,  fratres  venientes 
domum,  voluit  sanctus  Kiaranus  placere  eis,  et  caritatiue  eos  reficere. 
Et  confidens  in  Domino,  benedixit  vas  magnum  plenum  aqua  ;  et  ilico 

'  3  Reg.  xiii.  '  MS.  -tri.  ^  Ri  f.  93 ",  R^  f.  129''  (oraitting  the  story 

about  Columba,  ;  L  4402  ff. 


214  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

sub  manibus  eius  vinum  valde  optimum  apparuit  in  vasse.  Apponens- 
que  ipse  cibaria,  iussit  fratribus,  ut  cum  sobrietate  corpora  sua  bene 
reficerent,  gratias  Christo  pro  suis  donis  agentes.  Hec  est  cena 
sancti  Kiarani  fratribus  suis  postrema  in  vita  sua,  ipso  ministrante, 
nam  postea  paucis  diebus  vixit ;  et  ipsa  cena  erat  ualde  benignissima 
et  precellens  omnibus  cenis  que  facte  sunt  in  monasterio  sancti 
Kiarani,  sicut  in  hac  re  probatur.  Post  longum  enini  tempus,  cum 
sanctus  Columba  cum  sua  familiain  Hiberniam  abinsula  Hiavenisset, 
preparata  est  eis  cena  magna  in  monasterio  sancti  Kiarani  in  sua  ciui- 
tate  Ciuain.  Et  cum  ilh  venissent  ad  cenobium  sancti  Kiarani,  suscepti 
sunt  in  magna  hilaritate  et  diligentia  ;  et  illa  cena  refecti  sunt  largis- 
sime,  et  fama  ipsius  refectionis  per  totam  ciuitatem  et  eius  circuitum 
late  diuulgabatur.  Cumque  quidam  de  impericiai  in  domo  sanctorum 
seniorum  qui  habebant  cellulam  seorsum  in  monasterio  sancti  Kiarani, 
loquerentur,  quod  nunquam  in  illo  loco  talis  cena  facta  est,  nec  in 
futuro  esset,  unus,  qui  erat  puer  viuente  sancto  Kiarano  illic,  re- 
spondit :  '  Nescitis  vos,  quod  miramini ;  cena  enim,  quam  sanctus 
t  147 ''  Kiaranus,  patronus  noster,  de  aqua  in  vinum  conuersa  1  fecit  fratribus 
suis  de  messe  sicientibus,  melior  ualde  erat  quam  ista  cena.  Vt  hoc 
vos  sciatis,  et  credatis  quia  verum  est,  venite  et  videte  odorem  digiti 
mei  quo  ego  hauriebam  vinum  illud  fratribus.  PoIIex  enim  meus 
trans  oram  calicis  in  quo  vinum  hauriebatur,  tangebat  liquorem  ;  et 
ecce  adhuc  odor  illius  manet  in  eo.'  Tunc  omnes  accedentes  ad  eum, 
saciati  sunt  suaui  et  dulci  odore  sancti  senis  illius,  et  clamauerunt, 
dicentes  :  '  Vere  melior  multum  fuit  cena  illa,  cuius  odor  in  digito  per 
multum  tempus  manet  suauissimus.'  Et  benedixerunt  sanctum 
Kiaranum,  Deo  laudes  dantes.  Et  in  illis  diebus'  quibus  fratres 
sancti  Kyarani  segetes  suas  mettebant,  mercatores  cum  vino  Gallorum 
venerunt  ad  sanctum  Kiaranum,  et  impleuerunt  ingentem  vas ',  soli- 
tanam  fratrum,  de  vino  illo,  quod  sanctus  Kiaranus  fratribus  suis  cum 
sua  benedictione  dedit  ■". 

1  MS.  Tpacia  ;  ?  imperitis.  '  This  is  evidently  taken  from  another  version 

of  the  incident,  in  wliich  the  wine  was  supplied  non-miraculously  by  the  advent 
of  merchants  from  Gaul.  The  same  conllation  appears  even  more  clearly  in  L. 
^  vas  vas  m.  pr.  ^  Here  R  inserts  the  following  miracles  (R^  f.  93*^,  R* 

f.  129'')  :  irt  Dic  quadam,  cum  in  uia  inccderet,  nephandissimi  latrones,  eum 
comprehendentes,  caput  beati  uiri  radere  ceperunt.  Set  quod  peruersitas 
hominis  delere  uoluit,  diuina  pietas  ad  magni  miraculi  ostensionem  conuertit. 
Rassorum  enim  capillorum  loco  alii  statim  capilli  crescebant.  |  Quo  miraculo 
latrones  perculsi,  ad  veritatis  semitam  sunt  conuersi ;  ac  deinceps  diuine  milicie 
sub  tanto  duce  seruientes,  in  sancta  conuersacione  uitam  finierunt.  (li)  Alio 
tempore  bonus  pastor  percora  pascens,  tres  pauperes  ei  occurrerunt.  Quorum 
primo  capam,  secundo  pallium,  tercio  tunicam  contulit.  Abeuntibus  uero  illis, 
uiri  quidam,  secularis  uite  professores,  adueniunt.  A  quibus  quoniam  uesti- 
mentorum  expertem  se  uideri  erubuit,  adiutor  in  oportunitatibus  Dominus  aqua 
eum  circumdedit  adeo,  quod  preter  caput  nullum  membrum  illi  uidere  potuerunt. 
Set  postquam  hic  uiri  transierunt,  aqua  illa  mox  disparuit  [desperauit  R*  R"]. 
{c)  Elapso  post  hoc  tempore,  quidam  satellites  diabuli  uirum  quendam,  iuxta 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  CLUAIN  215 

xxxii.  Sanxtissimus'  noster  patronus  Kiaranus  vno  tantum  anno 
vixit  in  sua  ciuitate  Cluain.  Cumque  sciuit  ipse  diem  obitus  sui 
appropinquare,  propiictauit  plorans  dc  malis  posterioribus  qui  post 
se  in  suo  loco  futuri  essent ;  et  dixit  quod  vita  corum  parua  esset. 
Tunc  fratres  dixerunt  ei :  '  Quid  ergo  faciemus,  pater,  in  tempore 
malorum  illorum  .'  Vtrum  hic  iuxta  reliquias  tuas  manebimus?  an  ad 
alia  loca  pergemus.''  Quibus  ait  sanctus  Kiaranus  :  'Festinate  ad 
alia  loca  pacifica,  et  meas  reliquias  relinquite  quasi  ossa  arida  cerui 
in  monte ;  melius  est  enim  vobis  ut  cum  spiritu  meo  sitis  in  celo, 
quam  iuxta  ossa  mea  in  terra  cuni  scandalo  esse.'  Sanctus  autem 
Kiaranus  multum  corpus  suum  crucifigebat,  et  eius  exemplum  scribi- 
mus.  Ceruical  lapideum  sub  capite  semper  habebat,  quod  vsque 
hodie  in  monasterio  sancti  Kiarani  manet,  et  ab  omnibus  veneratur. 
Cum  autem  ipse  infirmaretur,  noluit  illum  lapidem  a  se  moueri,  set 
iussit  illum  humeris  suis  apponi,  ut  laborem  usque  ad  mortem  haberet 
causa  in  celo  perpetui  premii.  Cum  -  iam  hora  exitus  sui  appropin- 
quaret,  iussit  se  portari  extra  domum  foras,  et  aspiciens  in  celum, 
dixit  :  '  Ardua  est  ista  via",  et  hec  necessaria  est.'  Cui  fratres 
dixerunt :  '  Scimus  quia  nichil  difficile  est  tibi,  pater,  set  nos  miseri 
hanc  horam  multum  debemus  timere.'  Et  reductus  in  domum 
eleuauit  manum  suam,  et  benedixit  populum  suum  et  clerum,  et  acccpto 
sacrificio  dominico,  v.  idus  Septembris  emissit  spiritum,  trigesimo 
tercio  etatis  sue  anno.  Et  ecce  angeli  repleuerunt  viam  inter  celum 
et  terram  gaudentes  in  obuiam  sancti  Kiarani.  Et  tercia  nocte  post 
obitum  sancti  Kiarani  veniens  sanctissimus  abbas  Coemhgenus*  de 
provinchia  Laginensium  ad  exequias  sancti  Kiarani ;  et  locutus  est 
sanctus  Kiaranus  ad  sanctum  Coemhgenum,  et  mutacionem  vestium 
fecerunt,  et  fraternitatem  inter  se  et  inter  suos  semper  fecerunt.  Hoc 
iam  diligenter  longa  sententia  in  vita  ipsius  Coemhgeni  narratur '. 

xxxiii.  AuDiENs'  sanctus  Columba  obitum  sancti  Kiarani  dixit : 
'  Benedictus  Deus,  qui  sanctissimum  Kiaranuin  de  hoc  seculo  in 
iuuentute  sua  ad  se  uocauit.  Si  enim  viuus  esset  usque  ad  sene- 
ctutem,  invidia  multorum  esset  contra  eum  ;  valde  enim  parrochiam 
Hibernie  apprehenderet.'  Et  fecit  |  sanctus'  Columba  ympnum  f.  148 <• 
sancto  Kiarano,  et  demonstrans  ipse  illum  in  ciuitate  Cluain,  ait  ei 

monasterium  eius  commorantem,  interficere  conabantur.  Quem,  beato  uiro  pro 
eo  orante,  Deus  mirabiliter  eripuit.  Illum  [?  IUi]  enim  eundem  uirum  iugulantes, 
statuam  quandam  lapideam  percuciebant.  Quo  tandem  percepto,  latrones  curde 
compuncti,  ad  pastorem  animarum  Queranum  properant,  culpam  humiliter 
recognoscunt,  atque  uite  sue  emendato  calle,  sub  iugo  Christi  usque  ad  mortem 
fideliter  seruierunt.  '   =  R'  f.  93'',  R-  f.  130"  :  L  4440  ff.  -  R  omits 

this  beautiful  storj-.  ^  MS.  vita  ;  but  L  sliows  that  via  is  the  right  reading : 

'  as  aghasta  in  set  sa  suas,'  i.  e.  dread  is  this  path  on  high.  *  Altered  frora 

Caem-.  '  Coemghen  §  xxviii.  ®  =  R'  94  ",  R-  u.  s.  ;  L  4472  fi".  '  sanctus 
bis  m.  pr. 


2i6  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

cessor'  sancti  Kiarani :  '  Clarus  et  laudabilis  est  iste  ympnus;  que 
igitur  merces  tibi,  pater,  reddeturr'  Respondit  sanctus  Columba : 
'  Date  mihi  duas  manus  meas  plenas  de  humo  sepulchri  sancti  patris 
vestri,  Kiarani ;  illud  enim  plus  volo  et  diligo  puro  auro  et  gemmis 
preciossis.'  Accipiensque  sanctus  Columba  humum  de  sepulcro 
sancti  Kiarani,  perrexit  ad  suam  insulam  Hya.  Cumque  sanctus 
Columba  in  mari  nauigas[s]et,  orta  est  tempestas  in  mari,  et  nauis 
trusa  est  ad  carubdem,  qui  locus  scotice  Cori  Bracayn  dicitur ; 
in  quo  est  vorago  periculosissima  marina,  in  qua  si  que  naues 
intrant,  non  euadunt.  Et  incipiens  vorago  nauem  ad  se  trahere, 
beatus  Columba  partem  de  humo  sancti  Kyarani  proiecit  in  mare- 
Mirum  ualde  dictu  ;  ilico  tempestas  aeris,  mocio  fluctuum,  vorago 
circuire  simul  omnes  cessauerunt,  donec  nauis  inde  longe  exiuit. 
Tunc  sanctus  Columba  gratias  agens  Deo,  dixit  ad  suos  :  '  Videte, 
fratres,  quantam  gratiam  attulit  nobis  humus  beatissimi  Kiarani.' 

xxxiv.  Beatissimus  ^  Kiaranus  viuens  inter  homines  vitam  angeli- 
cam  ducebat ;  gratia  enim  Sancti  Spiritus  in  vvltu  eius  coram  oculis 
hominum  ardebat.  Conversationem  autem  eius  temporalem  quis 
homo  poterit  enarrare.'  Ipse  iam  iuuenis  etate  et  corpore  erat,  senex 
autem  sanctissimus  mente  et  moribus ;  in  humilitate,  in  lenitate,  in 
caritate,  in  laboribus  diurnis,  in  vigiliis  nocturnis,  et  ceteris  diuinis 
operibus.  Modo  enim  viuit  in  requie  sine  labore,  in  etate  sine  sene- 
ctute,  in  sanitate  sine  dolore,  in  leticia  sine  merore,  in  pace  sine  hoste, 
in  habundancia  sine  egestate,  in  sempiterna  die  sine  nocte,  in  regno 
eterno  sine  fine,  ante  tribunal  Christi.  Qui  cum  Patre  et  Spiritu 
Sancto  viuit  et  regnat  in  secula  seculorum.     Amen. 

EXPLICIT   VITA    SANCTI    KlARANI    ABBATIS    DE   ClUAIN    MEIC    NoIS 

1  'uel  successor  ',  m.  sec.  '   =L  4484  ff.  ;  instead  of  this  section  R^  R^ 

give  a  hymn  (printed  from  these  MSS.  in  Bernard  and  Atkinson's  edition  of  the 
Liber  Hymnorum  ii.  219J  with  the  rubric  '  metrum  de  eo  sic  '. 


Viia  sanrti  (Ciarani  rpisropi  tir  ^aigir 

Incipit'  sancti  Kyarani  episcopi  et  confessoris^  vita 

i.  Beatissimus  '  episcopus  Kyaranus*  Hybernie  sanctorum  pri-f.  106' 
mogenitus  de  occidentali  plaga  Laginensium,  que  dicitur  Osraygi^ 
oriundus  fuit.  In  tempore  quo  ipse  natus  est,  omnes  Hybernenses ' 
gentiles  erant.  Pater  eius  uocabatur  Lugneus,  qui  erat  de  nobiliori- 
bus  gentis  Osraigi ;  mater  uero  Liadain "  dicebatur,  que  orta  est  de 
australi  plaga  IVIumenensium,  id  est  de  gente  que  dicitur  Corcu 
Laiglidhe '.  Mater  iam  eius,  antequam  ipsum  conciperet,  vidit  in 
sompnis  stellam  in  os  suum  cadere.  Et  hoc  narrans  magis,  illi 
dixerunt  ei :  '  Paries  filium  qui  erit  uir  venerabilis,  cuius  fama  et 
uirtus  per  totam  Hyberniam  usque  ad  finem  mundi  erit.'  Deinde 
conceptus  est  electus  Dei  Kyaranus,  natusque  et  nutritus  est  in 
regione  Corca  Laighdhe,  videlicet  in  Clera  insula.  Vere  enim  ex 
utero  matris  sue  elegit  eum  Deus  ;  quia  cum  esset  nomen  Christi  tunc 
in  Hybernia  inauditum,  rigor  Christiane  religiositatis  in  eo  ilico  cepit 
oriri.  Mirabantur  iam  parentes  eius,  et  omnes  qui  eum  videbant, 
de  sobrietate  mentis  eius,  de  pietate  nature,  de  dulcedine  eloquii,  de 
ieiuniis  oportunis,  de  consiliis  perfectis,  et  de  ceteris  que  ad  sanctos 
uiros  pertinent. 

ii.  Qu.\DAM '  die  ibi  in  predicta  insula  Clera  inicium  miraculorum 
sancti  Kyarani  hoc  modo  diuinitus  factum  est.  Cum  iam  ipse  esset 
ibi  puer,  miluus  ex  aere  descendens  auiculam  quandam  super  nidum 
suum  cubantem  coram  sancto  Kj'arano  apprehendit,  et  in  suis  ungulis 
sursum  in  aerem  rapuit.  Hoc  videns  puer  beatus '°,  nimis  de  hac 
miseria  doluit,  et  orans  pro  rapta,  ilico  rapax  cum  preda  rediit,  et 
auiculam  semiviuam  wlneratam  ante  se  posuit.  Que  misera  statim 
in  conspectu  piissimi  pueri  secundum  uelle  cordis  eius  Dei  gratia 
sanata  est ;  et  cum  gaudio  super  nidum  incolumis  ante  sanctum 
cubauit. 

iii.  Triginta  ^'  annis  sanctus  Kyaranus  in  sanctitate  et  integritate  f.  106'' 
corporis  et  anime  in  Hybernia  habitauit  sine  baptismo  ^' ;  quia  gentiles 

'  On  the  lower  margin  of  M  is  an  Irish  pedigree  agreeing  almost  exactly  with 
that  in  LL.  352''.  2  pontificis  de  Saygir  R.  »   =S  §§  i,  2  ;  R^  f.  199'' ; 

Capg.   ii.   320  ;    Du.  c.   i.  *  Piranus   qui   .   .   .   Keranus  vocatur  Capg. 

'  -raigi  T.  ^'  Hi-  T.  '  Lidania  S   R  ;    ex   patre  Domuel  et  matre 

Wingella  Capg.  ^  .(jg  x.  '   =  S  §  2  ;  R*  u.  s.  Capg.  u.  s. ;  not  in  Du. 

1»  beatus  puer  T.  "   ■=  S  §  3  ;  R^,  Capg.  u.  s.  Du.  cc.  i,  a.  "  per  annos 

,  multos  catecuminus  perseuerans  R  S. 


V 


2i8  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

tunc  erant  Hybernenses  *,  sicut  supra  diximus.  Set  tamen,  inspirante 
Sancto  Spiritu  in  suo  sancto  famulo  Kyarano,  religiosus  perfectusque 
in  moribus  ipse  viuebat.  Et  audiens  famam  Chiristiane  religionis  in 
urbe  Roma  esse,  deseruit  Hyberniam,  et  adiuit  Romam.  Perueniens- 
que  ^  illuc,  baptissatus  est,  et  doctus  in  fide  catholica  ;  ibique  viginti " 
annis  mansit,  legens  diuinas  scripturas,  librosque  earum  colligens, 
ecclesiasticas  regulas  sedulus  discens.  Et  uidens  populus  Romanus 
sapienciam  et  prudenciam,  religiositatem  et  fidem  viri  Dei  Kyarani, 
ibi  ordinatus  est  episcopus ;  et  deinde  missus  est  ad  patriam  suam 
Hyberniam*.  Et  occurrit  ei  'in  via'  in  Italia  sanctus  Patricius,  arci- 
episcopus  tocius  Hybernie,  et  videntes  se  inuicem,  sancti  Dei  gauisi 
sunt.  Tunc  sanctus  Patricius  non  erat  episcopus,  set  postea  a  Cele- 
stino  papa  ordinatus  est  arciepiscopus,  et  missus  est  ad  predicandum 
in  Hyberniam.  Cui  iam,  quamuis  alii  sancti  ante  se  erant  in  Hy- 
bernia,  Deus  custodiuit  magisterium  et  omnem  arciepiscopatum 
Hybernie ;  quia  per  neminem  reges  uel  duces  Hybernie  ante 
Patricium  Deo  crediderunt.  Et  ait  Patricius  ad  Kyaranum :  '  Vade 
ad  Hyberniam  ante  me ;  et  adi^fontem  in  medio  Hybernie  in  con- 
finio  australium  et  aquilonalium  Hybernensium,  qui  uocatur  Fuaran^ 
et  constitue  ibi  monasterium ;  quia  illic  honor  tuus  et  resurrectio 
tua  erit.'  Cui  sanctus  Kyaranus  dixit :  '  Locus,  in  quo  ille  fons  con- 
stat,  ignotus  est  mihi.'  Respondit  ei  sanctus  Patricius :  '  Care 
frater,  perges  tu  securus,  et  Dominus  tecum  erit ;  et  accipe  hoc 
cymbalum  socium  yteneris,  quod  erit  mutum  usque  dum  per- 
uenias  ad  predictum  fontem.  Et  cum  illuc  perueneris,  cymbalum 
tuum  dabit  claram  uocem,  et  sonabit  dulciter.  Et  post  triginta  annos 
ego  ad  te  ueniam  in  illo  loco.'  Et  osculantes  et  benedicentes  se 
inuicem  serui  Dei,  sanctus  Kyaranus  iter  suum  direxit  ad  Hyberniam. 
Beatus  autem  Patricius  mansit  in  Ytalia.  Ab  illo  die  cymbalum 
sancti  Kyarani  mutum  sine  uoce  ulla  erat,  donec  peruenit  ad  fontem 
P"uaran,  sicut  predixit  sanctus  Patricius. 

iv.  Veniens'  sanctus  Kyaranus  in  Hyberniam,  Deus  direxit  eum  ad 
fontem  Fuaran,  et  ibi  ilico  cymbalum  viri  Dei  aperta  uoce  lucide 
clamauit,  quod  cymbalum  barthanus  Kyarani  uocatur",  et  habetur 
cum  magno  honore  in  ciuitate  et  in  tota  parrochia  sancti  Kyarani; 
Ducitur  enim  per  regiones  ad  coniuraciones  principum,  ad  defen- 
sionem   pauperum,   et  ad   exactionem  tributorum  monasterii  sancti 


*  Hi-  T  ;  here  the  fragment  in  T  ends.  ^  Here  Br.  begins.  '  quin- 

decim   Capg.  *  S  R    omit   the  rest  of  the   section  ;    and  also   §§   iv-vi. 

^  MS.  adii.  **  Waran  Capg.  fi.  e.  uuaran).  '   =Capg.  ii.  321  ;  Br.  c.  i^J 

Du.  c.  2^.  ^  i.  an  bardan  Ciarain,  doroine  German  gabha  do  grasaibh  Dd 

Br.,  i.  e.  the  Dumb  Bell  (V)  of  Ciaran,  which  Germanus  the  smith  made  by  the 
grace  of  God. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  SAIGIR  219 

Kyarani.  Quod  uero  cymbalum  factum  est  apud  Germanum  episco- 
pum,  iiiagistruni  sancti  Patricii.  Fons  uero  ille,  sicut  supradictum  est, 
in  continio  duarum  'parcium'  Ilybernie  constat,  set  tamen  in 
australi  plaga,  in  regione  Mumenie,  vidclicet  in  plebe  que  uocatur 
I  lele.  Et  cepit  beatus  |  pontifex  Kj-aranus  ibi  quasi  heremita  habitare ;  f.  107 ' 
quia  heremus  lata  densa  siluis  per  circuitum  erat.  Et  de  vili  materia 
ceilulam  suam  incepit,  et  inde  monasterium.  Et  postea  ciuitas  creuit 
Dei  dono  per  gratiam  sancti  Kyarani.  Que  omnia  uocantur  vno 
nomine,  id  est  Sayger. 

V.  CuM  '  illuc  sanctus  Kyaranus  peruenisset,  primitus  sedebat  ibi 
sub  quadam  arbore,  sub  cuius  vmbra  aper  ferocissimus  fuit.  Videns 
aper  primo  hominem,  perterritus  fugit,  et  iterum  mitis  factus  a  Deo, 
reuersus  est  quasi  famulus  ad  virum  Dei  ;  et  ille  aper  primus  disci- 
pulus  quasi  monachus  sancti  K^^arani  in  illo  loco  fuit.  Ipse  enim  aper 
statim  in  conspectu  viri  Dei  virgas  et  fenum  ad  materiam  cellule  con- 
struende  dentibus  suis  fortiter  abscidit.  Nemo  enim  cum  sancto  Dei 
adhuc  ibi  erat ;  quia  solus  a  discipulis  suis  ad  illum  heremum  euasit. 
Deinde  alia  animalia  de  cubilibus  heremi  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum 
uenerunt,  id  est  vvlpis,  et  broccus-,  et  lupus,  et  cerua  ;  et  manserunt 
mitissima  apud  eum.  Obediebant  enim  secundum  iussionem  sancti 
viri  in  omnibus  quasi  monachi. 

vi.  Alia  '  quoque  die  wlpis,  qui  erat  callidior  et  dolosior  ceteris 
animalibus,  fj-cones  abbatis  sui,  sancti  id  est  Kyarani,  furatus  est',  et 
deserens  propositum  suum,  duxit  ad  pristinum  habitaculum  suum  in 
heremo,  uolens  illas  ibi  commedere.  Hoc  sciens  sanctus  pater  Kyara- 
nus  alium  monachum  uel  discipulum,  id  est  broccum,  post  vvlpem 
in  heremum  misit,  ut  fratrem  ad  locum  suum  reduceret.  Broccus 
autem,  cum  esset  peritus  in  siluis,  ad  uerbum  senioris  sui  ilico  obe- 
diens  perrexit,  et  recto  itenere  ad  speluncam  fratris  wlpis  peruenit- 
Et  inueniens  eum  uolentem  ficones  domini  sui  commedere,  duas  aures 
eius  et  caudam  abscidit,  et  pilos  eius  carpsit,  et  coegit  eum  secum 
uenire  ad  monasterium  suum,  ut  ageret  ibi  penitentiam  pro  furto  suo. 
Et  vvlpis  necessitate  compulsus,  simul  et  broccus,  cum  sanis  ficonibus 
hora  nona  ad  cellam  suam  ad  sanctum  Kj'aranum  venerunt.  Et  ait 
uir  sanctus  ad  wlpem  :  '  Quare  hoc  malum  fecisti,  frater,  quod  non 
decet  monachos  agere  ?  Ecce  aqua  nostra  dulcis  est  et  communis,  et 
cibus  similiter  communiter  omnibus  partitur.  Et  si  uoluisses  comme- 
dere  "carnem'  pro  natura,  Deus  omnipotens  de  corticibus  arborum 
pro  nobis  tibi  fecisset.'     Tunc  wlpis,  petens  indulgenciam,  ieiunando 

1   =Capg.  u.  s.  Br.  c.  i'  ;   Dii.  c.  3.  -  taxus  Capg.  '   =Capg.  u.  s.  ; 

Br.  c.  I  "^ ;  Du.  c.  4.         *  ro  goid  leis  seabaic  in  abbad  Br.,  i.e.  stole  the  abbot's 
hawk  ^the  translator  confusedjfco  and/a/<ro;  Du.  is  correct). 


220  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

egit  penitentiam ',  et  non  commedit  donec  sibi  a  sancto  viro  iussum 
est.     Deinde  familiaris  cum  ceteris  mansit '. 

vii.  PosTEA  ^  sui  discipuli  et  alii  plures  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum  in 
ipso  loco  conuenerunt  vndique ;  et  ibi  inceptum  est  clarum  mona- 
sterium.  Set  predicta  animalia  domestica  in  vita  sua  ibi  erant,  quia 
sanctus  senior  libenter  ea  videbat  *.  Interea  fides  Christiana  crescebat 
in  Hybernia,  quia  alii  tres  sancti  episcopi  ante  aduentum  Patricii 
predicabant  in  ea  ;  id  est,  Ailbeus  episcopus  hinc  et  inde  per  diuersa 
loca;  simiHter  sanctus  Ybarus  episcopus,  et  beatissimus  episcopus 
Declanus  in  sua  nacione,  que  dicitur  na  n-Desi.  Et  multos  per 
circuitum  et  plurimos  gentis  sue,  Osraigi,  sanctus  pontifex  ad  fidem 
convertit.  Deinde  ^  gloriosus  arciepiscopus  Patricius,  missus  a  Cele- 
stino  papa,  venit  in  Hyberniam,  qui  Dei  gratia  reges  duces  principes 
populosque  ad  Christum  conuertit.  Et  tota  Hybernia  repleta  est  fide 
et  baptismo  Christi. 

f.  107''  viii.  Mater*  sancti  Kyarani"  uenit  ad  eum,  que  a  filio  suo  |  fidelis 
Christiana  et  sancta  Dei  famula  effecta  est ;  et  edificauit  sanctus 
Kyaranussancte  matri  sue  Lyadain  cellam  in  propinquo  loco  seorsum, 
et  sanctas  uirgines  congregauit  ad  eam  ibi.  Inter  quas  erat  quedam 
uirgo  ualde  pulcra,  nomine  Bruineach  *,  filia  ducis  de  Mumenia  cuius- 
dam,  quam  multum  sancta  mater  viri  Dei  diligebat,  quia  illa  erat 
alumpna  sua,  et  ipsa  moribus  honesta  erat.  Dux '  auteni  regionis  Hua 
Fiachach,  nomine  Dirama  ",  audiens  famam  pulcritudinis  illius  uirginis, 
uenit  cum  suis  militibus,  et  rapuit  illam  uirginem  per  vim  de  cella  sua. 
Et  erat  apud  eum  in  castello  suo  multis  diebus,  dormiens  cum  ea  in 
coniugem;  et  diligebat  eam  ualde.  Post  hoc  exiit  sanctus  Kyaranus 
ad  ducem  Dimtna  querere  alumpnam  suam.  Sed  dux  nuUo  modo 
uel  ulla  ratione  uoluit  dimittere  illam,  dicens  viro  Dei  pro  irrisione : 
'  Hanc  tibi  puellam  semper  non  dimittam,  nisi  in  sequentis  diei  inicio 
uox  ciconie"  excitauerit  me  a  sompno.'  Erat  'enim'  tunc  hyems 
aspera.  In  illa  siquidetn  nocte  nix  magna  fluit.  In  illo  autem  loco, 
in  quo  vir  Dei  Kyaranus  cum  suis  erat,  nulla  gutta  niuis  descendit. 
Mane  autem  facto,  quamuis  contra  naturam,  super  culmen  vnius- 
cuiusque  domus  nutu  Dei  ciconia  in  castello  cantabat.  Hoc  videns 
dux  Dimma,  uenit  et  prostrauit  se  ante  sanctum  Kyaranum,  et  dimis- 

'  i.  tredhan  tdora  la  adt/.  Br. ,  i.  e.  a  fast  of  three  days.  ^  Here  Capg.  and 

Br.  insert  (with  variations)  a  story  how  Ciaran  pretended  to  be  ill  in  order  to 
force  St.  Brcndan  to  accept  a  cow  ;  cf.  Vita  Carthagi  §  xlvii,  p.  188  supra. 
^   =S  §  4  ;  R^  f.  199"  ;  Du.  cc.  5,  6  ;  not  in  Capg.  Br.  *  set  predicta  .  .  . 

videbat  oiii.  R  S.  ^  Br.  c.  2.  ^  =  S  §  5  ;  R^  u.  s.  ;  Capg.  ii.  322  ;  Br.  c.  6  ; 
Du.  c.  7.  '  SaiictaWingella  Capg.  *  Brunecha  S  R  ;  Bruneta  Capg.  ^  qui- 
dam  regulus  S  R  ;  rex  Capg.  ^"  Daimhene,  .i.  ri  do  chinedh  Fiachna  Br., 

i.  e.  D.,  king  of  the  race  of  Fiachna.  ''  guth  na  cuaiche  Br.,  i,  e.  the  voice  of 
the  cuckoo. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  SAIGIR  221 

sit  ei  alumpnam  suam  ;  et  erat  ipsa  pregnans.  Videns  autem  vir 
Dei  quod  vterus  illius  feniine  partu  intumescebat ',  signo  sancte  crucis 
bencdixit  vvluam  illius,  et  uenter  eius  exinde  decreuit,  et  partus  in 
vtero  euanuit.  Et  reuersus  est  uir  sanctus,  ducens  illam  ad  cellam 
suam,  que  dicitur  scotice  Ceall  Lyadain. 

ix.  PosTEA-  autem  ipse  dux  Dimma  valde  amore  predicte  iuuencule 
Bruiniche  iterum  comprehensus,  uenit  reducere  eam  secum.  Set 
Deus  iecit  propter  uoluntatem  trium,  silicet  beatissimi  Kyarani,  et 
sancte  matris  eius,  et  ipsius  iuvencule  Bruiniche,  quod  dux  inuenit 
eam  mortuam.  Ipsa  enim,  ut  ad  se  ducem  uenientem  audiuit,  ilico 
obiit.  Videns  iam  dux  eam  mortuam  esse,  contristatus  est  ualde, 
et  tristis  dixit  sancto  Kj^arano  :  '  Quare  vxorem  meam  occidisti  ? 
Ipsa  iam  uxor  mea  propria  erat ;  neminem  enim  nouit  nisi  me,  et 
decreui  ego  eam  coniugem  meam  semper  esse.  Ideo  hic,  Kyarane, 
non  habitabis,  quia  te  expellam  de  isto  loco.'  Cui  sanctus  respondit : 
'  NuIIam  potestatem  tu  in  me  habes.  Sed  omnipotens  Deus  tibi 
desuper  quasi  vmbram  terrenam  potestatem  dedit,  quamdiu  ipse 
uoluerit ;  et  ideo  ego  ero  in  loco  meo  contra  tuam  uoluntatem.' 
Audiens  dux  hec  uerba,  cum  furore  in  viam  tristis  recessit',  minans 
Dei  famulo.  Hanc  iniuriam  Deus  cito  vindicauit  in  duce  ;  nam  ipse 
veniens  ad  castellum  suum,  tunc  illud  flammis  ardebat,  filiusque  ducis 
carissimus  oblitus  est  'in  cubili  suo'  dormiens.  Ipse  enim  puerulus 
erat.  Et  cum  nemo  potuisset  eum  adiuuare,  nutrix  eius  alta  uoce 
dixit :  '  In  manus  sancti  Kyarani  Saighre  te,  fili  mi,  commendo.' 
O  magnum  et  admirandum  miraculum,  quod  Deus  fecit  ibi !  Extincto 
enim  igne,  et  consumptis  domibus,  ille  filius  incolumis  et  intactus 
viribus  inuentus  est.  Hoc  videns  dux  *,  uenit  ipse  et  Edus  episcopus 
secum  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum,  |  et  ille  egit  penitentiam,  promittens  f.  107" 
agere  que  sibi  sanctus  Kyaranus  dixisset.  Et  obtulit  duos  filios  suos 
sancto  Kyarano,  id  est  Dunchadum,  qui  de  igne  liberatus  est,  et  alterum, 
cum  suis  seminibus,  ad  sepeliendum  apud  sanctum  Kyaranum  in 
eternum.  Postea  dux  cum  benedictione  viri  Dei  gaudens  recessit. 
Vir  igitur  'Dei'  Kyaranus,  dolens  quod  alumpna  sua  Bruineach  de 
hac  vata  velociter  migrauit,  et  sciens  quod  non  fecisset  dux  sibi  vim 
iterum,  adiuit  vbi  erat  corpus  illius,  et  orans  pro  ea,  resuscitauit 
eam  a  morte.     Et  ipsa  postea  vixit  in  sua  professione  multos  dies. 

X.  QuoDAM  °  die  prepossitus'  monasterii  sancti  Kyarani  uenit  ad 
eum  dicens  :  '  Domine,  sues  desunt  nobis,  et  debemus  eos  emere.' 
Cui  sanctus  ait :  '  Deus  qui  dedit  nobis  alia  uictualia,  dabit  et  sues.' 

*  uiperium  semen  animari  nolens  S  R.  '   =  S  §§  6,  7  ;  R-  f.  199''  ;  Capg. 

ii.  323  ;  Br.  c.  7  ;  Du.  c.  8.  '  go  Dun  Croibhtine  .i.  co  a  arus  fein  Br.,  i.  e. 

to  D.  C.  his  own  residence.  *  Dairine  Br.  '   =  Br.  c.  15  ;  Du.  c.  9; 

§§  x-xii  are  not  in  S  R  ;  §|  x,  xi  are  not  in  Capg.  ^  a  chealloir  Br.,  i.  e.  his 
cellarer;  a  choig  Du.,  i,  e.  his  cook. 


222  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

Crastino  iam  die  visa  est  scrofa  preclara  et  duodecim  surices  cum  ea 
a  Deo  missa  iuxta  verbum  viri  Dei ;  et  de  semine  eius  multi  greges 
porcorum  creuerunt  ibi. 

xi.  Iterum'  alia  die  prepossitus  suus  ait  Kyarano:  'Oues  modo  non 
habemus,  pater,  et  oportet  nos  eas  emere.'  Respondit  ei  uir  sanctus  : 
'  Qui  nobis  dedit  sues,  ipse  dabit  et  oues.'  Et  egressus  prepositus 
extra  ianuam  curie,  vidit  ibi  similiter  a  Deo  missas  septem  et  viginti 
oues  albas  carpentes  herbas,  que  similiter  ibi  in  greges  creuerunt. 

xii.  HoMo"  quidam  potens,  nomine  Fintanus,  adduxit  suum  mor- 
tuum  filium,  nomine  Leogarium,  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum,  petens  ut  in 
Christi  nomine  resuscitaret  illum.  Vir  itaque  sanctus  confidens  in 
Christo  accessit  ad  illum,  et  resuscitans  eum  a  morte,  assignauit  eum 
patri  suo  viuum,  qui  postea  longe  vixit.  Et  ille  obtulit  sancto  Kyarano 
villam  que  dicitur  Raith  Fera  cum  agris  suis. 

xiii.  Interea'  sanctus  Patricius,  predicator  Hybernie,  in  regionem 
iVIumenensium  venit ;  et  credidit  ei  Aengus  filius  Nafraich,  rex 
Mumenie,  in  ciuitate  regali  Cassel,  et  baptizatus  est.  Tunc  quidam 
homo,  filius  Erch*,  de  nepotibus  Duach  de  terra  Osraighi,  equum 
sancti  Patricii  euentu  [non]  ^  sponte  occidit ".  Et  apprehensus 
a  militibus  regis  Aengusa,  positus  est  in  vinculis,  ut  occideretur.  Set 
sanctus  Kyaranus  ab  amicis  illius  rogatus,  uenit  et  dedit  regi  copiam 
auri  et  argenti  pro  eo  ;  et  liberatus  regionem  suani  adiuit.  Set  post- 
quam  ille  euassit,  aurum  illud  et  argentum  in  nichilum  euanuit. 
Tunc  iratus  rex  uocauit  sanctum  Kyaranum,  et  ait  ei :  '  Quare 
fantasma  dedisti  mihi  pro  homine?'  Respondit  regi  uir  sanctus  : 
'  Omnia  de  nichilo  metalla  facta  sunt,  et  in  nichilo  ibunt.'  Tunc  rex 
minans  cum  ira,  ilico  diuina  vindicta  cecatus  in  terram  cecidit.  Set 
Carthagus,  sancti  Kyarani  alumpnus,  nepos  autem  ipsius  regis 
Aengussi,  multum  rogauit  sanctum  Dei  pro  rege.  Vir  Dei  ait: 
'  Petiuit  ex  sua  potestate  aurum,  et  vindictam  patitur  ad  mortem.' 
Pene  iam  expirauit  rex.  Et  adhuc  predicto  Carthago  cum  ceteris 
rogante  pro  rege,  accessit  ad  eum  sanctus  Kyaranus,  et  illuminauit 
eum,  et  sicut  quibusdam  videtur,  suscitauit  a  morte.  Quidam  enim 
dixerunt,  quod  mortuus  erat  rex.  Et  rex  sanatus  obtulit  sancto  | 
f.  107''  Kyarano  multa  bona',  gratias  agens  Deo. 

xiv.  Ipse*  rex  Mumenie,  Aengus ',  cytaristas  optimos  habuit,  qui 
dulciter  coram  eo  acta  heroum  in  carmine  cytarizantes  cantabant. 
Qui  aliquando  ambulantes   in   plebe   que   dicitur   Muscray   Tire,  et 

'  Br.  c.  16  ;  Du.  c.  10.  ^  Capg.  ii.  325  ;  Br.  c.17;  Du.  c.  11.  '  =S58; 
R''  f.  199 "^ ;  Capg.  ii.  323  ;  Br.  c.  10  ;  Du.  c.  12.  *  Mac  Eirce  Br.         ^  The 

insertion  o{  iton  seems  necess^ry ;  casu  contigit  interfici  S  R.  '^  ro  ghoid 

Du.,  i.  e.  stole.  '  filium  suum  Capg.  '  Not  in  S  R  ;  Capg.  ii.  323; 

Br.  c.  8  ;  Du.  c.  13.         ^  Re.x  quidam  nomine  Cohingus  Capg. 


VITA  SANCTI  CIARANI  DE  SAIGIR  223 

que  cst  in  regno  Mumenie,  occissi  sunt  ab  inimicis  suis ;  et  corpora 
eorum  abscondita  sunt  in  quodam  stagno  in  deserto,  quia  pax  firma 
erat  in  Mumenia  in  regno  Aengusi.  Et  suspense  sunt  cytharc 
eorum  in  quadam  arbore  super  ripam  stagni.  Et  rex  Aengus  con- 
tristatus  est,  nesciens  quid  illis  accidit.  Et  sciens  sanctum  Kyaranum 
plcnum  esse  spiritu  prophetie,  uenit  ad  eum,  ut  sciret  quid  suis 
cytaristis  accidit.  Factus  enim  Christianus,  noUiit  interrogare  magos 
siue  auruspices.  Et  ait  sanctus  Kyaranus  rcgi :  '  Cythariste  tui, 
domine  rex,  occissi  sunt  occulte,  et  occultata  sunt  corpora  eorum  in 
stagno,  et  cythare  sue  suspenduntur  in  arbore  imminente  stagno.' 
Vir  autem  sanctus  Kyaranus  rogatus  a  rege  uenit  cum  eo  ad  stagnum, 
et  ieiunauit  ibi  illo  die.  Expletoque  ieiunio',  aqua  in  stagno  arefacto 
non  apparuit ;  et  videntes  corpora  in  profundo  laci  sicci,  peruenit 
sanctus  Kyaranus  ad  ea  ;  et  coram  rege  et  omnibus,  rogans  siHcet  in 
vnitate  Patris  et  Fihi  et  Spiritus  Sancti,  quasi  de  graui  sompno  ihco 
resuscitauit  eos ;  et  ipsi  sihcet  numero  septem  fuerunt.  Per  totum- 
que  mensem  occisi  mersi  erant  sub  aqua.  Et  resurgentes  statim 
cytharas  suas  acceperunt,  et  cecinerunt  dulcia  carmina  turbis  coram 
rege  et  episcopo,  ita  ut  pro  suauitate  muse '  multi  ibi  dormirent 
homines.  Et  cum  ceteris  ipsi  gloriam  Deo  dederunt.  Stagnum 
autem  in  quo  mersi  erant,  uacuum  est  ab  illo  die  usque  hodie  sine 
aqua  ;  set  tamen  adhuc  nomen  stagni  nominatur  Loch  na  Crutthere ', 
quod  uertitur  latine  stagnum  cytharedarum.  Deinde  accepta  bene- 
dictione  regis  et  popuh,  sanctus  Kyaranus  ad  ciuitatem  reuersus 
est  suam. 

XV.  QuiDAM '  de  prepositis  predicti  regis  Mumenie  ambulans  cum 
commitibus  suis  in  eadem  regione,  que  dicitur  Muscrayghi,  vidit  porcos 
cuiusdam  viri,  et  iussit  mihtibus  suis  ut  occiderent  vnum  ab  illis. 
Et  cum  ibi  statim  in  silua  porcum  assare  cepissent^,  inimici  sui 
irruerunt  super  eos,  et  occiderunt  illum  prepositum,  et  viginti  mihtes 
secum  super  ripam  riui  Brosnache.  Et  cum  hoc  nunciatum  esset 
sancto  Kyarano,  suassit  ei  Carthagus  predictus,  id  est  alumpnus 
sancti  Kyarani,  nepos  ipsius  regis  Aengusi,  cum  ceteris,  ut  pergeret 
ipse  sanctus  ad  corpora  deducenda,  ne  a  bestiis  deuorarentur.  Et 
videns  sanctus  Kyaranus  pauca  uechicula  ad  tot  corpora  portanda, 
alta  uoce  coram  omnibus  qui  ibi  erant  ait  occisis  ;  'In  nomine  Domini 
nostri  lesv  Christi  surgite,  o  miseri,  et  uenite  mecum.'  Ad  hanc 
uocem  ilico  ille  prepositus  et  viginti  sui  comites  sani  surrexerunt,  et 
cum   ipsis   surrexit   porcus^,  quem  ipsi  occiderunt,  et  reuersus  est 

'  trium  dierum  ieiunio  Capg.      '  MS.  musse.      '  Cruitirigh  Du.,  Cruitenn  Br. 

*  Capg.  u.  s.  Br.  c.  9  ;  Du.  c.  14.  Not  in  S  ;  while  in  R  it  is  added  at  the  end 
of  the   Life,    f.   201 ''.  ^  porcum   omnino   uidere   non  potuerunt   Capg.   Br. 

*  R  omits  the  raising  of  the  pig  ;  while  botli  R  and  Capg.  make  Ciaran  [Piran] 
himself  its  owner  ;  the  pig  being  stolen  '  de  suburbio  eius '  ^^RJ. 


224  VITAE  SANCTORVM  HIBERNIAE 

ad  suum  dominum  'qui'  uocabatur  Eccanus'.  Viri  autem  illi  qui 
resuscitati  fuerant,  monachi  usque  ad  mortem  suam  apud  sanctum 
Kyaranum  omnes  religiose  vixerunt  -. 

f.  108"  xvi.  Die'  quadam  sanctus  Kyaranus  |  expandit  syndonem  *  mun- 
dum  super  uepreni  moros  multos^  habentem.  Preuidit  enim,  repletus 
spiritu  prophetie,  quod  esset  hoc  necessarium,  et  ideo  fecit  illud,  ut 
mori  in  maturitate  et  in  dulcedine  sua  per  annum  custodirentur,  ne 
eis  algor  hyemalis  noceret.  Et  per  annum  sub  sindone  ita  manse- 
runt,  ut  erant  illo  die,  siue  in  melius  uersi  sunt.  Ipso  sequenti  anno 
post  pascha  Ae'n'gus  ^  rex  Caissi!  cum  sua  regina  ad  conviuium  ma- 
gnum  quod  sibi  parauit  Conchrid,  dux  Osraighi',  exiuit.  In  conviuio 
iani  illo  regina'  amauit  predictum  ducem  Conchrid  ualde,  et  iussit 
eum  secum  dormire  ;  ille  enim  dux  multum  pulcer  erat';  set  dux 
nullo  nodo  uoluit  perpetrare  illud  peccatum.  Illa  enim  regina,  sciens 
hoc,  simulauit  se  acrum  dolorem  habere.  Ideoque  hoc  fecit,  ut  post 
regem  in  castello  ducis  maneret.  Set  interrogata  regina  ait :  '  Sana 
essem  a  dolore  modo,  si  moros  inuenirem  commedere.'  Putabat  enim 
quod  nullo  modo  tunc  mori  inuenirentur.  Dux'"  autem,  timens  eam 
in  suo  castello  post  discessum  regis  manere,  cucurrit  ad  patronum 
suum  sanctum  Kyaranum,  et  indicauit  ei  hec  omnia.  Omnis  enim 
regio  Osraighi  parrochia  sancti  Kyarani  est.  Et  audiens  episcopus 
ducem,  misit  ad  ueprem  sub  sindone  candido  tenentem  in  silva  moros 
ab  auptumpno  usque  ad  Aprilem  ;  et  uas  plenum  moris  regine  inde 
allatum  est.  Et  commedens  eos  ilico  sanata  est  a  dolore  suo,  id  est 
ab  amore  ducis  Conchrid  ;  quia  statim  non  curabat  de  eo.  Erantque 
mori  in  ore  regine  et  ceterorum  commedentium  quasi  mel  dulce  ". 
Vidensque  regina  miraculum  in  se  factum,  uenit  et  prostrauit  se  ante 
pedes  sancti  Kyarani,  fatebaturque  peccatum  suum  ei,  petens  bene- 
dictionem  eius.  Cui  ait  sanctus  episcopus,  gemens  :  '  Domina  regina, 
non  possum  te  liberare  a  morte  tibi  [dejfinita'^.  Tu  enim  silicet,  filia, 
et  dominus  noster  rex  vno  die  occidemini  ab  inimicis  vestris".  Set 
det  uobis  Deus  misericordiam.'  Quod  uaticinatus  est  sanctus  pontifex 
Kyaranus,  ita  contigit.  Ipse  enim  rex  Aengus  in  bello,  quod  com- 
missuni  est  in  campo  Fea,  in  prouinchia  Laginensium,  iuxta  grandem 

^  Cain  Br.  ^  7  is  e  Foda  mac  Forax  maille  lena  shiol  do  bhi  ann  Br.,  i.  e. 

and  this  vvas  Foda  mac  Forax  and  his  offspring.  Here  Capg.  and  Br.  insert  a 
story  hovv  the  saint  raised  a  slain  prefectus  fcend  sluaigh)  of  the  king  ;  called 
Mac  Ceisi  ( Br.).  '  =  S  §  10  ;  R^  f.  200 "  ;  Capg.  ii.  324  ;  Br.  c.  1 1  ;  Du.  c.  15. 
*  dlaoi  do  bogsimin  Du.,  i.  e.  a  wisp  of  rushes.  ^  nigros  Capg.  ;  multum  M. 

^  Cohingus   Capg.  '  rex   Osrigensium,   Conraduo   S  ;    Conchradus   R  ; 

Concolor    rex    Capg.  ;    Concrach    mac    Danach    Br.  ^  i.    Eithne    Br. 

'  rex  autem  Cohingus  senex  erat  Capg.  '"  ipse  Conraid  S.  '^  7  meiscci 

fiona  at/d.  Br.,  i.  e.  and  the  exhilaration  of  wine.  '^  definita  Coigan,  who 

notes  that  the  MS.  rcads  '  finita '.  '^  S  R  give  the  prophecy  more  fuUy,  but 

omit  thc  fulfilment. 


VITA  SANCTI   CIARANI   DE  SAIGIR  225 

villam,  Ceall  Osnadh,  cum  sua  uxore  regina  occissus  est  a  rege 
aquilonalium  Laginensium,  Illand,  filio  Dunlainge,  viii  idus  Octobris. 
Et  hec  cedes  maxima  abusio  erat.  Et  ipsa  regina  Ethne  h-Uathach 
uocabatur,  que  erat  filia  Crymthain  filii  Endai  Kennselaygh,  qui 
Crymthann  multum  subiugauit  aquilonales  Laginenses,  accepto  regno 
niagno  Hybernie,  postquam  ipse  in  graui  bello  Oche,  in  regione 
Midhi,  occidit  Aillill  Molt  regem  Hybernie. 

xvii.  Aliquando'  sanctus  Patricius  arciepiscopus  et  rex  Mumenie, 
simul  et  nouem-  duces  secum  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum  uenerunt. 
Quibus  iussit  beatus  Kyaranus  octo  boues  cum  ceteris  alimentis 
parari ;  cum  autem  diceretur  ei,  quid  essent  hec  inter  tantos  populos, 
ait :  '  Per  gratiam  Dei,  qui  multa  milia  de  paucis  panibus  et  pisciculis 
satiauit,  isti  de  hoc  modico  apparatu  sufficienter  habebunt.'  Bene- 
dixitque  fontem  suum,  et  apparuit  in  eo  vinum  optimum.  Que  omnia 
Dei  gratia  summo  pontifici  et  regi  cum  turmis,  quamdiu  ibi  erant', 
sufficiebant. 

xviii.  Alio*  tempore  rex  Themorie'  uenit  cum  fortitudine  magna 
ut  subiugaret  sibi  Mumenenses.  Sed  |  'Ailill''  rex  Cassyl  nolens  f.  108 
consentire  ei,  egressus  est  ad  bellum  contra  eum.  Et  cum  conue- 
nerunt  prope  ciuitatem  sancti  Kyarani ',  ipse  uir  Dei  uoluit  pacificare 
eos;  set  nullo  modo  potuit.  Et  impetrauit  ipse  a  Deo,  quod  non 
inuenit  a  superbis.  Cum  enim  processis[s]ent  ad  bellum  de  castris, 
silua  inter  eos  de  radicibus  diuino  nutu  contra  Mumenenses  euulsa 
est',  et  alueus  fluminis  Brosnaithe  contra  regem  Themorie°  eleuatus 
est  usque  ad  ripas.  Hec  utrique  uidentes,  perterriti  sunt ;  et  rex 
Temorie  a  flumine  reuersus  est,  quod  pedites  et  equites  leuiter 
potuissent  transire  prius,  et  exiuit  ad  regionem  suam.  Mumenenses 
autem  prope  monasterium  sancti  Kyarani  illa  nocte  manserunt.  Et 
misit  sanctus  Kyaranus  regi  eorum  coctam  uaccam  et  suem  ;  et  de 
hiis  saturati  sunt  exercitus  Mumenie,  et  residuas  dimiserunt.  Et  per 
hoc  nomen  sancti  Kyarani  diuulgatum  est  multum. 

xix.  Aliquando^"  turba  latronum  de  alia  regione  "  uenit  in  fines 
Mumenie  rapere  et  occidere  ibi.  Quidam  autem  comes  de  Mume- 
nensibus,  nomine  Lonanus'^  irruit  super  eos,  et  illi  uersi  sunt  in 

'   =  Capg.  ii.  324  ;   Br.  c.  14  ;  Du.  c.  16.  ^  decem  Capg.  ;  viginti  (alias 

rovem)  Colg.  *  tribus  diebus  Capg.  *   =S  §§  11,  12  ;  R-  f.  200''; 

Capg.   u.  s.,  Br.  c.  la  ;  Du.  c.  17.  ^  Loigaire  rex  Capg.  ;  Loegaire  mac 

I  Neill  Br.  '  A  mistake  forAengus.  '  a  n-Eilibh  tuaisgirt  Du.,  i.  e.  in 

Inorthern  Eile.  *  ro  eirigh  fiodh  adhbal  etorra  Du.,  i.  e.  an  immense  wood 

Irose  up  between  them.  '  re  hucht  na  n-Ulltach  Br.,  i.  e.  against  the  Ulto- 

Inians.  ">   =S   §   13  ;    R'  f.   200';    Capg.   u.  s.   Br.   c.    13;    not   in    Du. 

[■'  Ceithern  do  clannaibh  Fiachrach  Br.,  i.  e.  Kemes  of  the  Clanna  F. 
I"  Lonaii  mac  Natfraich  i.  derbrathair  ^Kngusa  Br.,  i.  e.  Lonan,  son  of  Nad- 
praech,  own  brother  to  Aengus. 

PLUMUER  Q 


226  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

fiigam.  Ipsi  autem  desperantes  posse  euadere,  rogauerunt  inde 
sanctum  Kyaranuni,  ut  liberaret  eos^  Cum  iam  Lonanus  cum  suis 
capere  et  prosternere  eos  cepisset,  globus  '^  igneus  repente  desuper 
post  tergum  illorum  ante  Lonanum  cecidit.  Multumque  milites 
Lonani  et  ipse  perterriti,  retro  discesserunt;  et  illos  prosequi  amplius 
non  potuerunt.  Illi  autem,  scientes  quomodo  liberati  sunt  Dei  potentia 
per  gratiam  sancti  Kyarani  de  magno  periculo,  uenerunt  ad  sanctum 
Kyaranum,  et  narrauerunt  ei  que  ipsis  acciderant.  Initoque  consilio, 
facti  sunt  ipsi  monachi  apud  sanctum  Kyaranum,  et  manserunt  sub 
cura  eius  in  operibus  bonis  usque  ad  obitum  suuni. 

XX.  Alio'  tempore  quidam  latro  de  regione  Laginensium  tulit  vi 
vaccam  optimam  a  monachis  sancti  Kyarani.  Ille  iam  latro  Carpreus 
uocabatur*.  Cumque  ille  ad  montem  Smoil  alias  Bladhmha  perue- 
nisset,  tenebre  et  caligo  circum[de]derunt  eum  ;  et  nec  potuit  scire 
viam  'suam',  [deuenitque]  °  in  quodam  flumine,  ibique  cadens  mortuus 
est.    Vacca  autem  reuersa  est  'recto'  itenere  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum  °. 

xxi.  Beatissimus'  pontifex  Kyaranus  boues  ad  sanctam  Conche* 
nutricem  suam  sine  minante  misit ;  et  peruenerunt  recta  via  ad 
sanctam  Dei ;  et  ipsa  cognouit  quod  egregius  suus  alumpnus  Kya- 
ranus  mitteret  illos  ad  eam  causa  arandi.  Longa  iam  ualde  uia  est 
inter  ciuitatem  sancti  Kyarani,  Saigher,  et  monasterium  sancte  Conche, 
quod  dicitur  Ross  Beannchuyr,  et  est  positum  iuxta  mare  occidentale 
Hibernie.  Et  boues  'singulis'  apud  sanctam  Conche  arabant'  annis, 
et  completo  arandi  tempore  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum  per  singulos  annos 
absque  commite  'quidem'  humano  redibant '°. 

xxii.  Consuebat"  siquidem  sanctus  Kyaranus  in  nocte  natalis 
Domini,  postquam  populus  suus  in  suo  monasterio  Saighyr  sacrifi- 
cium  de  manu  eius  acciperet,  ire  ad  monasterium  sancte  Conche'" 
predictum,  id  est  Ross"  Beanchuir  per  longyssima  terrarum  spacia, 
ut  corpus  Christi  offerret  ipsa  sanctissima  nocte  ibi  ante  beatam 
f.  io8<^  Conche.  Et  postquam  sancta  Dei  cum  aliis  communionem  de  |  manu 
eius  dominicam  sumeret,  nocte  eadem  ante  diluculum  ad  suum  mo- 

'  dicentes  :  Affer  opem  nobis,  pater  O  Kerane,  misellis  S ;  R  reads  O  pater 
Kerane,  which  spoils  an  hexameter  verse.  ^  columnam  S  R  ;  for  '  globus  . . . 
cecidit '  Capg.  has  :  '  tota  .  .  .  silua  .  .  .  flammis  .  .  .  choruscante  '  ;  do  las  an 
choill  fo  chetoir  Br.,  i.  e.  the  wood  blazed  up  at  once.  '   =  S  §  14  ;  R^  u.  s., 

Capg.  ii.  321  ;  Br.  c.  2;  Du.  c.  21.  *  Coirpre  Crom  .i.  fer  fedhma  righ 

Laigen  Br.,  i.  e.  Coirpre  the  Croolced,  a  servitor  of  the  King  of  Leinster  ;  pre- 
fectus  Capg.  ^  Something  seems  wanted ;  co  tarla  i  sruth  e  Br.,  i.  e.  and  he 

lighted  on  a  river.  ^  ipse  uero  ad  Tartara  add.  S  R.  '  =  Br.  c.  13 ; 

not  in  S  R  Capg.  or  Du.  *  go  seipel  [chapel]  Cochae  Br.  '  MS.  arr-. 

'1  MS.  reddieb-.  "   -Capg.  ii.  325  ;  Br.  c.  19  ;  Du.  c.  18  ;   §§  xxii,  xxiii  are 

not  iu  S  R.  "2  Cuinche  Du. ;  Cote  Capg.,  and  so  always.  '  Druim  Br. 


VITA  SANCTI   CIARANI   DE   SAIGIR  227 

nastcrium,  Sayger',  in  medio  Hybernie  possitum  ueniebat.  Nos 
iam  latct  quomodo  ibat  uel  redibat,  quia  ncmini  ex  nostris  hoc 
indicauit.  Scimus  autem  quoniam  Dcus,  qui  Abacucii  de  ludea  in 
Caldeam  modico  diei  spatio  duci  et  reduci  fecit,  famulo  suo  Kyarano 
qua  re  uoluit  egit. 

xxiii.  QuiDAM-  lapis  magnus.qui  nunc  diciturpetra  sancte  Conche, 
in  qua  petra  Dominum  frequenter  sancta  orabat,  in  maris  littore  haut 
procul  a  loco  sancte  Conche  constat  inter  undas.  Aliquando  sanctis- 
simus  Kyaranus  in  ipsa  petra  per  mare  intrauit,  et  feliciter  super 
eam  ad  locum  suum  reuersus  est.  Scriptum  quippe  est:  'Mirabilis 
Deus  in  sanctis  suis'.' 

xxiv.  Alumpnus*  sancti  Kyarani,  Carthagus,  de  quo  superius  dixi- 
mus,  et  quedam  uirgo  de  cella  sancte  Liadane^,  sancti  Kyarani  matris, 
amiciciam  habebant  invicem  carnalem ;  et  ardentes  igne  carnali 
multum  se  amabant.  Et  quadam  die  post  tempus  convencionem 
inter  se  constituerunt,  ut  implerent^  suam  uoluptatem.  Cumque  ad 
locum  convenerunt,  volentes  concumbere,  ignis  repente  inter  eos 
cecidit,  que  pene  combussit  eos.  Et  illi  magno  timore  perterriti, 
nichil  dicentes  retro  fugierunt.  Cecitate  iam  ipsa  die  uirgo  percussa 
est  usque  ad  mortem  suam.  Dignum  erat,  ut  que  mentem  suam 
propter  illicitam  rem  cecauerat,  ut  ageret  penitentiam,  cecaretur 
lumine  suo  corporali.  Carthagus  vero  penitens  peregrinus'  factus 
est.  Set  propter  sanctitatem  boni  pastoris  Kyarani  hoc  illis  accidit, 
quoniam  ipse  in  cuslodia  sui  gregis  semper  vigilabat*. 

XXV.  Duo'  fratres  carnales  de  "terra'  Muscraighi  Tyre  uolebant 
peregrini  esse  in  alia  provinchia,  id  est  in  regione  Connachthorum"' 
iuxta  Tulaydh  Ruaidh.  lUi  iam  nominabantur  Odhranus  et  Medhra- 
nus.  Villa  autem  eorum  Letracha  vocabatur.  Et  cum  uenissent  ad 
Saigher,  ad  sanctum  silicet  Kyaranum,  voluit  Meadhranus  ibi  manere. 
Cui  frater  suus  Odhranus  dixit :  '  Non  hoc  promisisti  mihi,  frater.' 
Et  ait  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum :  '  Noli,  pater,  fratrem  meum  hic  re- 
tinere.'  Respondit  ei  sanctus  Kyaranus :  '  Deus  omnipotens  iudicet 
inter  uos,  si  debet  hic  manere,  uel  tecum  ire.  Teneat  ipse  in  iudicium 
modo  lucernam  in  manu  sua ;   et,  si  ipsa  fuerit  accensa  flatu  oris 

^  Cluanam  Capg.  (confusion  vvith  Ciaran  of  CIonmacnois\  ^   =Capg., 

Br.  u.  s.,  Du.  c.  19.  '  Ps.  Ixvii.  36.  Here  Capg.  and  Br.  insert  two  sections  : 
(a)  how  the  saint  miraculously  fed  a  multitude  at  his  foster-mother"s  cell ; 
(6)  how  he  bUnded  a  king  Cobranus  (Corbanus  Capg.)  who  had  the  power  of 
slaying  with  a  look,  and  raised  a  youth  killed  by  him  (at  Raith  Tamnach  Br.). 
=  S  §  15  ;  R-,  Capg.  u.  s.,  Br.  c.  21  ;  not  in  Du.  ^  Lidanie  S.  «  MS. 

I  implererent.  '  septem  annis  Capg.  Br.  8  Here  Capg.  and  Br.  insert 

three  miracles ;  how  the  saint  (a)  checked  a  fire  ;  (b']  raised  a  decapitated 
maiden  ;  (<■')  raised  a  dead  priest.  '   =  Capg.  u.  s.  Br.  c.  26.     Not  in  Du. 

I  5§  xxv-xxvii  are  not  in  S  R.  '"  MS.  ?  Anna- ;  Osraighe  Br. 

Q  2 


228  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

sui,  hic  debet  manere.  Sin  autem,  vadat  tecum.'  Et  ille  statim 
accendit  lucernam  flatu  suo.  Mansitque  ibi  apud  sanctum  Kyaranum 
usque  ad  obitum  suum  in  magna  sanctitate.  Dixitque  sanctus  Kya- 
ranus  beato  Odhrano':  'Audi  me,  frater  Odhrane.  Dico  tibi  in 
veritate  quod  etiam  si  quatuor  mundi  plagas  circumieris,  tamen  in 
villa  tua  Letracha  moriere.  Ideo  reuertere,  et  mane  illuc  ;  quia  ex 
nomine  tuo  ipsa  villa  nominabitur  per  seculum^.'  Sic  iam  factum 
est.  Nam  sanctus  Odhranus  secundum  verbum  sancti  Kyarani 
reuersus  est  ad  predictum  locum,  et  ibi  clarum  monasterium  ediffi- 
108''  cauit;  et  erat  ipse  vir  magne  virtutis  et  |  sanctitatis.  Et  post  multa 
miracula  que  in  vita  sua  'de  eo'  leguntur,  abbas  illius  loci  ad  regnum 
celorum  feliciter  migrauit.  Et,  sicut  predictum  est,  ille  locus  uocatur 
nomine  suo,  id  est  Leitreach  Odhrain. 

xxvi.  Matrona'  quedam,  nomine  Eachyll,  cadens  incaute  in  terram, 
fracto  corpore  suo  multum,  mortua  est.  Quam  beatissimus  Kyaranus 
post  tres  dies  resuscitauit ;  et  obtulit  ipsa  matrona  sancto  Kyarano 
vicum  qui  dicitur  de  nomine  eius  Saltus  Eachille''.  Et  illa  cum  suis 
gratias  egit  Deo. 

xxvii.  QuiDAM  ^  prepossitus  regis  Mumenensium,  nomine  Ceann- 
faeladh,  occidit  Cronanum  amicum "  sancti  Kyarani.  Quem  sanctis- 
simus  senex  Kyaranus  post  septem  dies  in  Christi  nomine  resusci- 
tauit'.  Cumque  ille  esset  resuscitatus,  sanctus  senex  Kyaranus  coram 
omnibus  ait:  'Ceannfaeladh,  qui  iniuste  istum  occidit,  cicius  ipse 
occidetur,  et  corpus  eius  comburetur'  in  castello  quod  dicitur  Raith 
Maighe"  a  gente  Hele.'     Sicque  illi  omnia  contingerunt. 

xxviii.  Alio"  tempore  rex  Mumenie,  Ailill  nomine,  asperis  uerbis 
cum  ira  contra  sanctum  Kyaranum  locutus  est.  Et  in  hiis  uerbis 
discessit  rex  a  sancto  Kyarano.  Deinde  rex  ilico  mutus  factus  est, 
et  nichil  per  septem  dies  locutus  est.  Post  septem  autem  dies  ad 
sanctum  senem  Kyaranum  rex  uenit,  et  prostrauit  se  ad  pedes  viri 
Dei,  et  uoluntatem  eius  fecit.    Videns  iam  sanctus  senex  eum  corde 

'  MS.  Ogh-.  '^  In  Br.  Ciaran's  speech  runs  thus ;  Cibe  ar  bith  slighe  an  geba 

tu,  tiocfair  slan  go  Muscraighe  fo  deiredh,  7  an  trath  do  berthar  Colaitn  mac 
Criomtain  iarna  folach  hi  ccruithnecht  dia  adhlacadh  letsa  7  le  Mochaimhe  Tire 
da  Glas,  tiocfaisi,  a  Odhrain,  dod  chathraicch  fein,  7  as  innte  bhias  th'eiseirghe, 
i.  e.  Whatever  road  thou  shalt  tai^e,  thou  wilt  return  safe  to  Muslcerry  again, 
and  when  Colum  mac  Crimthan  [Columba  of  Terryglas]  shall  be  carried  to  his 
burial  concealed  in  wheat  by  thee  and  by  Mochaimhe  of  Terryglas,  thou  wilt 
come,  O  Odran,  to  thine  own  city,  and  there  will  be  thy  resurrection.  See 
Cod.  Sal.  col.  459  for  the  incident  referred  to.  '   =Capg.  ii.  326  ;  Br.  c.  27  ; 

Du.c.  20.  *  Leim  AchaillBr.,  L.  Eichille  Du.,  i.  e.  Eachiirs  Leap.  ^  =Capgi 
u.  s.,  Br.  c.  a8  ;  Du.  c.  22.  '  sic  Du.  (cara)  ;  cocum  Capg.  ;  ferthigis  Br. 

(hospitaller).  '  Colgan  omits  the  rest  of  the  section.  *  According  to  Du. 

Ciaran  actually  ordered  him  to  be  burned.  ^  Raith  Lochmuighi  Br.  i"  =S 
59;  R'  f.  200  " ;  Capg.  Br.  u.  s.  ;  Du.  c.  23. 


VITA  SANCTI   CIARANI    DE   SAIGIR  229 

penitcntem,  benedixit  linguam  eius,  et  ilico  ante  omnes  rex,  reddita 
sibi  loquela  'sua',  clare  loqu[u]tus  est.  Et  accepta  benedictione  sanctis- 
simi  episcopi,  ipse  rex,  magnificans  diuina  miracula,  cum  suis  recessit 
in  viam  suam '. 

xxix.  QuADAM^  nocte  sanctissimus  senex  episcopus  Kyaranus 
descendit  in  riuum  aque  frigide,  et  quidam  religiosus  peregrinus, 
nomine  Germanus ',  cum  eo.  Cumque  longe  in  aqua  essent,  cor- 
reptus  est  frigore  peregrinus,  et  ait  sancto  seni :  '  Domine  sancte 
pater,  ego  non  possum  amplius  frigiditatem  huius  aque  sufferre.' 
Tunc  signauit  episcopus  signo  sancte  crucis  aquam,  et  apparuit  ilico 
calida  circa  peregrinum,  quasi  aqua  in  ballneo.  Deinde  laudantes 
Dominum  ibi,  ait  sanctus  Kj^aranus  beato  Germano :  '  Frater  Germane, 
hospes  carissimus  meus  cras  ad  nos  ueniet*,  id  est  Carthagus  filius 
regis  Caissj'1,  quem  a  iuuentute  Deo  nutriui.  Et  misi  eum  in  pere- 
grinacionem  pro  culpa,  quam  uoluit  ipse  patrare,  nisi  Deus  per  me 
eum  prohiberet,  ne  ipse  uotum  et  laborem  suum  perderet.  lam 
modo  reuertitur,  data  sibi  uenia.  Tu  ergo  apprehende  piscem  qui 
circa  te  natat,  ut  filius  meus  dilectus  inde  reficiatur.'  Apprehendit 
ergo  Germanus  grandem  piscem,  sicut  dixit  senex.  Carthagus  simi- 
liter  crastina  die  uenit.  Culpa  autem,  pro  qua  missus  est  ille  in 
peregrinacionem,  cum  legeretur  columpna  ignis  inter  eum  et  uirginem 
descendisse°. 

XXX.  Alio^  tempore  sanctus  Kyaranus,  abbas  Cluana  meic  Nois, 
captus  erat  a  quodam  rege  qui  dicebatur  Furbytheus',  et  possitus 
est  in  vinculis.  Ideo  iam  cepit  illum  rex,  quia  bonum  regis,  quod 
erat  in  sua  custodia,  repletus  caritate,  Christi  pauperibus  diuisit. 
Quodam  die  illudens  rex  ait  sancto  Kyarano  abbati :  '  Si  vis  euadere 
liber  a  me,  da  mihi  septem  vaccas  caluas  corpore  rubras  1  capitibus  f.  109" 
autem  albas.'  Cui  ait  sanctus  :  '  Deo  possibilia  sunt  omnia  ;  dimitte 
me,  et  queram  tibi  tales,  uel  ego  ad  iudicium  vestrmn  iterum  ueniam.' 
Tunc  sanctus  Kyaranus  abbas  solutus  antedictum  senem  sanctum 
episcopum  Kyaranum,  Deo  annuente,  adiuit,  et  narrauit  ei  omnia 
que  sibi  acciderant.  Et  erant  tunc  cum  sancto  sene  episcopo  Kya- 
rano  duo  sancti  Brendani ;  et  ipsi  omnes  multum  gauissi  sunt  in 
aduentu  sancti  Kyarani  abbatis.  Dixitque  sanctus  senex  episcopus 
Kyaranus  ad  cellarium  suum  :  '  Quid  habes  sanctis  hospitibus  nostris 
ad  commedendum  ? '  Respondit  ei  frater :  '  De  alimentis  quidem  nichil 
habeo,  nisi  larda'  tantum;  et  nescio  si  ipsi  commedere  uoluerint.' 

1  Here  Capg.  Br.  insert  a  section,  how  the  saint  refused  to  save  a  certain 
monk  from  a  violent  death,but  promised  to  save  him  from  hell.  2  ^  g  §  15''; 
R'  f.  200'' ;  Capg.  u.  s.  Br.  c.  32  ;  Du.  c.  24.  ^  Gearman  easbudh  Du.,  i.  e. 

Germanus  the  bishop.  *  ueniat  m.  pr.  *  gee  §  xxiv  ;  'fertur'  is  added 

above  the  line  by  a  later  hand.  *   =S  §|  16,  17  ;  R'  f.  200 "*;  Capg.  ii.  321 ; 

Br.  c.  3  ;  Du.  c.  25.  '  Furbicius  S  R  ;  Forfigi  Br.  *  sHnnen  muice 

Br.,  i.  e.  a  gammon  of  bacon. 


230  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

Ait  illi  sanctus  senex :  '  Para  cicius,  ut  commedant.'  Et  cum  esset 
cocta,  accessit  sanctus  senex  Kyaranus,  et  benedixit  eam.  Postea 
iam  coram  fratribus  facta  est  galmula',  et  holus,  et  pisces,  et  mel, 
et  oleum.  Et  in  eodem  prandio  diuina  largitate  vinum  sanctis  Domini 
in  vasculis  sufficienter  apparuit.  Et  iam  ibi  [erat]  quidam  conuersus 
monachus'',  filius  Congayl ',  qui  noluit  commedere  cumsanctis,  dicens: 
'  Vtique  non  commedam  que  facta  sunt  de  lardo*.'  Cui  ait  sanctus  senex 
episcopus  Kyaranus^:  'Carnem^  utique  in  quadragessima  commedes, 
et  in  ipso  die  ab  inimicis  occideris,  et  capud  tuum  decollabitur,  re- 
gnumque  Dei  non  possidebis.  Amisso  enini  habitu  tuo,  viues  infeliciter.' 
Que  iam  omnia  ita  contingerunt  ei,  et  ipse  in  territorio  ciuitatis 
Saighre  occisus  est. 

xxxi.  Dejnde'  illi  quatuor  sancti,  id  est  duo  sancti  Kyarani  et  duo 
sancti  Brendani,  societatem  et  fraternitatem  inter  ipsos  et  inter  habi- 
tatores  locorum  suorum  semper  firmauerunt.  Et  accepta  Hcentia  et 
benedictione  aliorum  sanctorum  patrum,  sanctus  Kyaranus  abbas  in 
viam  suam  perrexit,  nesciens  adhuc  ubi  erant  uacce  quas  ipse 
debebat  reddere  regi.  Beatissimus  senex  pontifex  Kyaranus'  cum 
sancto  abbate,  iuniore  Kyarano,  in  viam  perrexit,  ut  duceret  eum 
per  ahquam  partem  iteneris.  Et  benedicentes  se  invicem,  commercium 
benedictionis  inter  se  uterque  decreuerunt.  lunior  Kyaranus  sancto 
seni  Kyarano  dixit :  '  In  tuo  loco,  pater,  habundancia  diuiciarum  erit 
in  eternum.'  Cui  senex  Kyaranus  respondit :  '  In  tuo  quoque  loco, 
fiH,  habundancia  sapientie  et  rehgionis  semper  manebit.'  Que  san- 
ctorum  prophetia  ita  reuera  completur.  Cumque  deinde  peruenissent 
ad  locum  qui  dicitur  Ath  Sallchayr,  inuenerunt  ibi  super  ripam 
ampnis  septem  uaccas  caluas  corporibus  rubras  et  capitibus  albas. 
'  Ecce  Deus',  inquit  senex  Kyaranus,  'donauit  nobis  uaccas  que 
debentur  regi  reddi.'  Tunc  Christi  famuli,  dantes  Deo  laudes,  in 
benedictione  et  in  osculo  pacis,  sanctus  senex  Kyaranus  ad  suum 
Saigyr  reuersus  est,  sanctus  autem  abbas  iunior  Kyaranus  ad  regem' 
peruenit,  et  reddidit  ei  uaccas  suas.  Et  multum  mirabatur  rex,  et 
qui  secum  erant,  quomodo  potuit  sanctus  tales  invenire.  Set  cum 
sanctus  Kyaranus  a  rege  liber  recessis[s]et,  animalia  illa  nunquam 
apparuerunt  ibi.     Et  tunc  rex  sciuit,  quod  inique  egisset. 

xxxii.  In'"  monasterio  sancti  Kyarani  abbatis  Cluain  meic  Nois  erat 

quidam  puer  occisus,  bonis  et  nocencior  malis.    Ipse  puer  uocabatur 

f.  109'' Crichidh'^  Cluana.    Venit  ille  aliquando  |  ad  monasterium  Saighyr; 

'  panis  Capg.  ^  qonuersus  habitu,  sed  peruersus  animo  S  R.  '  mac 

in  coicc  Br.,  i.  e.  son  ofthe  cook.  *  MS. -da.  ^  non  uindicandosed  prophe- 
tando  add.  S  R.  *  carnem  de  asina  Capg.,  feoil  daimh  7  si  dercc.  Br.,  i.  e.  raw 
beef.  '  =S  §  18  ;  R'  f.  201  ";   Capg.  ii.  322  ;   Br.  c.  3** ;    Du.  c.  26.         *  ut 

moris  est  ndd.  S  R.  "  tirannum  S  R.  '"  =Capg.  u.  s.,  Br.  c.  4  ;  Du.  c.  27. 
§§  xxxii-xxxv  are  not  in  S  R.  "  Trichem  Du. 


VITA  SANCTI   CIARANI   DE  SAIGIR  231 

et  ibi  aliquibus  diebus  apud  sanctum  scnem  episcopum  mansit  Kya- 
ranum.  Sanctus  senex  Kyaranus  statuit  ut  in  suo  monasterio  ignis 
paschalis  consccratus  per  annum  non  extingeretur.  Instigante  autcm 
dyabolo,  ignem  illum  in  monasterio  extinxit  sponte  [puer  iste 
Crichidh].  Tunc  sanctus  senex  Kyaranus  fratribus  dixit :  '  Ecce 
ignis  noster  consecratus  a  maledicto  puero  Crichidh  extinctus  est 
sponte,  sicut  solet  semper  nocere.  Ignis  autem  usque  ad  Pascha 
in  hoc  loco  non  erit,  nisi  a  Deo  missus  fuerit.  Ille  autem  puer 
Crithid  qui  extinxit  ignem  cras  occidetun'  Et  ille  crastino  die  in 
agro  occisus  est  a  luppis,  et  mortuus  iacebat.  Hoc  autem  audiens 
sanctus  abbas  iunior  Kyaranus,  ad  quem  pertinebat  ille  puer,  uenit 
ad  monasterium  sancti  senis  Kyarani  Saigyr ;  et  ibi  receptus  est 
honorifice.  In  monasterio  tunc  ignis  non  erat,  quia  de  igne  con- 
secrato  per  totum  locum  cotidie  ignis  accendebatur;  et  promissit 
sanctus  quod  non  esset  ignis  ibi,  donec  Deus  mitteret.  Et  algebant 
hospites  in  die  illa  niuiali.  Hoc  videns  sanctus  senex  Kyaranus, 
surrexit  et  expandit  manus  suas  in  orationem  ad  Dominum,  et  globus 
ignis  ilico  in  sinum  eius  desuper  cecidit.  Quem  sanctus  episcopus 
in  cassula  sua  ad  hospites  prius  portauit ;  et  calefactis  hospitibus, 
cena  appossita  est  ad  mensas.  Et  cum  sederent  ad  mensam,  sanctus 
abbas  Kyaranus  coram  omnibus  ait :  '  Ego  iam  in  hoc  loco  non 
commedam,  donec  puer  meus,  qui  hic  occisus  est,  viuus  ad  me  ueniet.' 
Cui  senex  Kyaranus  ait :  '  Scimus  quia  ideo  venisti,  et  pro  nobis 
Deus  viuificabit'  illum.  Vos  commedite ;  ecce  enim  puer  vester  huc 
properat.'  Deinde  cicius  puer  venit,  et  cum  fratribus  commedit.  Tunc 
omnium  clamor  in  Dei  laudem  extollitur,  magnificantes  sanctos  eius. 
Postea  sanctus  iunior  Kyaranus  cum  suo  puero,  accepta  benedictione 
sancti  senis  Kyarani,  ad  sua  reuersus  est. 

xxxiii.  Alio  '  tempore  vnus  de  fratribus,  nomine  Baithenus,  ignem 
incaute  extinxit  mane,  et  multum  inde  dolens,  petiuit  indulgenciam. 
IUo  iam  die  sanctus  Ruadanus,  abbas  Lothra,  ad  sanctum  Kyaranum 
visitandum  venit ;  set  in  monasterio  Saighyr  ignis  non  erat  quo 
calificarentur  hospites,  et  conviuium  eis  pararetur.  Hoc  sciens 
sanctus  Kj-aranus,  benedixit  quendam  lapidem  sibi  presentem,  et 
ilico  flammis  igneis  lapis  ardebat.  Et  uir  Dei  lapidem  accepit  ar- 
dentem  in  manibus  suis,  et  ita  portauit  usque  ad  sanctum  Ruadanum. 
Hoc  Ruadanus  cum  suis  videns,  multum  in  Deo  edificati  gauisi 
sunt. 

xxxiv.  SuPRADicTUs'  quoque  Baithenus  iterum  uas  plenum  lactis 
incaute  super  terram  effudit.    Set  sanctus  senex  Kyaranus  benedixit 

'  MS.  -cauit.  2  =Capg.  u.s.  ;  Br.  c.  5  ;  Du.  c.  28. 

Du.  c.  28'' ;  §§  xxxiv-xxxvi  not  in  Capg. 


232  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

sancto  signo  illud  uas ;  et  ibi  coram  omnibus  repletum  est  optimo 
ignoto  lacte.  Tunc  ille  frater  qui  effudit,  et  alii  fratres,  timentes 
sanctissimum  magistrum,  in  Dei  amore  firmati  sunt. 

XXXV.  Orans^  quoque  quodam^  die  sanctissimus  pontifex  senex 
et  decrepitus  Kyaranus  paucis  diebus  ante  obitum  suum,  apparuit 
ei  angelus  Domini.  Tunc  vir  sanctus  tres  peticiones  petiuit  a  Deo, 
presente  angelo.  Quas,  Deo  permittente,  promisit  sibi  angelus ;  id 
est,  quod  omnes  qui  sepulti  fuerint  iuxta  cathedram  suam  in  suo 
cymiterio,  super  eos  post  diem  iudicii  infernus  non  claudetur ;  et 
f.  log "  quicunque  diem  |  festum  sui  natalis  honorauerit,  hic  sit  diues,  et  in 
futuro  requiem  habebit ;  et  sua  gens  Osraighi,  que  accepit  eum 
patronum  suum,  si  non  uastauerit  aham  gentem  discedens  a  sua 
regione  in  illam,  uocansque  eam  in  pugnam ;  set  si  alia  gens  iniuste 
regionem  Osraighi  intrauerit  uolens  uastare  eam,  nunquam  a  suis 
hostibus  in  bello  in  sua  propria  terra  ita  vincetur.  Hee  tres  peti- 
ciones  sancto  Kyarano  ante  obitum  suum  a  Deo  promisse  sunt. 

xxxvi.  Iste'  sanctus  silicet  Kyaranus  ualde  erat  humilis  in  omnibus, 
qui  multum  diligebat  diuinam  scripturam  audire  et  discere  usque  ad 
decrepitam  etatem.  Fertur  enim  de  eo,  quod  ipse  cum  ceteris  sanctis 
Hybernie  ipsius  temporis  ad  virum  sanctum  sapientissimum  Finnia- 
num,  abbatem  monasterii  Cluana  Hayaird,  exiuit  in  sua  senectute,  et 
in  diuinis  [scripturis  in]  sancta  scola  eius  legebat.  Inde  uero  beatis- 
simus  Kyaranus  alumpnus  sancti  Finniani,  sicut  alii  sancti  Hybernie, 
dicitur.  Cum  enim  ipse  senex  sapiens  et  benedictus  ac  summus 
pontifex  esset,  dignatus  est  discere  sub  genu  alterius  propter  humi- 
litatem  et  amorem  sapientie. 

xxxvii.  BEatissimus*  Kyaranus  a  iuuentute  sua  usque  ad  obitum 
suum  mollibus  uestimentis',  carnibus,  et  potibus  ebriantibus,  somp- 
noque,  ceterisque  carnalibus  deliciis  incredibiliter  carebat.  Ipse  suam 
gentem,  id  est  Osraighi,  et  plurimos  alios  de  errore  gentilitatis  ad 
Christi  fidem  conuertit.  Crebris  iam  ipse  angelorum  visitationibus 
in  signis  preclaris  frequentabatur.  Innumerabilem  multitudinem 
episcoporum,  presbyterorum,  ceterorumque  graduum  ecclesiasticorum 
ipse  ordinauit. 

xxxviii.  Ipse"  sanctus  patronus  noster  Kyaranus  in  quodam  loco 
postulauit  fontem.  Quem  angelus  Domini  sibi  depinxit ;  et  multi 
morbi  per  aquam  ipsius  fontis  adhuc  gratia  viri  Dei  sanantur.  Qui 
dicitur  fons  Kyarani. 

'  =Br.  c.  33''  ;  Du.  c.  29.  ^  MS.  wrongly  places  qtiodam  after  Kyaranus. 
'  =S  §  19;  R^  u.  s.,  omitting  his  visit  to  Finnian  ;  Du.  c.  30,  which  makes 
Finnian  come  to  him.  *  «Capg.  ii.  326  ;  Br.   c.  33^  (much  expanded) ; 

§§  xxxvii,  xxxviii  are  rot  in  S  R  Du.  ^  sed  pellibus  luporum  ferarumque 

Capg. ;  so  Br.  ^   =  Br.  c.  33  " ;  not  in  Capg. 


VITA  SANCTI   CIARANI   DE  SAIGIR  233 

xxxix.  Trecentis'  silicet  annis  vixit  sanctissimus  Kyaranus  in 
carne,  in  deuoto  seruicio  Christi  ante  baptismum  et  deinde.  Cum 
iam  ipse  esset  infirmatus*  senio  et  dolore,  sciens  diem  obitus  sui, 
uocauit  ad  se  populum  suum ;  et  benedicens  eum,  mandauit  ei  diuina 
mandata^  Et  accepto  diuino  sacrificio  intra  chorum  sanctorum  tertio 
nonas  Martii  in  pace  Christi  suum  emisit  feHcem  spiritum.  Et  tri- 
ginta  sancti  episcopi,  quos  ipse  sanctissimus  Kyaranus  ordinauit, 
providencia  Dei  cum  eo  in  vna  nocte  secundum  uohmtatem  suam 
migrauerunt  ad  Christi  regnum.  Cui  est  honor  et  gloria  cum  Deo 
Patre  et  Spiritu  Sancto  in  secula  seculorum.    Amen  *. 

EXPLICIT   VITA   SANCTI    KyARANI 
EPISCOPl'  ET  CONFESSORIS 

'  =  S  §  20  ;  R^,  Capg.  u.  s. ;  Br.  cc.  33 ',  34  ;  Du.  c.  3 1 ;  ferme  trecentis  S  R  ; 
plusquam   ducentis  Capg.  ;    four   hundred  Br.  -  esset  add.  M   m.   pr. 

'  Capg.  takes  him  to  Cornwall  before  he  dies  :  Quiescit  autem  in  Cornubia 
supra  mare  Sabrinum,  a  Petrokstovve  miliaribus  xv,  et  a  Mousehole  xxv  [i.  e. 
at  Perranzabuloe,  =  Pieranus  in  Sabulo].  *  Here  R  inserts  a  section  cor- 

responding  to  5  xv  above,  and  then  adds  the  '  Explicit '.       '  de  Saygir  add.  R. 


Vita  sanrti  (JTocmgcni  abliatis  tJc  (!&lcnn  tra 

Eoct) 

f.  64  <*  InCIPIT   VITA  SANCTI   CiEMHGENI    EPISCOPI    ET   CONFESSORIS 

i.  ViR^   ERAT   IN   PROVINCHIA   Laginensium,   que   est   quinta    pars 
Hybernie,  in  plebe  videlicet  Dal  Machscorb,  que  est  in  orientali  plaga 
Laginensium  super  ripas  maris,  cuius  nomen  dicebatur  Coemhlogha^, 
fidelis  satis,  et  Deo  ydoneus,  qui  habuit  vxorem  nomine  Coemhellam^. 
Erantque    ambo    iusti^   apud    Deum   et    homines.      Quadam    nocte 
apparuit  angelus  Domini  in  sompnis  illi  mulieri,  dicens  ei :  '  Bene- 
dicta  mulier,  paries  filium,  et  uocabis  nomen  eius  Coemgenum,  qui 
erit  carus    Deo  et  hominibus.      Et  ipse  erit  pater  multorum  mona- 
chorum,  in  cuius  loco  magna  erit  gratia  Spiritus  Sancti.    Et  postquam 
fuerit  natus,  statim  ad  baptismum  ducetun'     Et  ilico  ut  natus  est, 
sicut  iussit  angelus,  ductus  est  ad  baptismum.   Occurritque  portantibus 
eum  in  via  angelus  Domini  in  forma  pulcri  iuuenis ;  et  interrogauit 
eos,  dicens  :  '  Quid  habetis,  aut  quo  pergitis  ? '     At  illi  responderunt : 
'  Ad  quendam  heremitam  sanctum  presbiterum  hic  prope  habitantem, 
ut  infantem,  quem  portamus,  baptisset.'     Tunc  angelus  Domini  in 
forma    hominis    insufflans,   signauit   in    nomine    Patris,   et   Filii,   et 
Spiritus   Sancti,  et   orans   benedi.xit   eum.     Deinde   illi   homines  ad 
sanctum  presbiterum,  nomine  Cronanum  ^  venerunt.     Qui  °  dixit  eis  : 
'  Quid  queritis  huc  ? '     Illi  responderunt  ei :  '  Vt  baptizes  istum  in- 
fantem,   pater.'      Et  videns   sanctus   Cronanus   infantem,   ait :    '  Iste 
sanctus  infans  rebaptizari  non  indiget,  quia  a  viro  sanctiore  et  meliore 
me  baptizatus  est.'    Illis  admirantibus  de  hoc  uerbo,  ait  eis :  '  Occurrit 
uobis  aliquis  in  via  ? '     Et  indicauerunt  ei,  quomodo  predictus  iuuenis 
f.  65"  benedixit  infantem  |  et  nominauit  eum  Coemhgenum.     Et  ipse  senior 
ait  eis :  '  Ille  est  angelus  Domini,  qui  istum  infantem  baptizauit.     Et 
sicut  nominauit  eum  angelus,  ita  semper  ipse  uocabitur,  id  est  Coem- 
genus,'  quod  latine  sonat  pulcer  genitus ;  pulcerrimus  enim  ipse  erat. 
Et  respiciens  sanctus  senior  Cronanus  infantem  Dei  plenum  gratia. 
obtulit  se  ipsum  ei  dicens  :  'O  benedicte  Dei  infans,  benedicat  te  Deus 
omnipotens.     Et   'ego'  ero  primus  monachus  tuus,  et   locum  meum 

'    =S  §  I,  R2  f.  116";  Br.  cc.  3,4  ;   Du.  p.  146  ;  on  the  margin  of  M  is  an  Irish 
pedigree  of  Coemgen.agreeing  in  the  main  vvith  that  in  LL.  351  ".  '  Caym- 

lugus  S  R.  3  Caim-  R  ;   Caym-  S.  *  nobilibus  ac  iustis  exortus 

parentibus  S  R.  *  in  Forlualha  Laigen  add.  Br.  '^  Du.  p.  147. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  235 

cum  omnibus  meis  tibi  trado '.'    Et  postea  cum  oratione  et  benedictione 
sancti  Cronani  sanctus  Coemgenus  ad  parentes  suos  reductus  est. 

ii.  In  natiuitate  ^  iam  sancti  Coemgeni,  Dei  dono  ad  domum  paren- 
tum  suorum,  pro  gratia  infantis,  mira  uacca  alba  mane  et  uespere 
veniebat,  de  cuius  lacte  sanctus  infantulus  Coemhgenus  aliquo  tem- 
pore  nutritus  est.  Et  illi  homines  nescierunt,  vnde  illa  venerat,  aut 
quo  pergeret  die  et  nocte.  Set  duo  magna  uassa  de  lacte  in  vnaquaque 
die  mulgebantur  ab  ea.  Et  post  teinpus,  nemine  illorum  adhuc 
sciente,  Dei  nutu  vnde  venit  ipsa  rediuit.  Et  per  hoc  sancti  infantis 
nomen  magnificatum  est. 

iii.  DuM '  esset  sanctus  Coemgenus  puer,  oues  parentum  suorum 
cum  aliis  pastoribus  pascebat.  Et  quodam  die  in  pascuis  pauperes 
venerunt  ad  eum,  dicentes  :  '  Miserere  nostri,  sancte  puer  Coemgene, 
audiuimus  iam  famam  sanctitatis  tue.'  In  Dei  enim  nomine  coram 
ceteris  tradidit  iUis  pius  puer  quatuor*  oues.  Sero  numeratis  ouibus 
domi,  numerus  Dei  dono  integer  inuentus  est,  ne  Christi  seruus  pro 
largitate  caritatis  sue  accussaretur.  Et  in  hoc  miraculo  sanctus 
Coemhgenus  in  Christi  amore  confortatus  est. 

iv.  Beatissimo  "  Coemgeno  adhuc  in  domo  parentum  manente,  alia 
plura  miracula  per  eum  a  Deo  facta  sunt,  que  hic  non  scribimus, 
uolentes  cicius  peruenire  ad  suam  perfectam  etatem.  Videntes  par- 
entes  sancti  Coemgeni  tantam  gratiam  in  eo,  tradiderunt  eum  sanctis 
senioribus  Eogano ",  Lochano',  et  Enne  *,  ut  m  cella  eorum  Christo 
nutriretur.  Et  apud  illos  sanctos  beatus  Coemgenus  sedule  legebat. 
Ipsoque  in  primis  iuuentutis  sue  floribus  crescente,  videns  illum 
quedam  pulchra  iuuencula  foris  in  agro  cum  fratribus  operantem, 
amauit  eum  valde.  Pulcerrimus  enim  erat  ipse,  sicut  prediximus. 
Et  cepit  indicare  ei  amicitiam  suam  astutis  verbis.  Insidiasque  ei 
illa,  prout  poterat,  semper  agebat,  vissu  et  loquela,  et  ahquando  per 
nuncium.  Que  omnia  sanctus  iuuenis  respuebat.  Et  ab  illa  ergo  die 
querebat  ipsa  oportunitatem  invenire  illum  solum.  Ouadam  vero  die, 
fratribus  operantibus  in  silua,  illa  post  eos  perrexit.  Et  uidens 
sanctum  Coemgenum'  seorsum  solum  in  silua  operantem,  adiuit  eum, 
et  blandissimis  |  nexibus  manuum  suarum  eum  amplexa  est.  Roga-  f.  65' 
batque  illum  dulcibus  uerbis,  ut  secum  concumberet.  Miles  autem 
Christi  armauit  se  sancto  signo,  et  repletus  Spiritu  Sancto,  resistit 
ei  fortiter,  et  exiliuit  de  manibus  eius  in  silua.     Et  inueniens  ipse 

1  According  to  B,  Fitzsimon's  MS.  adds  :  '  et  tota  prouincia  ista  Domino  tuo 
seruiet  in  eternum  ;  et  quando  habitatores  istius  primae  dignitati  tuae  aduersa- 
bunt,  ensis  extraneus  ueniet,  qui  diuersis  modis  eos  eradicabit.'  The  reference 
is  to  the  attempt  to  transfer  the  see  of  Glendalough,  and  Henry  ITs  invasion. 
■   =  S  §   I,  R2  u.  s.  ;   Br.  c.  6.  3   =  S  §  3,  R^  u-  s. :  Br.  c.  15  ;  Du.  p.  156. 

■*  vii.  S  R  ;  ocht  muilt  Br.,  i.  e.  eight  wethers.  ^   =  S  §§  2,  3  ;  R'  u.  s. 

^  Eugenio  S  R.       '  Altered  to  Lochurano  S  m.  sec. ;  Lachano  R.       *  Eanne  S  ; 
Ennano  R.        ^  Coginium  S  ;  Caimhinum  R. 


236  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

urticam  inuoluit  se  ipsum  nudo  corpore  in  eam.  Et  illa  adhuc 
iuuencula  persequens  eum,  reinduit  se  uestimentis  suis  uelocius,  et 
apprehendit  occulte  fa[s]ciculum  vrtice,  et  veniens  illa  ad  eum,  per- 
cussit  eam  sanctus  urtica  in  faciem,  et  in  manibus,  et  in  pedibus 
multis  vicibus.  Et  cum  illa  esset  lacerata  urtica,  extincta  est  uoluptas 
amoris  sui ;  et  compuncta  ipsa  corde,  flexis  genibus  ueniam  postu- 
lauit  in  Dei  nomine  a  sancto  Coemhgeno.  Et  orans  sanctus  pro  ea 
ad  Christum,  tunc  ipsa  Deo  et  sancto  Coemgeno  uirginitatem  suam 
promissit.  Inuenientesque  eos  fratres  ita  sibi  colloquentes,  admira- 
bantur  ualde.  Narrauitque  eis  uirgo,  que  gesta  fuerant,  habens 
verecundiam  pudicicie.  Et  talia  fratres  audientes,  confirmati  sunt  in 
amore  castitatis.  Illa  autem  iuuencula  deinceps  prudens  et  sancta 
uirgo  effecta  est,  que  sancta  monita  beati  Coemgeni  diligenter  seruabat. 
v.  QuADAM  '  die  iussus  est  sanctus  Coemgenus',  ut  pergeret  cum 
quodam  fratre '  in  siluam  prope  cellam  possitam ',  ut  facerent  in  ea 
ignem  pro  aliqua  causa  fratrum.  Et  erat  ille  frater  beato  Coemgeno 
senior.  '  Et  ipse  senior  ait  sancto  Coemgeno ' :  '  Frater  Coemgene, 
porta  nobis  ignem  in  siluam.'  Oblitusque  est  sanctus  Dei  ignem 
secum  portare.  Peruenientesque  ad  locum,  vbi  debebant  ignem 
accendere,  senior  ille  interrogauit,  vbi  esset  ignis.  Fatens  sanctus 
Coemgenus,  quod  oblitus  esset  ignem,  ait  ei  senior:  '  Percurre,  frater, 
cicius  post  ignem,  et  tolle  tecum  ignem.'  Et  interrogans  beatus 
Coemgenus  eum,  in  quo  portaret  ignem,  dixit  ei  senior  per  iram : 
'  In  sinu  tuo.'  Perueniensque  sanctus  Coemgenus  ad  coquinam, 
possuit  facem  ardentem  cum  multis  prunis,  iuxta  uerbum  senioris, 
in  sinu  suo.  Veniensque  ad  locum  predictum,  misit  ignem  in  terra 
de  sinu  suo  ante  seniorem  ;  set  mansit  vestimentum  intactum  igne 
ardente,  ac  si  nunquam  in  eo  missus  esset.  Videns  autem  ille  senior 
tale  miraculum  per  sanctum  Coemgenum  factum,  humiliter  dixit  ei : 
'  O  sancte  iuuenis,  video  te  Spiritu  Sancto  plenum  esse  ;  et  uere 
bbaciam  nostram  debes  habere.'  Ait  ei  sanctus  Coemgenus :  '  Miruni 
esset,  ut  sancti  seniores  sub  regula  mea  essent,  stulti  iuuenis ;  set 
nemini  hoc  miraculum  dicas.'  Et  ait  senior  :  '  lam  conueniencius  est 
alios  sub  te  esse,  quam  ut  tu  sis  sub  aliis.  Vere  venient  dies,  quando 
nos  omnes  et  loca  nostra  sub  te  erimus.'  Et  narrans  ille  senior'^  hoc 
miraculura  maioribus  et  omnibus  fratribus,  displicuit  multum  sancto 
Coemgeno,  et  recessit  ab  eis  longe  in  deserto  solus. 

f.  65  ""  vi.  Ambulans  '  beatissimus  Coemgenus  per  deserta  loca  solus,  in- 
venit  quadam  die  uallem  quandam  inter  concaua  montium  altissi- 
morum  possitam,  irrigantemque  pulcris  aquis.    Duo  enim  stagna  et 

'   =S  I  4,  R''  f.   115'';  Du.  p.  155  (different).           ^  Cayminius,  altered  to 

Caymginius  S  ;   Caymginus  R.  ^  presbitero  nomine  Brait  Diuco  S  R. 

*  ad  fornarium  S  ;  ad  fornicanum  R.  '  Brait  Diucus  R.             '   =  S  §  5  ; 
R'  u.  s.,  Br.  c.  7  ;  Du.  p.  148. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  237 

clari  riuuH  hinc  et  inde  confluunt  in  ea  de  montibus.  Et  pertransivit 
illam  uallem  usque  in  supcriori  parte  ipsius,  ubi  est  lacus  in  angustiori 
suo  fine,  inter  cacumina  niontium  altissimorum,  set  lacus  ad  radices 
eorum  a  monte  usque  ad  montem  constat.  Illaque  uallis  quondam 
scotice  vocabatur  Gleand  De,  modo  autem  dicitur  Gleand  da  locii,  id 
est  uallis  duorum  stagnorum.  Et  se  collegit  sanctus  Coemhgenus 
iuxta  predictum  stagnum  in  quadam  arbore  cauata,  et  mansit  ibi 
quodam  tempore  in  vita  angustissima  ^  Raro  enim  de  illa  arbore 
egrediebatur  foras,  et  colligebat  pauca  olera,  et  cum  modica  aqua 
commedebat.     Et  ita  vi.\it  multis  diebus. 

vii.  Pastor^  quidam  cuiusdam  patris  familias,  qui  dicebatur  Bi ', 
aliquibus  diebus  colligebat  armentum  suum  ad  pascua  in  predictam 
uallem,  in  qua  erat  sanctus  Coemgenus  heremita.  Et  uolens  Deus 
famulum  suum  Coemgenum  ostendere  hominibus,  fecit  vnam 
vac[c]am  de  illo  armento  venire  cotidie  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum 
in  suo  specu  manentem ;  et  ipsa  veniens  hngebat  sedule  uestimen- 
tum  sancti  *.  Audiensque  illa  uacca  mugitum  armenti  saturi  de 
herbis  virentibus  et  aquis  circa  uesperas  redeuntis,  et  pastores 
altissonis  uocibus  peccora  minantes,  uelocius  ad  primam  armenti 
partem,  contenta  suo  pastu,  recurrebat.  Et  omni  die  descendens 
armentum  de  gremio  montis  in  vallem  illam,  ipsa  vacca  se  furabatur 
a  ceteris,  et  veniebat  ad  virum  Dei.  Agebatque  cotidie,  sicut  in  primo 
die  fecit.  Et  illa  vacca  habundanciam  lactis  incredibiliter  habebat 
de  tactu  vestis  viri  Dei.  Admirantes  autem  caupones  habundantes 
ex  illa  uacca  lacteos  fontes,  narrauerunt  domino  suo.  Et  ille  ait 
pastori :  '  Scis  tu  quid  illi  uacce  contigit  ? '  Et  pastor '  nescire  se 
dicens,  ait  dominus  suus  ei :  '  Obserua  eam  diligenter,  ut  scias 
unde  habet  illa  "hanc'  gratiam.'  Crastino  autem  die  pastor  ille  com- 
mendauit  armentum  pueris  minoribus,  et  sequ[u]tus  est  illam  uaccam, 
quocunque  ibat.  Et  ipsa  uacca  consueto  more  exiuit  ad  arborem 
cauatam,  in  qua  erat  sanctus  Coemgenus.  Inveniens  pastor  vac[c]am 
lingentem  uestimentum  sancti,  admiratus  est  multum  ;  et  minans 
inde  uaccam,  aspere  increpauit  sanctum  Dei  rustice.  Et  hoc  sancto 
Coemgeno  displicuit,  timens  quod  ille  homo  se  proderet.  Postea  ille 
rusticus  minauit  peccora  ad  domum  suam.  |  Peruenientes  uero  ad  f.  65  "* 
uillam,  uerse  sunt  uacce  et  vituli  in  tantam  insaniam,  ut  non  cogno- 
scentes  se  inuicem,  matres  uellent  uitulos  occidere.  Hoc  videns 
pastor  timuit,  et  narrauit  domino  suo  quod  vidit  in  valle.  Et  ius[s]ione 
domini  sui  ille  pastor  statim  reuersus  est  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum  ; 

'  S  and  R  combine  in  one  section  this  residence  of  the  saint  in  the  tree  on 
the  north  side  of  the  lough  with  that  in  the  cave  on  the  south  side  in  §§  xvi  and 
xix  infra.  '   =  S  §  6,  R^  u.  s.,  Br.  c.  9'';  Du.  p.  149.  '  brugaidh  .  .  . 

dar  bho  comhainm  Dimma  mac  Fergna  Br.,  i.  e.  a  farmer  called  Dimma,  son  of 
Fergna  v.  inf.  §  xxv.      *  ro  ligh  a  chosa  Br.,  i.  e.  liclied  his  feet,      ^  Du.  p.  150. 


238  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

flectensque  genua,  rogauit  sanctum  Dei,  ut  daret  sibi  ueniam.  Adiu- 
ratusque  ille  a  sancto,  promissit  ipse  de  cetero,  se  'non'  proditurum 
eum  ;  nesciuit  enim  sanctus,  quod  ille  narrasset  antea  de  se  homini- 
bus.  Et,  impetrata  venia,  ille  homo  aquam  benedictam  a  sancto 
Coemgeno  'accepit'.  Et  aspergens  ille  aqua  illa  uaccas  et  uitulos, 
cognouerunt  se  inuicem  consueto  amore,  et  mites  ilico  facte  sunt. 
Statimque'  fama  sanctiCoemgeni  per  regionem  diuulgata  est.  Audi- 
entes  autem  sancti  seniores  supradicti,  id  est  Eoganus,  Lochanus, 
et  Enna,  quod  sanctus  Coemgenus  in  illa  ualle  deserta  esset,  reduxe- 
runt  eum  inde  contra  voluntatem  eius  ad  monasterium  suum. 

viii.  QuoDAM  die  in  autumpno  illi  sancti  seniores  collegerunt  plures 
in  segitibus  suis  messores,  et  parate  sunt  illis  carnes  et  cereuisia 
habundanter.  Manens  aliquo  circuitu  sanctus  Coemgenus  in  coquina 
illo  die,  magna  peregrinorum  turba  petens  in  Christi  nomine  victum, 
tunc  uenit  ad  ostium.  lam  beatissimus  Coemgenus,  plenus  miseri- 
cordia,  erogauit  illis  ante  coquos  omnia  cibaria  que  erant  parata 
messoribus.  Tunc  sanctus  Eoganus  iussit,  ut  messores  uenirent  ad 
prandium.  Cum  hoc  nunciatum  esset  sancto  Lochano,  uenit  ad  co- 
quinam,  et  ait  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum  :  '  O  bone  iuuenis,  quid  est  quod 
fecisti  sine  nostro  imperio  .'  Plures  enim  sunt  messores,  et  iuste  debent 
habere  bonum  prandium,  quia  opus  bonum  agunt ;  illis  autem  pere- 
grinis  alium  cibum  daremus.'  Hec  audiens  sanctus  iuuenis,  ueniam 
flexis  genibus  postulauit.  Exeunte  autem  foras  sancto  seniore  cum 
tristitia,  beatus  Coemgenus  coquinam  clausit  super  se,  et  imperauit 
ministris  omnia  ossa  colligere,  et  implere  aqua  omnia  uassa  ceruisie. 
Postea  autem  misit  foras  coquos,  et  orauit  supphciter  ad  Deum. 
Statimque  Christi  potencia  aqua  illa  conuersa  est  in  vinum,  et  omnia 
ossa  carnibus  plena  apparuerunt.  Vocansque  ad  se  magistrum 
coquine,  ostendit  ei  quod  sibi  Deus  donauit.  Et  coccus  currens 
narrauit  sanctis  senioribus  quod  factum  fuerat  per  sanctum  Coem- 
genum.  Et  sancti  seniores,  videntes  illud  factum  mirabile,  glori- 
ficauerunt  Deum,  et  benedixerunt  suum  sanctum  discipulum,  per  quem 
fecit  Deus  tale  miraculum.  Et  illud  donum  a  Deo  factum  fratribus 
illius  loci,  et  hospitibus,  atque  messoribus,  per  tres  dies  habundanter 
suffecit. 

ix.  Alio  tempore  sanctus  Coemgenus  perrexit  ad  quendam  sanctum 
f.  66  ■■  heremitam,  nomine  Beoanum;  et  mansit  apud  |  illum  aliquot  diebus. 
Ille  sanctus  habebat  vnam  vaccam,  et  ministro  suo  quodam  die  in 
alio  offjcio  occupato,  dixit  beato  Coemgeno :  '  Vade  frater,  et  vide 
vaccam  nostram,  ne  eam  bestie  heremi  commedant.'  Pergens  iam 
sanctus  Coemgenus,  invenit  illam  vitulum  parturientem.  Et  uolens 
postea  sanctus  eam  cum  uitulo  minare  ad  domum,  uenit  luppa  macie 
'  From  here  to  end  of  §  xv  om.  S  R. 


VITA  SANCTI  COEMGENI  239 

tabescens  ad  eum.  Et  sciens  ipse,  quod  illa  esuriret,  iussit  ei,  ut 
commederet '  vituium '  tunc  natum.  Et  statim  luppa  occidit  vitulum, 
et  commedit.  Hoc  videns  pia  mater,  tristissima  effecta  est ;  et  mugiens 
miserabiliter,  cucurrit  ad  cellam  domini  sui.  Sciensque  uir  Dei 
causam  illius,  di.xit  sancto  Coemgeno :  '  Fili,  quid  fecisti  ?  Cur  fregisti 
cor  miscre  matris.'  Impero  tibi  in  nomine  Domini  lesu  Christi,  ut 
cicius  adiuues  tristem  illius  mentem.'  Hoc  audiens  sanctus  Coem- 
genus,  perrexit  in  siluam  propinquam,  et  in  uirtute  Dei  luppam  ad  se 
uocauit.  Nutuque  Dei  illa  ilico  uenit  ad  sanctum  Domini.  Et  ait  ei 
beatus  Coemgenus:  '  Tibi  in  nomine  lesu  Christi  Dei  mei  dico,  ut 
vice  vituli  modo  ad  uaccam  illam,  cuius  uitulum  commedisti,  uenias,  et 
omni  hora  mulgendi  congrua  cotidie,  usque  dum  alium  partum  habeat, 
simili  modo  uenias.  Ipsa  enim  te  amabit  Dei  potestate,  quamuis  sit 
contra  naturam.'  Mirum  dictu  ;  luppa  ilico  post  tale  monitum  cucurrit 
ad  cellam,  et  stetit  ante  uaccam.  Videns  iam  uacca  eam,  statim  dilexit 
illam,  ut  mater  vnicum  suum  'filium'.  Et  postea  omni  die  hora 
mulgendi,  quanto  tempore  uacca  lac  illo  conceptu  habebat,  luppa  de 
silua  veniebat,  et  linguens  eam  uacca,  pie  lac  suum  dabat.  Hoc 
videns  sanctus  heremita  Beoanus  signum,  Deo  gloriam  dedit,  et 
benedi.^it  diligenter  sanctum  Coemgenum. 

X.  Deinde  sanctus  Coemgenus,  accepta  licentia  et  benedictione 
beati  senioris  Beoani,  ad  sanctum  episcopum  Lugidum  exiuit.  Lugi- 
dus  sanctus  episcopus  monasterium  monachorum  regebat  pie  et 
religiose ;  et  ipse  libenter  suscepit  sanctum  Coemgenum  inter  suos. 
Quodam  die  fur  de  grege  monasterii  sancti  Lugidi  episcopi  arietem 
furatus  est,  et  commedit.  Et  cum  ille  coactus  esset  ad  reddendum  siue 
ad  iurandum,  sanctus  Coemgenus  dixit  ei  :  '  O  miser,  confitere  quod 
fecisti,  postulans  ueniam  ;  uel  ad  periurium  auda[c]ter  accede.'  Ille 
autem  homo,  paruipendens  uerbum  sancti,  accessit  ad  signa  sancta, 
ut  iuraret.  Ilico  iam  accedens  fur  ad  iurandum,  aries  ex  ore  eius 
balando  alte  clamauit.  Tunc  omnes  uoluerunt  illum  post  talem  con- 
fussionem  dampnare  ad  mortem  ;  set  sancti  liberauerunt  eum.  Et  ait 
ei  sanctus  Coemgenus  :  '  O  stulte  homo,  relinque  hoc  seculum,  et 
salua  animam  tuam  a  languore  scelerum  tuorum.'  Ille  iam  compleuit 
consilium  sancti,  et  effectus  est  penitens  dignus  in  vita  sua. 

xi.  Quodam'  die  sanctus  Lugidus  episcopus  beatum  Coemgenum 
misit  in  rure  ad  quendam.  Iter  Christi  seruus  Coemgenus  agens, 
invenit  in  via  j  iacentes  duas  filias  de  nepotibus  Dallayn  decollatas.  f.  66'' 
Videns  iam  uir  Dei  nepharium  opus,  stetit  ibi  solus,  ne  dimitteret 
humana  cadauera  auibus  uel  canibus.  Et  orans  sanctus  in  illo  loco 
ad  Deum,  hostes,  qui  hoc  scelus  fecerunt,  turbata  mente  eorum, 
errauerunt,  et  ad  locum  perpetrati  sceleris  venerunt  retro  habentes 
1  =Br.  c.  18;  Du.  p.  161. 


240  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

capita  occisarum.  Et  uidens  eos  sanctus  Coemgenus,  uerbis  plurimis 
eos  increpauit  de  occissione'  feminini  sexus.  Illi  dixerunt:  '  Propter 
odium  et  vindictam  parentum  suorum  fecimus,  qui  nobis  multa  mala 
fecerunt.'  Et  petens  sanctus  ab  eis  capita,  deponunt  ea  super  terram. 
lungensque  sanctus  Coemgenus  capita  corporibus  suis,  orauit  pro  eis. 
Oransque  sanctus,  ante  omnes  ille  surrexerunt  sane  et  ualide,  gratias 
Deo  agentes.  Illi  uiri  videntes  maximum  miraculum  coram  se  factum, 
postulauerunt  suppliciter  ueniam,  et  promiserunt  se  nunquam  facturos 
tale  neffas,  gratulantes  multum  de  uita  puellarum.  Puelle  uero  per- 
uenientes  ad  suos,  narrauerunt  omnibus  que  sibi  contingerunt.  Et  de 
hoc  insueto  miraculo  nomen  sancti  Coemgeni  per  regiones  multum 
diuulgatum  est. 

xii.  QuoDAM  tempore  beatissimus  episcopus  Lugidus  in  iuuentute 
sua  uoluit  deserere  Hyberniam,  et  esse  in  aliena  patria  peregrinus. 
Veniensque  ad  eum  angelus  Domini,  dixit  ei :  '  Noli  deserere  Hyber- 
niam,  quia  Dei  dispensacione  plures  sanctos  in  ea  ordinabis.'  Ex 
hac  iu's'sione  angelica  sanctus  Lugidus  'retentus',  mansit  in  Hybernia. 
Et  de  illis  sanctis,  quos  sanctus  Lugidus  ordinauit,  est  beatissimus 
Coemgenus.  Postquam  iam  sanctus  Lugidus  fecit  sanctum  Coem- 
genum  sacerdotem,  misit  eum  cum  "quibusdam'  discipulis  sibi 
ordinatis,  ut  cellam  Deo  edificaret,  vbi  locum  posset  inuenire.  Et 
ueniens  ad  locum  qui  dicitur  Cluayn  Duach,  edificauit  ibi  cellam,  in 
qua  aliquo  tempore  mansit,  colligens  Christo  famulos. 

xiii.  Aliquando  in  ipso  loco  sancto  Coemgeno  adhuc  manente, 
quidam  plebeus  ad  ostium  illius  loci  uenit.  Et  videntes  eum  duodecim 
viri,  qui  erant  inimici  eius,  cucurrerunt  post  illum,  uolentes  eum 
occidere.  Videns  ipse  eos  se  sequentes,  prostrauit  se  ad  terram 
iuxta  ostium  ;  et  tunc  erat  clausum,  et  non  potuit  intrare.  Venientes 
autem  inimici,  nichil  ibi  de  homine  sentierunt,  set  tantum  lignum 
transuersum  super  terram.  Mirabanturque  ualde,  quia  non  viderunt 
ostium  aperiri,  nec  eum  inde  exisse.  Et  dicebant  inter  se  :  'Vbi  est? 
aut  quo  exiit  ?'  Nescientesque  quid  agerent,  quidam  ex  illis  sederunt 
super  eum,  quasi  super  hgnum.  Tunc  beatissimus  Coemgenus  intus 
f.  66'^  solus  in  oratorio  orabat ;  cui  diuinitus  reuelatum  est,  quid  |  factum 
fuerat  foris.  Et  discedens  foris,  uocauit  ad  se  quendam  fratrem,  et  ait 
ei :  '  Fili,  uoca  homines  consistentes  ante  fores  ad  me.'  Qui  cum 
uenissent,  ait  illis  uir  sanctus  :  '  O  miseri  homines,  cur  uoluistis 
hominem  interficere  ante  ostium  celle  Coemgeni  ? '  Illi  audientes  iam 
nomen  sancti  Coemgeni,  et  scientes  ex  gratia  uultus  sui  et  eloquii, 
quia  ipse  esset  beatus  Coemgenus,  corruerunt  in  terram,  petentes 
ueniam  ex  intimo  corde.  Tunc  ait  eis  minister  sancti  Coemgeni : 
'O  stulti,  ite  et  uidete  hominem  quem  querebatis,  et  super  quem 
sedistis,  apparens  ipse  uobis  quasi  lignum  potencia  Dei  per  gratiam 
'  MS.  occisisione. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  241 

nostri  abbatis.'  Videntes  illi  duodecim  hominem  ibi  sedentem,  et 
narrans  ipse  eis  ueritatem  rei,  obtulerunt  se  omnes  Deo  et  sancto 
Coemgeno.  Fecitque  eos  statim  uir  Dei  monachos,  et  manserunt 
apud  eum  pie  et  religiose  usque  ad  obitum  suum. 

xiv.  Faber  quidam  de  familia  sancti  Coemgeni  quadam  die  mortella 
lapidem  terens,  particula  de  lapide  scis[s]a  exiliuit,  et  fregit  oculum 
fabri.  Hoc  sancto  Coemgeno  in  oratorio  oranti  a  Deo  reuelatum  est, 
et  venit  statim  foras,  ubi  erat  luscus.  Vidensque  illius  miseriam,  et 
fratres  de  eo  dolentes,  possuit  manum  suam  super  oculum,  et  orauit 
pro  eo,  signans  illius  ^'vlnus  in  Christi  nomine.  Et  ilico  ibi  coram 
omnibus  illius  oculus  redditus  est  sanitati  a  cruore  et  dolore,  acsi 
nunquam  esset  percussus.  Et  ille  cum  ceteris  fratribus  gratias  Deo 
egit,  glorificans  uirtutem  sancti  sui  patroni. 

XV.  PosT  hec  et  alia  magna  signa  beatissimus  Coemgenus  illum 
locum,  id  est  Cluayn  Duach,  deseruit,  dimittens  illic  viros  catholicos. 
Direxitque  iter  ad  patriam  suam  cum  monachis,  quos  secum  uoluit 
ducere.  Ambulansque  sanctus  Coemgenus  quadam  diejjer  loca  aspera 
solus  post  monachos  suos,  vidit  hominem  a  via  parumper  remotum ' 
iacentem  mortuum.  Et  non  ualens  sanctus  illum  tegere  humo  ibi, 
quia  discipuli  sui  omnes  antecedebant  eum,  rogauit  Christum,  ut 
viuificaret  illum.  Cepitque  ilico  ille  palpit"a're ;  et  orans  adhuc 
sanctus,  surre.^it  viuus  qui  erat  mortuus  ;  et  benedixit  viro  Dei, 
gratias  Deo  agens.  Et  secutus  est  sanctum  Coemgenum,  perhibens 
se  morte  repente  illic  suffocatum.  Et  peruenientes  ad  fratres,  ipsi 
interrogabant,  unde  esset  homo  ignotus.  Ille  iam  homo  indicauit  eis 
se  exanimem  fuisse,  et  se  a  sancto  Coemgeno  resuscitatum  esse. 
Hoc  audientes  discipuli,  Christo  saluatori  laudem  dederunt.  Homo 
silicet  ille  factus  est  a  sancto  Coemgeno  monachus,  et  mansit  apud 
eum  obediens  usque  ad  mortem  suam. 

xvi.  DEiNDE'sanctus  Coemgenus  cum  ad  patriam  suam  peruenit,  | 
et  cepit  habitare  in  illa  solitudine,  in  ualle  'silicet'  duorum  stagnorum,  f.  66 '' 
in  qua  ipse  in  iuuentute  sua  heremita  erat,  ubi  uacca  eum  invenit, 
sicut  scripsimus.  IUam  enim  solitudinem  ab  inicio  multum  dilexit 
beatus  Coemgenus.  Et  in  inferiori  predicte  uallis  parte  magnum 
monasterium  fundauit,  ubi  duo  riui  clari  confluunt.  Et  multi  hinc  et 
inde  venerunt  ad  eum,  et  fecit  eos  sanctus  Coemgenus  monachos  in 
illo  loco.  Et  plurima  monasteria  et  celle  per  regiones  Laginensium 
sub  eo  fundata  sunt,  et  erat  maxima  monachorum  multitudo  per 
diuersa  loca  sub  cura  sancti  Coemgeni.  Ipse  beatissimus  Coem- 
genus  predictum  suum    monasterium   et    cetera  viris  probabilibus 

>  MS.  -ta.  »   =S  |§  s'',  7»  ;  R^  ff.  ii6<',  117"  ;  v.  p.  237,  note  i  supra. 

PLUMUER  B 


242  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

commendauit,  constituens  singulis  religiossis  officium  suum.  Et 
exiuit  ipse  ab  eis  solus  ad  superiorem  ipsius  uallis  partem,  quasi 
per  vnum  miliarium  a  monasterio,  et  construxit  mansiunculam 
ibi  in  loco  angusto  inter  montem  et  stagnum  sibi,  ubi  erant  dense 
arbores  et  clari  riuuli.  Et  precepit  monachis  suis,  ut  nullum  ciborum 
sibi  genus  darent,  et  nemo  ad  eum  veniret  nisi  pro  maxima  causa. 
Et  ita  solus  in  superiori  ipsius  uallis  plaga  inter  montes  et  stagnum 
in  diuersis  locis  per  quatuor  annos  heremita  fuit,  in  ieiuniis  et  vigiliis 
continuis,  sine  igne  et  sine  tecto  ;  et  habetur  incertum  vtrum  radici- 
bus  herbarum,  an  fructibus  lignorum,  siue  celesti  pastu,  suam 
sustentauit  vitam,  quia  ipse  nemini  indicauit  hanc  questionem.  Set 
sui  monachi  claram  cellam  in  heremo,  ubi  sanctus  Coemgenus 
habitabat,  inter  superius  stagnum  et  montem,  in  australi  parte  (ubi 
est  clarum  monasterium  modo,  in  quo  semper  viri  religiosissimi 
habitant,  et  illud  vocatur  scotice  [Disert  Caimhghin]\  quod  sonat 
latine  heremus  Coemgeni)  construxerunt ;  et  ibi  plures  habitauerunt. 
Et  fere  moncium  et  siluarum  mites  commitabantur  sanctum  Coem- 
genum,  et  aquam  de  manibus  eius  domestice  bibebant.  Et  post 
predictum  tempus  multi  sancti  conuenientes  duxerunt  de  desertis 
locis  invitum,  et  fecerunt  eum  habitare  cum  suis  monachis  in  predicta 
cella.  Ibique  sanctus  Coemgenus  semper  uoluit  habitare,  et  ad 
Christum  migrare.     Adhuc  iam  illic  inter  fratres  satis  stricte  vixit. 

xvii.  QuADAM-  die,  manens  sanctus  Coemgenus  foris  super  lapidem, 
apparuit  ei  dyabolus  cum  magna  modestia  in  forma  pulcerrima, 
transformans  se  in  angelum  quasi  lucis  ;  et  dixit  viro  Dei :  '  Aue,  vir 
sancte  Dei,  ecce  sum  missus  tibi  a  Domino,  ut  dem  tibi  consilium. 
Magnum  iam  laborem  semper  sustines,  et  laudant  te  sancti  angeli 
ante  conspectum  Domini,  et  imperat  tibi  Dominus,  amans  te,  ut  de 
hac  ualle  montana  ad  terram,  habitabilem  monachis  tuis  post  te, 
discedas.'  Et  benedicens  dyabolus  sancto  Dei,  ilico  post  tale  impe- 
rium  euanuit.  Sanctus  autem  Coemgenus  admirans  de  pulcritudine 
f.  67  "  et  modestia  ilhus,  si  demon  esset;  et  cur  imperauit^  |  ei,  ut  discederet 
a  loco,  ubi  vita  sua  a  Deo  et  angelis  suis  laudatur,  si  angelus  lucis 
esset,  quia  Deus  potens  est  seruis  suis  vbique  bona  preparare,  ait : 
'  In  hac  ualle,  Deo  permittente,  ubi  vita  mea,  siue  ab  angelo,  siue 
a  demone  laudatur,  cursum  huius  vite  consum[m]abo.' 

Et  postea  ille  Sathanas  cum  turba  demonum  ultra  montem  Fuayd, 
in  aquilonali  plaga  Hybernie,  in  regione  silicet  Ultorum,  sancto 
Comhgallo  abbati  apparuit ;  et  ait  ei  sanctus  Comhgallus :  '  Vnde 
modo  venisti,  Sathanas?'     Sathanas  respondit :  'De  finibus  Laginen- 

'  No  lacuna  in  MS.,  but  it  is  clear  that  the  Irish  name  has  been  omitted; 
Desertum  Caymginii  S  ;  Dcsertum  Caimhgin  R  ;  which  do  not  give  any  Irish 
name.  2  Not  in  S  R.  '  MS.  imparauit. 


VITA   SANCTI   COEMGENI  243 

sium,  dc  ualle  videlicet  duorum  stagnorum,  ubi  ille  rigidus  Coem- 
genus  habitat,  ucnimus.  In  illo  iam  loco  ipse  rusticus  cum  miserabili 
cetu  meis  discipulis  septem  annis  multum  nocuit  indesinenter.  Ego 
autem  post  omnes  exiui  ad  eum,  et  ut '  de  suo  loco  discederet, 
persuassi  ei ;  sed  non  profuimus,  quia  stabilitas  illius  nos  omnes 
superat.  Nunc  iam  ego  cum  mea  familia  ad  nostrum  locum  inanes 
vadimus,  et  uexilla  nostra  fracta  esse  ab  illo  narrare  ibi  cupimus. 
Volumus  enim  adhuc  temptare  eum.'  Tunc  sanctus  Comhgallus  ait 
ei :  '  Reuertere,  Sathanas,  cum  meis  monachis  ad  sanctum  Coem- 
genum,  et  nec  post  nec  ante  eos  uenias  ad  euni,  set  simul  cum  illis ; 
et  insidias  tuas,  tuumque  dolum  contra  eum,  presentibus  monachis 
meis,  manifesta  illi.  Hoc  tibi  impero  in  Christi  nomine.'  Et  uenien- 
tibus  sancti  Comhgalli  monachis  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  apparuit 
simul  cum  eis  Sathanas,  et  narrauit  sancto  Coemgeno  omnia 
secundum  ordinem,  sicut  iussit  ei  sanctus  Comhgallus.  Tunc  sanctus 
Coemgenus  gratias  Deo  egit,  benedicens  amico  suo  Comhgallo.  Et 
imperauit-  dyabolo,  ut  cetum  suum  de  illa  valle  semper  tolleret. 
Demones  iam  statim  imperio  sancti  Coemgeni  discesserunt  de  ualle, 
ululantes  terribili  clamore,  et  perhibentes  se  nunquam  acturos 
stacionem  in  ipsa  ualle.  Post  discessum  autem  demonum  rupis 
illa,  de  qua  nocebant  hinc  et  inde,  per  orationem  sancti  Coemgeni 
in  stagnum  cecidit  magno  fragore. 

xviii.  CoNsuEBAT '  sanctus  Coemgenus  in  stagno  omnibus  noctibus 
per  interuallum  hore  intrepidus  orare.  Bestia  uero  horridissima  de 
lacu  veniebat  ad  eum  ;  et  natans  circuibat  corpus  eius  vndique,  set 
tamen  nichil  sancto  nocebat.  Paciencia  mira  viri  Dei  impetum  bestie 
sustinebat  in  aqua  frigida,  quasi  nichil  videret.  Videns  piissimus 
Deus  maximam  pacienciam  serui  sancti  sui  Coemgeni  in  vissu 
horrende  belue,  et  maximum  eius  tormentum  in  frigida  aqua, 
angelum  suum  post  tempus  missit  ad  eum  iuuandum.  Tribus  'de' 
causis  a  Deo  missus  est  angelus  ibi  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum.  Prima, 
ut  a  diuersis  suis  grauibus  laboribus  leuius  viueret  paulisper. 
Secunda,  ut  hor|ridam  bestiam  sancto  infestam  repelleret.  Tertia,  f-  (>1  ^" 
ut  frigiditatem  aque  calefaceret.  Adueniens  enim  angelus  Domini, 
statim  omni  nocte  monstrum  bestiale  rece'de'bat  a  viro  Dei ;  et, 
angelo  quasi  in  sinu  eius  sedente,  aqua  circa  eum  calida  fiebat.* 

xix.    Infra°  spacium  predictorum  septem   annorum,   in   margine 
aquilonali  illius  laci  sanctus  Coemgenus  oratoriolum  sibi  construxit 

J  MS.  ut  et.  2  MS.  imparauit.  3   =s   5  ,,   R2  f.  1170  ;  Br.  c.  8. 

*  Here  S  R  insert  the  following  section  (8  in  Si  :  Cum  quodam  tempore  in 
monasterio  suo  ignis,  quo  necessaria  hospitibus  pararentur,  deficeret ;  lotis  aqua 
manibus  ac  uultu,  quinque  digitorum  apicibus  guttas  in  ticiones  demisit  emortuas  ; 
et  mox,  igne  suscepto,  arserunt  iu  uiuas.  Hic  uero  ignis  miraculose  resuscitatus 
multa  temporum  durauit  curricula.        *   =Br.  c.  13.     Not  in  S  R  ;  but  cf.  S  §  5. 

R  2 


244  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

ex  uirgis  ad  Deum  orandum  cotidie.  Ibique  sanctus  a  nullo  homine 
cognitus  habitabat,  et  nullo  humano  alimento  uescebatur,  ut  supra 
diximus.  Quodam  quoque  die  uenator  regis  Laginensium,  Brandubli 
fihi  Eathach,  de  semine  Enna,  a  quo  nominaturgens'  Cennselach,  qui 
innumerabilem  cedem  in  maxima  plaga  super  aquilonales  Hybernie 
provinchias  in  bello  magno  fecit  (et  ille  Brandubh  regnum  multarum 
Hybernie  regionum,  postquam  ipse  regem  Temorie  et  Aileach,  id  est 
Edum  filium  Ainmireuch  occidit  in  bello,  tenuit),  sequens  canes  suos 
aprum  persequentes,  uenit  in  uallem  illam ;  et  aper  oratoriolum 
sancti  Coemgeni  intrauit,  canes  autem  non  intrauerunt,  set  super 
pectora  sua  ante  ostium  iacebant.  Et  erat  ibi  sub  arbore  sanctus 
Coemgenus  orans,  et  aues  plures  super  manus  eius  et  humeros 
stabant,  et  uolabant  circa  eum,  carmina  suauia  sancto  Dei  canentes". 
Videns  venator,  stupefactus  de  hiis  reuersus  est  cuni  canibus  suis 
ilico,  dimittens  aprum  liberum  causa  benedictionis  sancti  anachorite. 
Et  miracula  que  vidit,  ille  narrauit  regi  et  ceteris  omnibus.  Et  rami 
et  folia  arborum  aliquando  dulcia  carmina  sancto  Coemgeno  cane- 
bant,  ut  intollerabilem  laborem  eius  celestia  carmina  temperarent. 

XX.  In  tempore  '  quadragessimali,  cum  esset  sanctus  Coemgenus  in 
deserto,  angelus  Domini  tribus  noctibus  uenit  ad  eum,  dicens : 
'Rupis  ista,  que  supereminet  huic  spelunce,  in  qua  habitas,  Christi 
famule,  cadet  super  istam  speluncam  cito ;  ideo  uade  cicius  ad  alium 
locum.'  Sanctus  Coemgenus  respondit:  '  Loculus  iste  angustus 
'est'  in  quo  maneo,  et  uolo  per  tempus  quadragesime  in  eo  esse,  nisi 
displicet  Deo  meo.'  Angelus  dixit :  '  Vere  manus  omnipotentis  Dei 
rupem  istam,  ne  te  occideret,  pluribus  diebus  sustinet.'  Et  hiis  dictis 
discessit.  Beatus  autem  Coemgenus  intra  se  ait :  '  In  Domino  Deo 
meo  lesu  Christo  confidens,  usque  in  pascha  hic  manebo.'  Veniente 
quoque  sancto  uespere  paschali  angelus  iterum  sancto  Coemgeno  ait : 
'  Cito  de  hac  spelunca  Vmigra,  sequens  me.'  Tunc  sanctus  Coem- 
genus  sequ[u]tus  est  angelum  siccis  pedibus  trans  stagnum.  Post 
discessum  iam  sancti  rupis  illa  super  speluncam  predictam  cito 
cecidit,  sicut  angelus  predixit.  | 

f.  67  <^  xxi.  Alio  die  beatissimus  abbas  Munnu  in  suo  nionasterio, ' 
nomine  Teach  Munna,  que''  est  in  australi  plaga  regionis  Ceannselach, 
audiuit  demonem  alteri  demoni  dicentem  :  '  Vt  quid  tuus  wltus,  'O' 
amice,  tam  tristis  est,  et  pallescit  multum  isto  tempore?'  Alter 
respondit :  '  Nempe  'cur  non'  essem  tristis .'  nam  ego  et  alii  socii 
plures  fortiter  contra  vnum  hominem  multo  tempore  pugnauimus, 

'  Here  on  margin  of  MS.  a  scribal  note  :  is  fada  a[ta],  i.  e.  it  is  long  that  it  is. 
'  Br.  c.  10  and  Du.  p.  153  give  the  story  how  a  blackbird  built  its  nest  and 
hatched  its  young  on  one  of  St.  Coemgen's  hands.  ^  =  Br.  c.  10  ;  Du.  p.  153 ; 
§§  XX,  xxi  are  not  in  S  R.  '  quc  refers  to  domits  implied  in  Teach, 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  245 

et  nichil  ualuimus.  Locus  enim,  in  quo  ipse  stat,  proprius  cst  noster 
ab  inicio  mundi ;  modo  autem,  sicut  impossibile  homini  viuenti  in 
flammis  succensis  consistere,  ita  nobis  difficile  est  inter  illum  locum 
et  celum  perlustrare,  quia  flammis  orationum  eius  vrimur.  Si  vis 
nosse  eum,  ipse  est  Coemgenus,  qui  habitat  in  valle  duorum  stagno- 
rum.  Nos  tamen  in  hiis  diebus  persuassimus  ei  de  loco  irc  in 
peregrinacionem,et  ipse  'modo'est  paratus  ire,  si  Deus  non  impediret 
iter  eius.'  Hec  audiens  sanctus  Munna,  demonem  illum  in  cathena 
ignita  per  uirtutem  Christi  alligauit  per'  lapideum  titulum  Dei 
auxilio  huc  usque  in  memoriam  uirtutis  ligatum.  Deinde  sanctus 
Munna  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum  nuncios  misit,  qui  sancto  Coemgeno 
uerba  demonum  erga  se  per  ordinem  dixerunt.  Et  sanctus  Coem- 
genus,  gratias  agens  Deo  et  sancto  Munna,  omisit  -  uotum  peregri- 
nandi. 

xxii.  Qvadam'  nocte  sanctus  Coemgenus  cum  siiis  monachis 
ympnum  sancti  Patricii  cantabant.  Repente  autem  beatus  Coem- 
genus  admiratus  tacuit,  et  suos  tribus  vicibus  ympnum  cantare  iussit. 
Ympno  tercia  vice  depossito,  benedixit  eis  Patricius.  Quibus 
interrogantibus,  cur  iu's'sit  ympnum  cantari  ter,  ipse  uero  tacens, 
expossuit  eis,  dicens :  '  Beatissimus  patronus  noster  Patricius,  cuius 
ympnum  cantastis,  stabat  in  pauimento  sufiultus  baculo,  et  benedixit 
uobis  'a'  carmine  cessantibus.'  Ille  est  Patricius  archiepiscopus, 
qui  Hyberniam  de  gentilitate  conuertit  ad  fidem,  et  ipsc  ante  multos 
annos  ad  Christum  migrauit.  Eius  autem  ympni  gratia  in  uita  sua 
narratur  *. 

xxiii.  Sequente"  nocte  sancfus  Coemgenus  nocturno  silencio  a 
loco,  ubi  ympnum  sancti  Patricii  cuni  suis  cantauit,  usque  ad 
locum,  in  quo  nunc  est  ciuitas  eius,  trans  stagnum  siccis  pedibus 
ambulauit,  putans  quod  nemo  se  tunc  videret.  Tamen  coriarius 
eius,  nomine  Cronanus,  secutus  est  paulatim  vestigia  sancti  Coem- 
geni  similiter  siccis  pedibus  trans  stagnum.  Videns  eum  pater 
sanctus  de  stagno  post  se  descendentem,  ait  ei :  '  Quare,  fi-ater, 
ausus  es  post  me  per  insuetum  iter  sine  mea  licentia  venire  ?  Ideo 
tibi  dico,  quia  tua  ossa  in  loco,  ubi  erunt  reliquie  mee,  non  erunt 
sepulta.  Set  tamen  ne  sit  desperacio ;  mecum  eris  in  celestibus.' 
Ille  iam  frater  obediens,  humilis,  et  fidelis  erat,  Et  secundum  | 
uaticinium  viri  Dei  sibi  contigit.  f-  67 

xxiv.  Post"  hec  angelus  Domini  ad  sanctum  Coemhgenum  uenit, 
dicens :  '  O  sancte  Dei,  misit  me  ad  te  Deus,  ut  ad  locum  quem 
constituit  Dominus  tibi  in  oriente  minoris  stagni,  venies,  et  sis  ibi 

1  ?intra.  »  MS.  amisit.  3  =S  §  9,  R^  f.  117".  *  See  Colgan's  third 
Life  of  Patrick,  c.  88  ;  sixtfi  Life,  c.  177  ;  V.  Tr.  pp.  116-8,  244-6,  382-4,  304, 
400,476.        sNolinSR.        6  --S§  10,  R=f.  117''.  '  ^^  > 


246  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

inter  fratres  tuos  ;  quia  illic  erit  resurrectio  tua.'  Sanctus  Coem- 
genus  dixit  :  '  Nisi  Domino  meo  displicuisset,  uellem  in  isto  loco,  in 
quo  laborem  pro  Ciiristo  sustinui,  manere  usque  ad  obitum  meum.' 
Angelus  respondit :  '  Si  tu  cum  monachis  tuis  ad  illum  locum  pergas, 
plurcs  filii  vite  semper  in  ipso  usque  ad  finem  seculi  erunt,  et 
monachi  tui  post  te  sufficienciam  de  terrenis  habebunt  ibi.  Multaque 
beatarum  milia  animarum  tecum  ex  illo  loco  ad  regnum  celorum 
resurgent.'  Coemgenus  respondit  :  'Vere,  O  sancte  minister,  im- 
possibile  est  monachis  in  ista  ualle  montibus  circumdata  habitare, 
nisi  Deus  eos  sua  potencia  adiuuauerit.'  Angelus  respondit :  '  Hec 
uerba  audi,  uir  Dei.  Quinquaginta  silicet  viros  in  illo  loco 
celesti  pane  de  monachis  tuis,  si  volueris,  saciabit  Deus  sine  ali- 
moniis  terrenis,  si  vnanimes  in  Christo  permanserint  post  te  ;  et  vni- 
cuique  ex  eis  morienti  alius  cum  Dei  timore  et  amore,  in  eodem 
'  habitu '  et  professione,  usque  ad  diem  iudicii  succedet.'  Coemgenus 
respondit :  '  Nolo  iam  ut  sint  monachi  mei  tam  pauci  post  me  in 
illo  loco.'  Respondit  angelus  :  '  Si  ergo  nolueris  ut  sint  tam  pauci 
in  illo  loco,  multa  milia  in  eo  prospere  et  sine  penuria,  Deo  eis  iam 
prestante  terrena  commoda,  per  seculum  ibi  erunt.  Tu  vero  de 
celesti  sede  tue  familie  terrene,  sicut  tu  in  Christo  uolueris,  sub- 
ministrabis.  Atque,  Deo  iuuante,  tuos  monachos  hic  et  in  futuro 
gubernabis.  Locus  iam  ille  sanctus  et  venerabilis  erit ;  et  reges 
potentesque  Hybernie  eum  honorabunt  in  honore  Domini  propter 
te,  in  terris,  auro  et  argento,  gemmis  preciosis,  ac  sericis  ucstibus, 
muneribus  transmarinis,  et  regurri  deliciis,  et  fertilitate  satis  cumu- 
labitur.  Ciuitas  enim  magna  illic  crescet.  Leuicianaque  monachorum 
tuorum  tam  sanctissima  erit,  ut  nullus  eorum,  illius  introiens  sub 
humo,  tormenta  inferni  pertulerit.  Si  uero  uolueris,  ut  isti  quatuor 
montes,  qui  huic  ualli  adherent,  equi  campi  amenissimi  et  fructuosi 
sint,  absque  dubio  Deus  tuus  faciet  propter  te.'  Sanctus  Coemgenus 
respondit:  '  Creaturas  Dei  propter  me  moueri  non  cupio  ;  quia  aliter 
Deus  *meus'  locum  potest  adiuuare.  Et  insuper  omnes  fere  horum 
moncium  domestice  et  humiles  mihi  sunt,  et  de  hoc  quod  dicis  tristes 
essent.'  Hec  et  hiis  similia  sermocinantes  inter  se  angelus  Domini  et 
sanctusCoemgenus,  trans  stagnum  ad  locum  illum  superaquas  ambu- 
lauerunt.  Et  prospicientes  illum  diligenter  locum,  Coemgenus  angelo 
f.  68  "  dixit :  '  Hic  locus  asper  [  est ;  scrophes  enim  multum  abscondunt  super- 
ficiem  eius,  et  nuUus  locus  sepulture  aptus  est  in  eo.'  Respondit  ei 
angelus :  '  Isti  lapides  immobiles  sunt  ab  euo  usque  hodie ;  ab  isto 
autem  die  semper  mobiles  erunt.'  Et  in  ipsa  terra,  quam  angelus 
significauit  '  sancto '  Coemgeno,  nullus  lapis  immobilis  invenitur. 

XXV.  Deinde  '  non  longe  angelus  supradictus  iterum  ad  sanctum 

1  Not  in  S  R  ;  =Br.  c.  9«  ;  Du.  p.  151. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  247 

Cocmgenum  venit,  dicens  :  '  In  nomine  Domini  nostri  lesu  Christi, 
surge  tu  cum  tuis,  et  exitc  ad  locum  quem  Deus  aptum  resurreccioni 
vestre  ordinauit.'    Post  hec  uerba  discessit. 

Adhuc  sancto  Coenigeno  in  eodem  loco  manente,  ecce  uir  bonus 
de  nobili  genere  Laginensium,  nomine  Dymma  filius  Fiagni,  uenit 
ad  sanctum  Coemgenum.  Cui  ait  uir  sanctus:  '  Die  constituto  tu  cum 
tuis  ad  me  ueni,  ut  sarcinas  et  edes  fratrum  ad  alium  locum,  a  Deo 
nobis  constitutum,  transferatis.'  Veniensque  ille  homo,  sicut  pro- 
missit,  interrogauit  eum  sanctus  Coemgenus,  dicens  :  '  Duxisti  tecum 
omnes  homines  tuos,  sicut  dixi  tibi  ? '  Respondit  Dymma :  '  Octo 
filios  meos  cum  ceteris  duxi  mecum  ;  nonus  autem  remansit  domi, 
nolens  uenire.'  Sanctus  Coemgenus  dixit  :  '  Quo  nomine  uocatur 
ille  ? '  Dymma  dixit  :  '  Moelgubi  uocatur.'  Dixit  ei  sanctus  Coem- 
genus  :  '  Heu  proprium  nomen  est  illi  ;  ipse  enim  post  paucos  dies 
in  australi  Laginensium  plaga,  que  dicitur  Cennselach,  crucifigetur. 
Et  uere  congruum  '  nomen '  illi  fuit  Moelgubi,  id  est  caluus  lugubris  ; 
quia  exitus  lugubris  sibi  accidet.'  Iterum  sanctus  Coemgenus 
prophetice  predixit,  Dym[m]a  dicens  :  'Tu  uero  et  octo  filii  tui  non 
iugulabimini,  set  post  penitentiam  quiete  ibitis  ad  celum.'  Quod  ita 
completum  est.  Post  talia  uaticinia  Dymma  cum  [filiis]  suis  et  ceteris 
inde  suppellictilem  et  edes  eleuantes,  depossuerunt  in  loco  signato 
ab  angelo  sancto  Coemgeno.  Postea  sanctus  Coemgenus  ait :  '  In 
hoc  loco  ciuitas  mea  crescet,  in  qua  erit  resurreccio  mea.'  Inter- 
rogantibus  Dymma  et  filiis  eius,  ubi  ecclesia  et  cimiterium  iliius  loci 
edifficaretur,  sanctus  Coemgenus  dixit  :  '  Hic  olim  pastor  quidam 
sepultus  est,  et  circa  eum  multi  resurgent ;  nam  cimiterium  huius 
loci  hic  erit.'  Et  ait  sanctus  Coemgenus  Dj^mma  et  filiis  eius :  'O 
filii,  spinas  et  tribulos  abscidite,  et  facite  rimacionem  huius  loci,  in 
hoc  enim  loco  sepulti  eritis.  Vbi  iam  post  tempus  multum  templum 
meo  nomini  edificabitur,  et  sub  altari  eius  iacebitis.'  Illa  iam  uallis 
posessio  Dymma  erat,  et  illam  totam  Dymma  et  filii  sui  Deo  et 
sancto  Coemgeno  obtulerunt.  Octauus  filius  Dymma,  nomine  Dycoll, 
humiliter  supra  vires  pre  omnibus  laborabat.  Cui  sanctus  Coem- 
genus  dixit :  '  O  fili,  benedictus  et  amabilis  Deo  et  hominibus  eris ; 
et  sicut  humilior  es  pre  ceteris,  ita  tu,  et  |  semen  tuum  post  te,  f.  68  <> 
sublimior  eris,  et  fratrum  tuorum  dominaberis.'  Postea  Dymma  cum 
filiis  suis,  gaudens  de  benedictione  sancti  Coemgeni,  ad  sua  exiuit. 
Cepit  autem  sanctus  Coemgenus  in  illo  loco  strictissime  viuere  ;  id 
est  asperrimis  uestibus  indui,  et  sine  lecto  super  nudam  humum 
iacere,  et  nimiis  ieiuniis,  non  gustando  nisi  herbas,  et  raro  aquam, 
et  continuis  vigiliis,  et  esse  sine  tecto  et  igne  frequencius  foris.  Et 
ita  vixit  ibi  multo  tempore,  donec  sancti  patres,  rogantibus  discipu- 
lis  eius,  illum  de  hac  asperitate  ad  societatem  fratrum  per  racionem^ 
'  Here  MS.  wrongly  inserts  eum. 


248  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

reuocauerunt.  Et  in  ipso  loco  clara  et  religiosa  ciuitas  in  lionore 
sancti  Coemgeni  creuit,  que  nomine  predicte  uallis  in  qua  ipsa  est, 
id  est  Gleann  da  Locli,  uocatur.  Ipsaque  ciuitas  est  in  oriente 
Laginensium,  in  regione  que  dicitur  Fortuatlia. 

xxvi.  QuiDAM  '  homo  audiens  zonam  auream  in  elymosinam  sancto 
Coemgeno  datam,  uenit  plenus  dolo,  et  petiuit  zonam  illam.  Dicebat 
mendaciter  matrem  suam  captiuam  esse,  et  quod  pro  absolucione 
illius  quesiuit  zonam  ;  et  hoc  falsum  erat.  Deditque  ei  sanctus 
Coemgenus  zonam  auream,  ut  pro  matre  sua  daret.  Ille  iam  exiens 
cum  zona,  tribus  vicibus  mirabiliter  errauit,  et  nullo  modo  potuit 
uiam  suam  agnoscere ".  Tercia  autem  vice  cognoscens  culpam  suam, 
uenit  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  et  confessus  est  quod  fecit  inique,  et 
egit  penitentiam  ^ 

xxvii.  Alio*  tempore  audiens  sanctus  Coemgenus  tres  abbates,  id 
est  Columbam,  Comhgallum  et  Caynnicum,  congregatos  in  vnum 
locum,  nomine  Huysneach  ",  perrexit  ad  eos,  uolens  cum  eis  fraterni- 
tatem  firmare.  Et  erat  illa  die  magna  stacio  plebium  conueniens  ad 
sanctum  Columbam,  ubi  erant  sancti.  Et  uidens  sanctus  Columba 
sanctum  Coemgenum  a  longe  [uenire]  ad  stacionem,  surrexit  ob 
honorem  illius,  et  stabat,  quousque  sanctus  Coemgenus  illuc  peruenit. 
Appropinquans  iam  sanctus  Coemgenus  illi  stacioni,  ecce  canes 
ferocissimi  et  horribiles  occurrerunt  ei,  uolentes  eum  commedere. 
Videntesque  omnes,  putabant  quod  sanctus  cum  suis  occisus  esset 
a  canibus.  Set  signans  sanctus  Coemgenus  contra  impetum  canum, 
ipsi  nutu  Dei  mitissimi  effecti  sunt,  et  pedes  sancti  Coemgeni  et 
uestimenta,  gaudentes  multum,  auribus,  et  naribus,  ac  lingua  lambe- 
bant.  Et  uidentes  tale  miraculum,  benedictionem  Deo  in  sanctis  suis 
dederunt.  Increpabant  autem  homines  rustici  illius  stacionis  sanctum 
Columbam,  quod  stabat  tam  longe  causa  aduentus  Coemgeni.  Dixit- 
que  eis  Columba  sanctus  :  '  Cur,  miseri  homines,  non  surgeremus  in 
aduentu  famuli  Dei,  Coemgeni,  cum  angeli  Domini  in  aduentu  eius 
f.  68  "  consurgent  in  celo.'    Et  de  hoc  testimonio  \  multum  edificati  sunt. 

xxviii.  ALio^tempore  beatissimus  Coemgenus  ad  uisitandum  san- 
ctissimum  Kyaranum  abbatem,  qui  instituit  suam  ciuitatem,  id  est, 
Cluayn  meic  Noys,  que  est  in  occidentali  plaga  regionis  Midhi,  super 
ripam  fluminis  Synna,  contra  prouinchiam  Connachtorum,  perrexit. 
Set  sanctus  Cyaranus,  antequam  sanctus  Coemgenus  ad  se  peruenis- 
set,  tercio  die  de  hoc  seculo  ad  Christum  migrauit.  Et  corpus  illius 
in  quadam  basilica  super  feretrum  constitutum  est,  donec  sanctus 
Coemgenus  et  alii  sancti  ad  eum  sepeliendum  peruenirent.    Per- 

1  =S  §  II,  R'  u.s.  2  ac  uespere  ad  uirum  Dei  nescius  rediuit  o(/rf.  S  R. 

'  et  zonam  reliquit  adii.  S  R.  <  =  S  §  12,  R«  u.  s.  ^  Usnech  S  R. 

6   =S  §  la^,  R2f.  117«. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  249 

ueniensque  sanctus  Coemgenus  sero  ad  monasterium  sancti  Chyarani, 
intrauit  basilicam  in  qua  erat  sanctum  corpus,  et  imperauit  omnibus 
tratribus  foras  exire,  uolens  ipse  illa  nocte  soius  commorari  ibi  iuxta 
sanctum  cadauer.  Et  exeuntes  omnes  fratres  foras,  sanctus  Coeni- 
genus  ostium  illius  basilice  clausit  diligenter,  et  mansit  ibi  solus  usque 
ad  crastinum.  Set  quidam  de  fratribus  ante  fores  basilice  vigilabant 
vsque  mane.  Oransque  ibi  sanctus  Coemgenus,  beatissima  anima 
sancti  Ciiiarani  ad  corpus  suum  reuersa  est,  et  ipse  surgens  cepit 
loqui  salutiferis  verbis  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum.  Et  uocem  vtriusque 
liquido  audiebant  fratres  foris  manentes.  Rogauitque  sanctus  Kyara- 
nus  beatum  Coemgenum,  ut  in  signum  eterne  societatis  uterque 
uestem  suam  commutaret  "inVicem  ;  et  sic  fecerunt.  Apertoque 
crastino  die  basilice  ostio,  invenerunt  fratres  sanctum  Coemgenum 
vestibus  sancti  Kyarani  indutum,  etsanctum  Kyaranum  uestibus  sancti 
Coemgeni  circumdatum.  Corpus  sancti  Kyarani  calidum  erat,  habens 
rubicunditatem  in  facie.  Indicauitque  sanctus  Coemgenus  monachis 
sancti  Kyarani  fraternitatem  et  societatem,  quas  ipse  et  sanctus 
Kj-aranus  inter  se  et  sua  loca  et  monachos  suos  semper  firmauerunt. 
Et  fratres,  qui  vigilabant  illa  nocte  ante  basilicam  illam,  hec  testifica- 
bantur.  Traditoque  sancti  Kyarani  corpore  honorifice  humo,  sanctus 
Coemgenus  ad  suam  reuersus  est  ciuitatem. 

xxix.  CoNTiGiT '  aliquando  sancto  Coemgeno  cogitacio,  ut  uellet 
solus  peregrinari.  Et  perrexit  solus  de  suo  monasterio,  uolens  longe 
peregrinari.  Vidensque  eum  solum  euntem  sanctus  heremita,  Gar- 
banus  nomine,  ait  ei :  '  O  homo  Dei,  quo  pergis  ?  Melius  est  iam 
in  vno  loco  fixus  manere  in  Christo,  quam  de  loco  ad  locum  in  sene- 
ctute  discurrere.  NuIIam  enim  auem  sua  oua  involatu  fouere  audisti.' 
Hec  audiens  sanctus  Coemgenus,  compunctus  est  corde,  et  promisit 
redire  ad  suum  locum.  Et  tunc  sanctus  Garbanus  Deo  et  sancto 
Coemgeno  se  cum  sua  cella  semper  obtulit.  Et  ipse  sanctus  Gar- 
banus  prope  ciuitatem  Ath  Cliath  habitabat,  que  est  in  aquilonali  | 
Laginensium  plaga,  super  fretum  maris  possita.  Et  illud  scotice  f.  68  ^* 
dicitur  [Duibh  Linn],  quod  sonat  latine  nigra  terma ;  et  ipsa  ciuitas 
'potens'  et  belligera  est,  in  qua  semper  habitant  viri  asperrimi  in 
preliis,  et  peritissimi  in  classibus. 

XXX.  Rediensque  sanctus  Coemgenus  a  sancto  Garbano,  diuertit  ad 
sanctum  seniorem  Berchanum,  qui  erat  cecus,  uolens  uerba  Dei 
audire  ab  eo.  Sanctus  autem  Berchanus  preuidens  prophetice 
aduentum  sancti  Coemgeni,  ait  discipulis  suis :  '  O  filioli,  balneum 
sancto  seniori  nostro  Coemgeno,  ad  nos  hodie  uenienti,  cicius  pre- 
parate.'    Postquam  iam  Coemgenus  illuc  peruenit,  dixit  ei  beatus 

'  §§  xiix-xliii  are  not  in  S  R. 


250 


VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 


Berchanus :  '  Sancte  pater,  in  balneV  tibi  preparato  diuina  ostensione 
laua  corpus  tuum.'  Cui  sanctus  Coemgenus  respondit :  '  Vere,  pater, 
ex  die  quo  hoc  propossitum  in  iuuentute  accepi,  non  balneaui  usque 
hodie  nisi  in  frigidis  aquis,  causa  corporis  mei  humiliandi ;  set  tamen 
propter  te  et  Deum,  cuius  electus  es,  balneabo.'  Et  sancto  Coemgeno 
se  lauante  in  balneo,  sanctus  Berchanus  ait  ministro  suo :  '  Duc  mihi, 
frater,  ficones  sancti  Coemgeni.'  Vidit  iam  sanctus  Berchanus  spiri- 
tualiter  demonem  sedentem  in  ficone  sancti  Coemgeni,  et  dixit  ei : 
'Vt  quid  stas  hic,  O  nequissime  demon .'  Quomodo  ausus  es  intrare 
ficonem  sancti  viri  ? '  Respondit  demon  :  '  Demones  nichil  possunt 
ei  suadere,  nisi  in  specie  boni ;  ita  ego  ficonem  eius  intraui,  suadens 
ei  peregrinari,  et  deserere  locum  suum,  quod  est  makim  in  specie 
boni.'  Et  hec  dicens,  demon  clamauit,  alte  rogans,  ut^dimitteretur 
inde  ire ;  ante  enim  conspectum  sanctorura  Dei  demon  potestatem 
sui  non  habebat.  Habensque  demon  licentiam  eundi,  euanuit  ex 
oculis  sanctorum.  Postea  autem  sanctus  Coemgenus  et  sanctus  Ber- 
chanus  propinantes  sibi  invicem  verba  salutifera,  vnus  eorum  rediit 
ad  suos  fratres,  glorificans  Deum,  alter  uero  in  sua  cella  cum  timore 
et  amore  Dei  mansit. 

xxxi.  CoLMANUs ',  filius  Carbri,  dux  quarte  partis  aquilonalium  La- 
ginensium  ^,  habens  in  iuuentute  quandam  nobilem  feminam  in 
vxorem,  cum  '  vero '  non  conuenissent  sibi  invicem  moribus  suis, 
illam  dimisit,  et  accepit  aliam  uxorem  pro  ea.  Illa  iam  que  dimissa 
est,  malifica  erat  ualde  in  magicis  artibus,  et  repleta  est  ipsa  zelo 
contravirum  suum,  Colmanum  ducem,et  occidebat  illa  omnes  soboles 
alterius  per  incantaciones  suas  magicas.  Illa  autem,  ut  audiebat 
filium  uel  filiam  illi  natam  esse,  ueniebat  ex  aliqua  parte  contra 
villam  in  qua  infans  fuerat,  et  cantabat  magice,  quousque  infantulus 
esset  mortuus.  Cumque  esset  illi  in  senectute  infantulus  genitus, 
statim  baptissatus  est,  ne  sine  baptismo  ab  illa  occideretur  venifica,  et 
uocatus  est  Felanus'.  Ouem  ilico  dux  pater  suus  misit  ad  sanctum 
Coemgenum,  ut  ipse  defenderet  eum  per  uirtutem  Dei  a  predicta  | 
.  69  "  muliere,  et  nutriret  eum  in  seculari  habitu.  Et  obtulit  illum  sancto 
Coemgeno,  ut  ipse  cum  semine  suo  apud  sanctum  Coemgenum  per 
seculum  sepeli[r]etur,  et  seruiret  ei,  si  viuus  euaderet  Felanus.  Et 
suscepit  eum  sanctus  Coemgenus  gaudens,  et  nutriuit  eum  in  habitu 
laicali,  sicut  precepit  pater  suus  ;  diligebatque  eum  ualde.  Et  non 
habens  sanctus  Coemgenus  unde  haberet  nouum  lac  infantulo 
nutriendo,   quia  mulieres   et  vacce   ionge   erant   a   suo   monasterio, 

1   =Br.  c.  14 ;  Du.  p.  159.  ''■  ri  Ua  Faolain  Dii.,  ro  b(5i  tra  Colman  .  .  . 

irrighe  Ua  Muiredhaigh,  6m  beirdis  siabhra  a  cland  tre  draideacht  Br.,  i.  e.  now 
Colman  was  chief  of  the  Ui  Muiredhaigh  and  sprites  used  to  carry  off  his 
children  from  him  by  druidism  {pr  magic)  Br.  '  0  ffuiht  .  .  .  hi  Faolain  Br., 

i.  e.  from  whom  the  Ui  Faelain  are  descended. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  251 

orauit  ad  Dominuin,  ut  aliquod  adiutoriuni  tribucret  ei.  Et  Deus 
ilico  misit  de  monte  propinquo  ceruam  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  de 
cuius  lacte  infans  Felanus  nutritus  est.  Que  cerua  cotidie  bis  uenie- 
bat '  ad  monasterium  sancti  Coenigeni,  et  mulgebatur  ibi  a  quodam 
fratre  infanti  Felano,  quousque  ille  adultus  fuit,  et  mitissime  redibat 
ad  pascua  sua. 

xxxii.  QuADAM  quoque  die  mulgens  frater  illam  foris,  possuit  uas 
cuni  niulso  super  terram  ;  et  ueniens  coruus  rapax  uoluit  illud  bibere, 
ertuditque  rostro  suo  uas  cum  mulso  in  terram.  Hoc  videns  sanctus 
Coemgenus  ait  coruo  illi :  '  Multo  tempore  hoc  nephas  tu  et  genus 
tuum  postea  penitebitis  ;  id  est,  multe  carnes  in  die  migracionis  mee 
ad  celum  parabuntur,  et  non  commedetis  ex  eis.  Et  si  quis  ex  uobis 
per  audaciam  suam  tangere  uoluerit  de  fimo  seu  de  sanguine  occisorum 
animalium  illis  diebus,  statim  morietur.  Et  omnes  leti  tunc  erunt, 
uos  autem  super  cacumina  '  circumstancium  '  moncium  tristes  eHtis, 
garr[i]entes  et  litigantes  '  inter'  uos  pre  tristicia.'  Hoc  autem  miracu- 
lum  hodie  usque  omni  anno,  sicuti  uir  sanctus  predixit,  completur. 

xxxiii.  AuDiE.\s  predicta  pestifera  mulier,  quod  puer  Faelanus  apud 
sanctum  Coemgenum  erat,  uenit  et  stetit  in  cacumine  niontis  Eanydh, 
qui  ab  australi  plaga  ciuitatis  sancti  Coemgeni  imminet;  et  de  illo 
monte  introspexit  monasterium  sancti  Coemgeni,  ut  puerum  Faelanum 
venenis  [et]  incantacionibus  interficeret  diabolicis.  Hoc  senciens 
nutu  Dei  pater  Coemgenus,  ait  fratribus  suis  :  '  O  fratres,  diligenter 
occultate  puerum  Faelanum,  ne  uideat  illum  diabolica  mulier,  que 
respicit  nos  de  monte  propinquo.'  Et  hec  dicens,  surrexit  ad  Deum 
contra  illam  in  orationem.  Illa  deambulans  hinc  et  inde  circa  cacu- 
men  montis,  agebat  magicam  suam  artem ;  set  a  Deo  cecata  est,  et 
nichil  videns  persistebat  adhuc  in  malicia  sua,  et  cecidit  de  cacumine 
montis  per  aspera  in  preceps,  in  uallem  silicet  Cassain,  et  lacerata 
est  membratim,  et  ibi  periit  illa  misera  infelicissime. 

xxxiv.  Post"  hec  vernali  tempore  idem  puer  Faelanus  postulauit 
poma  a  sancto  Coemgeno  ;   et  uolens  uir  Dei  satis  placere  illi,  bene- 
dixit  arborem,  silicet  sahcem ',  et  ilico  dulcia  poma  I  Dei  gratia  ap-  f.  69 ' 
paruerunt  in  illa,  de  quibus  puer  ille  saciatus  est.    Et  illa  salix'  adhuc 
omni  anno  poma  Dei  nutu  producit. 

XXXV.  Alia  die  ipse  puer,  respuens  frigidum  lac,  petiuit  calidum 
a  sancto  Coemgeno.  Coemgenus  iam  non  inveniens  illico  patellam, 
lac  etfudit  'in  conicem  ligneam',  possuitque  manibus  suis  super 
ignem  ;  et  nec  ignis  ullo  modo  ligno  nocuit,  set  in  eo  intus  mira- 
biliter  lac  Dci  potencia  calefactum  est. 

'  Here  M  m.  pr.  inserts  '  cotidie  '  again.         ^  Cf.  Br.  c.  I2.        '  MS.  sil-. 


252  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

xxxvi.  Alio  tempore,  cum  predictus  puer  Faelanus  esset  iuuenis, 
misit  eum  sanctus  Coemgenus,  et  alios  cum  illo,  ad  sanctum  Mo- 
chonne.  Et  ipse  sanctus  predixit  suis,  dicens  :  '  Homines  de  familia 
sancti  patris  Coemgeni  ad  nos  hodie  ueniunt,  et  preparate  illis  re- 
fectionem.'  Postea  Faelanus  cum  suis  illuc  peruenit,  et  susceptus 
est  cum  gaudio.  Et  interrogauit  sanctus  Mochonne  iuuenem  Faela- 
num,  dicens:  'Ad  quid  uenistis  ad  nos?'  Respondit  Faelanus : 
'  Non  indicauit  nobis,  o  sancte  pater,  causam  pro  qua  noster  senex 
Coemgenus  misit  nos  ad  te ;  set  hoc  iam  scimus,  quod  concilium 
secretum  Coemgeni  tu  scis  ;  et  wlt  ipse,  ut  confirmes  illud.'  Dixit 
ei  sanctus  Mochonne :  '  Sapienter  respondisti,  fili ;  hoc  est  enim 
quod  vvlt  noster  pater  Coemgenus.  Oportunum  vtique  tempus  uenit, 
ut  tu,  fili,  ex  nostro  consilio  et  oracione  in  regno  patris  tui  sede'a's, 
et  semen  tuum  post  te  usque  ad  finem  seculi.  Set  quicunque  de 
tua  prole  successoribus  sancti  Coemgeni  contrarius  fuerit,  omnia 
bona  hic  et  in  futuro  auferentur  ab  illo.'  Postea  felix  iuuenis  Faela- 
nus  in  regno  patris  sui  cum  oracione  et  exhortacione  sanctissimi 
senis  Coemgeni  et  sancti  Mochonne  sedit,  et  prosperatum  est  regnum 
in  manu  eius  per  gratiam  sanctorum. 

xxxvii.  QuoDAM  tempore  ipse  Faelanus  uenit  ad  salutandum  nutri- 
cium  suum  Coemgenum.  Hoc  audientes  inimici  eius,  qui  uolebant 
regnum  suum  apprehendere,  magnas  insidias  constituerunt  contra 
eum,  uolentes  eum  occidere.  II[l]ud  in  spiritu  videns  senex  sanctus 
Coemhgenus,  narrauit  diligenter  duci  Faelano  alumpno  suo,  quem 
multum  diligebat ;  et  benedicens  eum,  precepit  ei,  ut  secure  rediret 
ad  sua.  Ibi  iam  pauci  erant  cum  duce  Faelano.  Ipse  siquidem 
Faelanus,  confidens  in  benedictione  sancti  patris  sui  Coemgeni, 
exiuit  recta  via  ad  regionem  suam.  Et  ueniens  inter  insidias  inimi- 
corum  suorum,  apparuit  ipse  cum  suis  in  formis  et  in  uelocitate 
ceruorum ;  et  sic  euasit  ille  ab  ini[mi]cis  suis  incolumis  per  bene- 
dictionem  viri  Dei. 

xxxviii.  Tres  '  aliquando  scolastici  de  campo  Liffi,  qui  nominatur 
planicies  Laginensium,  venerunt  ad  sanctum  Coemgenuni,  uolentes 
concilium  eius  obseruare.  Vnus  eorum  Melcruinn  uocabatur.  Ipsi 
philosophiam  inter  se  meditantes,  supradictus  Melcruind  alios  duos 
f.  69  "^  superabat  in  questionibus.  Alii  autem  duo  irati  |  occiderunt  eum, 
et  decollauerunt  in  ualle  Cassain,  in  qua  predicta  mulier  malifica 
occubuit".  Sciens  hoc  sanctus  Coemgenus  intus  in  cella  sua,  dixit 
magistro  hospitum  :  '  Duo  iuuenes  scolastici,  qui  hodie  homicidium 
perpetrauerunt,  ad  te  cicius  uenient ;  et  ne  sis  letus  in  aduentu 
eorum,  set  responde  eis  dura  uerba  o'b'scure.'     Et  sic  fecit  minister. 

'  Cf.  Du.  p.  162.  2  §  xxxiii  supia. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  253 

'ruiic  illi  videntes  asperitatem  illius  contra  se,  dicebant  tristes  ad 
invicem :  '  lam  sanctus  pater  Coemgenus,  sciens  facinus  nostrum, 
precepit  huic  fratri,  ut  ageret  nobis  istam  asperitatem.  Faciamus 
igitur  bonum  consilium  ;  id  est,  confitentes  illi  scelus  nostrum,  peni- 
tcntiam  agamus.'  Et  ait  eis  sanctus  Coemgenus :  '  O  filii,  malum 
opus  perpetrastis ;  sct  adhuc  in  Dei  miscricordia  confidite ;  et  reuer- 
timini  ad  quem  occidistis,  meumque  baculum  vobiscum  portate,  et 
ponite  super  pectus  iliius  ;  et  caput  eius,  quod  inter  pedes  suos 
dimisistis,  congrue  collo  suo  opponite  ;  et  credo  quod  resurget  ad 
uos.  Nulla  iam  bestia  eum  adhuc  tetigit,  excepto  volpe  modicum 
de  sanguine  eius  bibente.'  Illis  euntibus,  et  sic  per  omnia  agentibus, 
frater  occisus,  quasi  de  graui  sompno,  surrexit  a  morte.  Et  simul 
ipsi  tres  gaudentes  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum  redierunt.  Ille  iam 
frater,  qui  a  morte  suscitatus  est,  monachus  obediens  usque  ad  obitum 
suum  apud  sanctum  Coemgenuni  mansit.  Precepitque  ei  sanctus 
Coemgenus,  ut  ne  vnquam  longius  iret  a  monasterio,  nisi  ducens 
hospites  usque  ad  locum  martirii  eius,  ut  viam  eis  ostenderet  per 
montes.  In  illo  nunc  loco  crux  est  possita.  Aliis  autem  duobus 
rcddeuntibus  precepit,  ut  in  peregrinacionem  irent,  et  postea  religiose 
viuerent.     Quod  illi  magno  aflectu  compleuerunt. 

xxxix.  QuiDAM  uir  regius  ad  sanctum  senem  Coemgenum  uenit, 
ut  zonam  suam  ab  eo  benedictam  acciperet,  ne  ab  inimicis  suis  ipse 
iugularetur.  Et  reuertens  ipse  cum  zona  benedicta  ad  sua,  turba 
inimicorum  suorum  magna  uenit  obuiam  ei  in  via  plana.  Videntesque 
eum  inimici  sui,  impetum  magnum  fecerunt  in  eum.  Tunc  ille  ac- 
cinctus  zona  sua,  cepit  invocare  nomen  sancti  Coemgeni ;  et  ilico 
illi  nuilo  modo  eum  videre  potuerunt,  circumdatus  ab  eis.  Senci- 
ensque  ille  ex  loquela  ipsorum,  quod  se  non  vidissent,  sic  incolumis 
per  medium  eorum  invissus  per  gratiam  viri  Dei  euasit. 

xl.  Aliquando  rex  Laginensium,  cum  nepotes  Neill,  et  aquilonales 
prouinchie  secum,  regionem  Laginensium  ad  eam  deuastandam  in- 
trarent,  venit  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  querens  ab  eo  concilium. 
Set  non  permittens  eum  sanctus  Coemgenus  in  uallem  suam  intrare, 
in  supercilio  montis  australis  stetit,  ubi  nunc  terebintus  est  regum, 
ct  misit  legatos  suos  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum.  Quibus  uir  sanctus 
di.^iit :  '  Rex  ex  iure  humano  pro  patria  sibi  commissa  debet  bellare, 
si  aliter  non  potuerit  eam  |  defendere.'  Hec  uerba  sancti  Dei  audiens  f.  eg"* 
rex,  letus  et  promptus  rediit  ad  bellum.  Et  ante  se  ingens  bellum 
fractum  est,  in  quo  nepotes  Neill  a  Laginensibus  ualde  superati  sunt, 
et  aquilonales  ad  interemcionem  redacti  sunt  ^  Ipse  iam  rex  cum 
Laginensibus  post  bellum  gratias  egit  Deo  et  sancto  Coemgeno. 

*  The  battle  of  Magh  Ochtair,  Ann.  Ult.  589  (  =  590). 


254  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

xli.  QuiDAM  miles,  nomine  Rotanus,  comam  pulcerrimam  habebat, 
quam  ualde  diligens  nutriebat  omni  cura,  et  per  eam  luxuriosse 
viuebat,  nichil  curans  de  anima  sua.  Hoc  audiens  sanctissimus 
senex  Coemgenus,  muhum  sibi  displicuit.  Benedicensque  ipse 
aquam,  misit  ei,  et  iussit  sibi,  ut  inde  cum  lixiua  capud  suum  lauaret, 
quasi  pro  benedictione.  Ille  iam  caput  inde  lauans  cum  gaudio, 
totam  comam  depossuit.  Sciensque  ipse  quod  hoc  uoluit  sanctus 
Coemgenus,  venit,  et  egit  penitentiam  coram  sancto,  promisitque 
de  emendacione  vite  sue.  Vidensque  uir  Dei  satisfactionem  eius, 
benedixit  capud  iOius,  et  in  eo  alia  coma  statim  creuit,  que  fuit  satis 
pulcrior,  set  non  peruenit  ad  primam.  Postea  ille  miles  gratias  Deo 
et  sancto  eius  in  omnibus  agens,  rediit  ad  sua. 

xlii.  Latrones  de  gente  Degha,  de  regione  Kennselach  venerunt, 
et  absconderunt  se  in  montibus  iuxta  monasterium  sancti  Coemgeni, 
uolentes  quandam  villam  in  plebe  nepotum  IVIoel  illa  nocte  sequente 
rapere,  et  occidere  viros  eius.  Hoc  a  Deo  sancto  seni  Coemgeno 
reuelatum  est.  Tunc  sanctus  Coemgenus,  non  in  promptu  alium 
nuncium  habens,  cuidam  viro  ceco  a  natiuitate,  nomine  Guaire,  iussit, 
ut  iret  ad  illos,  et  indicaret  eis  de  latronibus.  Ille  iam  surgens  sine 
excusacione,  ilico  angelus  Domini  venit  ad  illum,  et  illuc  duxit  et 
inde  reduxit  cum  celesti  lumine  eum  incolumem.  Habitatores  pre- 
dicte  ville,  gratias  agentes,  absconderunt  se  cum  suis  in  tutis  locis ; 
latrones  autem  inde  uacui  reuersi  sunt. 

xliii.  CoRiARius  quondam',  nomine  Cronanus,  postea  autem  uir 
sanctus  et  pius  coram  Deo  et  hominibus,  qui  claram  cellam  Deo 
edificauit,  misit  legacionem  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  ut  ipse  fratreni 
fidelem  et  j'doneum  ad  se  mitteret,  per  quem  sua  secreta  sancto 
Coemgeno  remandaret.  Ad  quem  sanctus  pater  Coemgenus  sine 
dilacione  Berchanum  monachum  misit,  secundum  morem  antiqui 
temporis  solum.  Illo  iam  fratre  iter  incipiente  per  siluas  et  montes 
desertos,  invenit  quandam  mulierem  speciosam  solam  in  via  ex- 
pectantem  conductum  per  desertum.  Que  videns  illum,  dixit  ei : 
'O  homo  Dei,  propter  Dominum  omnipotentem  dimitte  et  sustine 
me  ire  tecum  per  heremum.'  Frater  itaque  propter  Dominum  con- 
cessit,  et  promisit  ei  in  fide  sua  se  expectare,  donec  per  desertum 
ad  villas  suas  reduceret  eam.  Et  illa  apprehensa  est  in  amore  eius ; 
ipse  enim  pulcer  erat,  et  ualens  flore  iuuentutis.  Temptauitque 
f.  70"  eum  frequenter  blanda  Io|cucione  ;  postremo  autem  peruenientes 
ad  quendam  ampnem,  dixit  ei :  '  Rogo  te,  domine,  in  Christi  nomine, 
donec  aquam  bibam,  et  balneam  me  in  aqua,  expecta  ;  ego  iam  lassa 
sum  a  via.'  Ideo  hoc  fecit  uolens  pulcritudinem  corporis  sui  ilM 
ostendere.  Illa  nudans  se  uestimentis,  Berchanus  caput  suum  pos- 
suit  in  terram,  nolens  eam  aspicere,  et  oppressus  est  illico  grauissimo 

'  V.  s.  §  xxiii. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  255 

sompno.  Veniens  mulicr  de  aqua,  vidensque  eum  dormientem, 
concupiuit  ualde  cum  eo  cubare.  Tollensque  fratris  uestimenta, 
cepit  concumbere  cum  eo,  amplexans  eum  manibus  eius.  Miles 
autem  Christi  expergefactus  a  sompno,  resistit  ei  fortiter  volnis  et 
genibus,  et  saliens  de  manibus  illius,  cepit  flagellare  eam  baculo 
suo  per  dorsum  et  latera.  Sanctus  iani  Coemgenus  et  sanctus  Cro- 
naiuis  diuinitus  hec  omnia  viderunt  in  cellis  suis  longe,  et  ait  sanctus 
Cronanus :  '  Viriliter  age,  O  bone  frater  Berchane,  flagellando  im- 
pudicam.'  Sanctissimus  autem  Coemgenus  ait:  'O  fili  carissime 
Berchane,  indulgens  parce,  et  noli  miseram  flagellare.'  Hec  uerba 
sanctorum  sedencium  in  suis  cellis  beatus  monachus  Berchanus  in 
deserto  longe  audiuit  Dei  nutu ;  et  audiens  ius[s]ionem  sancti  sui 
magistri  Coemgeni,  cessauit  flagellare  feminam.  Et  illa  penitentiam 
agens,  duxit  eam  Berchanus  secum  per  heremum,  sicut  promisit ; 
et  magnificans  illa  sanctitatem  viri  Dei,  narrabat  suis  amicis  que 
gesta  fuerunt  in  via.  Beatus  autem  Berchanus  perueniens  ad  cellam 
sancti  Cronani,  susceptus  est  cum  gaudio,  et  gratias  egit  ei  sanctus 
Cronanus  de  virili  suo  agone.  Et  remittens  eum  ad  sanctum  Coeni- 
genum,  inter  alia  secreta  ait  ei :  '  Indica  patri  meo  Coemgeno,  quia 
desidero  vno  die  secum  migrare  ad  Christum'.'  Hoc  audiens  sanctus 
Coemgenus,  dixit  prophetice :  '  Non  vno  die  nos  ambo  ibimus  ad 
celum,  id  est  non  eodem  anno,  set  tamen  in  ipso  die  migracionis  mee 
post  tempus  migrabit  ad  Christum.  Et  vno  die  postea  sollempnitas 
nostra  erit.'     Et  sic  factum  est. 

xliv.  Quida.m''  crudelis  miles  latrocinia  frequenter  inter  iuga  mon- 
cium  exercebat,  et  nichil  de  bonis  operibus  curabat ',  nisi  tantummodo 
quod  nomen  sancti  Coemgeni,  credens  in  Deo,  ad  animam  suam 
auxiliandam  cotidie  inuocabat.  Die  quoque  quadam  conclusus  est 
ab  inimicis  suis,  et  iugulantes  eum,  posterius  truncauerunt.  Postea 
angelus  Domini  uenit  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  dicens :  '  Quidam 
homo  miser,  qui  cotidie  contra  pericula  anime  sue  te  inuocabat, 
Christi  miles,  hodie  truncatus  est.  Tu  ergo  in  Deo  tuo  uiriliter  age, 
et  uade  post  demones  qui  trahunt  animam  eius  ad  supplicia  ;  quia 
licet  corpus  confectum  est,  animam  eius  de  inferno  per  Dei  potenciam 
eripias.'  Tunc  sanctissimus  senex  Coemgenus  confortatus  conductu 
angelico,  in  aerem  conscendens,  animam  illius  |  miseri  a  demonibus  f.  •70'' 
liberauit  per  Christi  uirtutem.  Et  fuit  in  illo  certamine  a  nona  usque 
in  crastinum.  Monachi  autem  sui  dolentes  mirabantur  de  absencia 
sui  sanctissimi  senis  decrepiti.  Veniensque  ad  fratres  suos  crastino 
die  de  aere,  statim  dixit  eis :   '  O  fratres  mei,  corpus  illius  miseri, 

•  Here  in  M  is  a  marginal  note  in  a  seventeenth-century  hand  :  S.  Cronanus 
3  Junii.  There  is  a  Mochua  at  June  3  in  Mart.  Don.,  which  name  is  a  frequent 
hypocoristic  alias  of  Cronan.         '   =  S  i  13,  p.-  {.  ii^  '.  ^  informem  habens 

fidem  S  R. 


256  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

pro  quo  fui  in  celo,  inter  sepulcra  vestra  sepelite,  quia  anima  eius 
liberata  est  a  demonibus,  et  in  requie  est  coram  presencia  Dei.'  Sic 
fratres  fecerunt,  admirantes  gratiam  Dei  in  sancto  patre  suo. 

xlv.  QuEDAM  ^  uirgo  sancta,  nomine  Cassayr,  filia  ^Edha,  videns 
in  aere  sanctum  senem  Csemgenum  asperrimis  pellibus  indutum, 
rogauit  ilUim  in  nomine  Christi,  ut  meliores  vestes  a  se  acciperet. 
Vir  autem  Domini  respuit  eas,  ne  per  auariciam  Sathanas  ad  se 
accederet.  Sancta  iam  uirgo  de  hoc  tristis  effecta  est.  Que  postea 
se  et  cellam  suam  cum  suis  omnibus  sub  regula  sancti  Caomgeni 
tradidit.  Tunc  venit  angelus  Domini,  et  tollens  aspera  sua  vestimenta 
a  sancto  sene  et  decrepito,  Caemgeno,  vestiuit  eum  predictis  uestibus 
sancte  uirginis.  Pro  qua  re  vir  Dei  et  sancta  virgo  cum  suis  gracias 
Deo  persoluebant. 

xlvi.  QuiDAM  *  homo,  Critanus  nomine,  et  inimici  sui  pacem  fecerunt 
in  conspectu  sancti  Coemgeni,  et  ipse  sanctus  senex  commendauit 
vtrumque  in  fide  alterius.  Set  post  tempus,  suscitata  spicula  dis- 
sensionis  inter  eos,  venerunt  ipsi  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  ut  refir- 
marent'  pacem  ante  illum'.  Altercantes  inuicem  in  via,  illi  irati 
occiderunt  eum ;  et  postea  venerunt  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum,  et 
male  locuti  sunt  de  illo,  quasi''  ipsi  nichil  mali  agerent  ei.  Quibus 
sanctus  Coemgenus  dixit :  'O  miseri,  quid  dicitis  coram  me  in  dolo? 
Vos  occidistis  eum  hodie,  non  curantes  de  fide  vestra.  lam  ego 
presens  spiritu  eram,  quando  eum  interfecistis.  Reuertimini  ad  eum 
cicius,  dicentes  ei,  ut  sine  mora  uobiscum  ad  me  ueniat,  ut  uos 
sciatis  quantum  ualet  custodia  fidei  in  Christo.'  Illi  ita  agentes,  qui 
occisus  erat  surrexit  a  morte,  et  cum  illis  ad  sanctum  Coemgenum 
uenit.  Et  illi  omnes,  secundum  ius[s]ionem  sancti  Coemgeni,  peni- 
tentiam  egerunt ;  qui  autem  a  morte  suscitatus  est,  gratias  egit, 
magnificans  Deum  in  omnibus. 

xlvii.  Duo "  rei  mortis  in  campo  Liffi  a  rege  Laginensium  sunt  ad 
occisionem  ducti.  Cum  iam  peruenirent  ad  locum  occissionis,  ro- 
gauerunt  simul  sanctum  Coemgenum  ;  vnus  eorum  rogabat,  vt  vitam 
eternam  sibi  peteret,  alter  uero  uitam  presentem  postulabat.  Sanctis- 
simus  videlicet  senex  Coemgenus  spiritu  presens  illis  erat,  licet 
corpore  absens.  Et  ipse  in  sua  cella  orabat  pro  illis  Deum  ;  et  Deus 
largitus  est  eis  secundum  peticionem  eorum  propter  orationem  fide- 
lissimi  Coemgeni.  Vnus  enim  eorum  illico  occisus  est,  cominendans 
se  Deo  per  gratiam  senis  Coemgeni,  et  anima  eius  ab  angelis  Dei 
adducta  est  ad  celum.    Alterum  uero  eorum  uolebant  lictores  regis 

'  Not  in  S  R.  In  M  the  whole  of  this  section  iswritten  on  the  lower  margin 
with  a  mark  of  insertion  at  this  point.  It  is  by  the  same  hand  as  the  body  of  the 
text ;  but  the  difference  of  the  speiiing  of  the  saint's  name  indicates  perhaps  that  it 
is  derived  from  a  diflercnt  source.  ^    =  S  §  14,  R^  u.  s.  '  reformarent  S  ; 

-ret  R.       *  ante  ilium  o»i.  S  R.      =  ac  si  uiueret  S  R.       «  =S  §  15,  R' f.  117''. 


VITA  SANCTI   COEMGENI  257 

tota  die  occidere ;  nec  occidere,  nec  crucifigere,  uUo  niodo  potuerunt 
eum.  Interrogantes  autem  eum  circa  uesperam,  pro  qua  arte  ma'g'ica ' 
non  poterant  arma  uel  fustes  corpus  eius  laniarc,  dixit  eis  :  '  Audistis 
hodie  quomodo  rogauimus  ego  et  socius  meus  sanctum  senem  Coem- 
genum,  ille  pro  uita  eterna,  ego  autem  pro  uita  presenti;  illum 
ilico  occidistis,  et  animam  eius  acceperunt  angeli  Deo  ;  ego  uero 
uideo  sanctum  patronum  nostrum  Coemgenum  circa  me,  iacula  et 
ictus  vestros  a  me  reiactantem.'  Hoc  cum  nunciatum  esset  regi", 
iussit  ut  ille  Deo  et  |  sancto  Coemgeno  liber  dimitteretur.  Et  sic  f.  70  = 
dimissus  est  ille,  gratias  Deo  et  sancto  Coemgeno  agens. 

xlviii.  CuM  ^  iam  sanctus  senex  Coemgenus  in  uenerabili  senectute 
de  hac  uita  ad  Christum  uellet  migrare,  perfecte  ab  infancia  usque 
ad  senectutem  in  mandatis  Dei  currens  in  sanctitate  et  iustitia,  in 
multis  uirtutibus  signisque  plurimis,  duodecim  probatissimos  de 
monachis  suis  misit  ad  locum,  ubi,  ter  j'mpno  cantato  suo,  beatissimus 
archiepiscopus  Patricius,  sicut  supra  diximus*,  astitit.  Quidquid 
homines  bone  uoluntatis  recte  a  Deo  in  ipso  loco  [petunt],  sicut 
sanctus  Coemgenus  promisit,  accipiunt.  Ideoque  illos  missit  Coem- 
genus  illuc,  ut  rogarent  ibi  Dominum  pro  peticione  sancti  Coemgeni, 
quam  ipse  non  indicauit  eis.  Et  rogauerunt  fratres  Dominum  pro 
peticione,  nescientes  adhuc  eam.  Finitaque  oratione  reuersi  sunt 
ad  sanctum  Coemgenum.  Tunc  sanctus  pater  Coemgenus,  sciens 
esse  donatum  eis  quod  postulauerunt,  indicauit  eis  peticionem  suam ; 
id  est,  ut  ipse  de  sarcina  carnis  deponeretur,  quia  ei  olim  a  Deo 
promissum  est,  non  de  hoc  seculo  migraturus,  donec  ipse  rogaret 
Deum  pro  hoc.  Audientes  fratres  hec  uerba,  effecti  sunt  ualde 
tristes.  Pater  autem  sanctus  Coemgenus  cepit  consolari  eos  de 
promis[s]ione  Christi,  perhibens  se  regnum  Dei  adhuc  vidis[s]e 
viuens  in  corpore.  Docuitque  eos  suam  regulam  et  mandata  Dei 
diligenter  custodire.  Postea,  eleuans  manus  suas,  benedixit  eos  et 
locum  suum ;  acceptoque  Christi  corpore  et  sanguine  a  sancto  Mo- 
chorog^  Brittone^  cuius  cella  est  in  oriente  ipsius  ciuitatis  sancti 
Coemgeni,  fratribus  iam  in  fletu  gemituque  constitutis,  post  centum 
viginti  annos'  in  presenti  uita,  inter  choros  angelorum,  archangelo- 
rumque  agmina  migrauit,  tertio  nonas  lunii,  ad  lerusalem  celestem, 
ad  regnum  sine  fine,  Dominum  Deum  nostrum  lesum  Christum. 
Cui  est  cum  Deo  Patre  et  Spiritu  sancto  gloria,  honor,  et  potestas, 
per  omnia  secula  seculorum.    Amen. 

EXPLICIT   VITA   SANCTI    CoEMGENI 
ABBATIS    ET   CONFESSORIS  ' 

1  In  M  the  ^  is  added  later;    maica    R  ;    mayca   S   m.   pr.  -  rei  S. 

'   =  S  §  16,  R^  f.  117'' ;  Du.  p.  165.  *  §  xxii  siipra.  ■'  Mo  cuaroch 

S  R.  ^  om.  S  R.  '  c"  et  xxx°  anno  S  R ;  Du.  says  that  he  died  in  the 

reign  of  Suibne  Menn.  '  Caimhgini  abbatis  de  Glenn  da  lacha  R. 


Vita  sancti  (JTolntaui  aiiijatis  tre  Hanti  iBlo 

f.  129«  Incipit  vita  sanxti  Colmani'  abbatis 

i.  FuiT  -  viR  vite  venerabilis,  Colmanus  nomine,  de  nobili  gente 
Hybernie,  id  est  de  Nepotibus  Neill ",  et  pater  eius  Beogne  uoca- 
batur;  qui,  cum  esset  regio  Midhi  a  Laginensibus  deuastata,  fugit 
cum  suts  in  vallem  Hoichle  *,  et  ibi  natus  est  sanctus  Colmanus. 
In  hora  partus  eius "  apprehendit  mater  lignum  aridum,  quod  erat 
positum  in  terra ;  et  postquam  ipsa  peperit  sanctum  infantulum, 
illud  lignum,  quod  tenuit  mater,  uiruit  ilico,  et  creuit  in  altum,  et 
permanet  usque  in  hodiernum  diem.  Et  alia  signa  multa  per  sanctum 
Colmanum  in  puericia  sua  a  Deo  ostensa  sunt.  Et  baptizatus  sanctus 
Colmanus,  cum  magna  diligentia  apud  parentes  suos  per  paucos 
annos  [nutritur]  ° ;  et  admirantes  que  per  eum  fiebant,  tradiderunt 
eum  parentes  sui  sancto  seniori  Coemhano,  ut  doceret  eum,  et  nutriret 
Deo".  Et  illuminacio  diuina  mores  et  intellectum  sancti  Colmani 
instruebat,  ut  admirarentur  omnes  de  ingenio  et  sanctitate  eius. 

ii.  QuADAM*  die  pergens  cum  aliis  foras  extra  cellam  beatus  puer 
Colmanus,  venit  quedam  mulier ",  et  percussit  fortiter  sinistra  manu 
sanctum  puerum  Colmanum  pro  re  minima  in '"  qua  ille  erat  inculpa- 
bilis.  Hoc  videns  sanctus  senior  Coemhanus,  increpauit  illam  dicens  ; 
'  Quare,  impudica,  puerum  innocentem"  lesisti .'  Vides  eum  quasi 
hominem,  et  non  vides  intra  illum  habitantem,  et  nescis  Dominum  in 
templo  suo  sedentem.  Vere  sanctos  angelos  in  celo  offendisti.'  Au- 
diens  illa  mulier  hec  verba  ^',  corde  compuncta  est,  et  procidens  in 
terram  egit  penitentiam.  Ait  ei  sanctus  senior  :  '  Deus  suscipit  peni- 
tentiam  hominum  ;  tamen  sinistra  manus  tua,  qua  percussisti  iniuste 
f.  129''  Christi  famulum,  cadet  crastina  die  a  latere  tuo.'  |  Et  sic  factum  est. 
Aceruus  iam  lapidum  positus  est  super  illam^'  manum  in  signum 
uirtutis. 

1  At  the  foot  of  the  page  is  an  Irish  pedigree  which  agrees  very  nearly  with 
that  in  LL.  352/.  2   =  S  §§  i,  2  ;  R«  f.   139''  (Ri  is  mutilated  at  the 

beginning).  ^  qui  de  .  .  ,  silu[a]  .  .  .  Alo  augmeiitum  nominis  accepit  S  adU. 

*  Heichle  R.  ^  sicut  feminis  nios  est  S  ((nW.  "  NotinMorT.         '  ut  ab 

ipso  instrueretur  in  scientia  libcrali  atquc  morali  R.  *    =  S  §  2  ;  RT  140". 

'  mulier  uaccaria  R  ;  she  struck  him  with  a  cow-spancel ;   lora  .i.  buorach  S. 
'"  in  0111.  T.  "  seruilis  condicionis  R  aM.  "*  The  MS.  is  much  blotted 

here,  and  several  words  have  been  rewritten  in  a  seventeenth-century  hand. 
"  iUum  T. 


VITA   SANCTI   COLMANI  259 

iii.  ViDENs '  sanctus  senior  Coemhanus  magnam  gratiam  in  signis 
et  prodigiis  in  sancto  suo  alumpno  Colmano,  misit  eum  corpore  et 
anima  integrum  ad  alios  sanctos  abbates  in  adolescencia  sua,  ut 
uideret  regulas  et  religionem  eorum,  et  disceret  scripturas  apud  eos. 
Et  -  ipsi  sancti  patres,  videntes  sapientiam  et  constanciam  mentis 
sancti  Colmani,  et  perfectionem  sanctitatis  eius,  fecerunt  eum  presby- 
terum,  et  assignauerunt  ei  quosdam  discipulos,  et  nominauerunt  eum 
abbatcm  eorum  ;  et  miserunt,  ut  construeret  loca  Deo,  et  congregaret 
Christi  famulos.  Et  uenit  ipse  ad  ciuitatem  Conneire '  in  prox^inchia 
Vltorum*,  in  qua  iacet  beatissimus  episcopus  Mac  Cneyssi';  et  habi- 
tauit  sanctus  Colmanus  in  illa  ciuitate  multis  diebus,  et  plurimas 
uirtutes  ibi  fecit;  et  ipse  est  secundus  patronus  eiusdem  ciuitatis. 
Et  benedicens  populo  illius  ciuitatis,  uenit  inde  ad  patriam  suam,  id 
est  ad  regionem  Midhi. 

Et"  inuenit'  ibi  congregacionem,  in  qua  Eadus*  filius  Ainmireach, 
rex  Hybernie,  et  Edus  Slan',  dux  Nepotum  Neill '",  et  sanctus 
Columba  Cj'Ile  ",  et  sanctus  Cainnicus '-  abbas,  et  alii  plures  erant ; 
et  ipsi  cum  gaudio  honorem  sancto  Colmano  dedenmt.  Et  ait 
sanctus  Columba  illis:  '  Date  agrum  bonum  sancto  Colmano,  fratri 
nostro,  ut  monasterium  suis  monachis  in  eo  constituat.'  Illi  dixerunt: 
'  Vbicunque  voluerit  in  finibus  Neill  eligat.'  Tunc  Edus  Slan ',  dux 
Midhi,  ait  :  '  Est  in  australi  nostre  regionis  plaga,  in  plebe  Fera  Gall  " 
saltus  magnus,  si  ei  placeret.'  Sanctus  Colmanus  dixit :  '  Quo  modo 
uocatur  ille  saltus?'  Dux  respondit:  '  Fydh  EIo"  uocatur.'  Beatus 
Colmanus  dixit :  '  Illic  resurrectio  mea  erit ;  et  amodo  ab  illo  loco 
nominabor.'  Ab  illo  iam  die  additur  nomini  eius  semper  EIo  ;  id  est, 
uocatur  ab  hominibus  Colmanus  EIo.  Postea  sanctus  Colmanus  EIo, 
dans  benedictionem  illis,  et  accipiens  libertatem  illius  loci  ab  ipsis 
potentibus  coram  multis  testibus,  perrexit  ad  illum  saltum'''',  et 
instituit  ibi  magnum  et  clarum  monasterium  in  loco  irriguo  aquis, 
et  specioso  agris  in  medio  silue.  Et  uocatur  illud  monasterium  Land 
Elo '",  in  quo  iacet  beatissimus  Colmanus,  sicut  ipse  predixit. 

iv.  CoNTiGiT^ut  in  die  Epiphanie  Domini  nichil  haberent  fratres 
ad  manducandum  in  monasterio ;  et  ait  sanctus  Colmanus  cellario'* 
monasterii :    '  Da  hodie  in  hac  sanctissima   sollemnitate   sufficienter 

'   =  S  §  3";  R- f.  140".  -  This  passage  '  et  ipsi  .  .  .  eiusdem  ciultatis'  is 

much  shorter  in  S  and  R,  after  which  they  have  eleven  sections,  of  which  three 
(viz.  S  |§  10,  la,  13)  are  not  in  M  T  at  all,  while  the  others  ^S  §§  s''-^,  n)  are 
inserted  below  (=  §§  vi-xii).  '  Connere  T.  *  wltorum  M.  '  Mac 

Nisi  T.  6  =  s§  14  ;  R'f.  136«,  R=(.  141^  '^  inregionibus  Neill  S.  SEdusT. 
"  Flan  T.  "^  qui  famosi  ulrl  temporibus  suls  fuerunt  Radd.  '•  Chllle  T. 

12  Kanicus  T.  "  Fergall  T.  "  Fidh  Elo  T  ;  Flth  Alo  S  ;  Fith  Ela  R', 

Fiech  Ela  R-.  '^  et  Laisran  minister  Columbe  Kylle  missus  secum  Sat/t/., 
and  ipractlcally)  R.  '«  Lann  Ela  R.  "  =  S  §  15 ;  R'  f.  136  ",  R»  f.  141«*. 
'*  coco  S  ;  procuratori  fratrum  R. 

S  2 


26o  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

fratribus  tuis.'  Hoc  dicebat  temptans  eum.  Cellarius  admirans 
dixit '  :  '  De  aqua  fontana  satis  possum  dare  eis  ;  at  ^,  dum  tu  scis 
quod  nichil  aliud  habeo,  quare  hoc  dicis  ? '  Sanctus  ait :  'Vere  scio 
quia  plurime  esce  sunt  hodie  in  cellario  tuo.'  Vix  vir  Dei  hec  uerba 
compleuerat,  quando  uenit  longa  turba  virorum  multorum  magnas 
elymosinas  sancto  Colmano  de  diuersis  ciborum  generibus  offeren- 
cium,  ita  ut  uix  possent  fratres  longo  interuallo  in  cellam  ducere. 
Tunc  vnus  de  fratribus^  dixit :  '  Plebes  hodie  requiescunt,  nisi  qui 
causa  nostri  ad  nos  ueniunt  ;  et  nos  cum  ipsis  non  requiescimus.' 
Cui  sanctus  Colmanus  ait :  '  Male  dixisti,  frater,  nam  cras  et  post  cras 
tale  ministerium  caritatis  non  deficeret  fratribus,  si  hoc  non  dixisses, 
ut  per  multos  dies  satis  inde  haberent.  Set  propter  sermonem  in- 
obedientie  tue  prohibebitur.'     Et  sic  factum  est. 

V.  Alio*  die  homo  fidelis  et  misericors,  nomine  Becanus'*,  impleuit 
f.  130"  grande  plaustrum  escis  electis,  et  po|suit  in  eo  boues,  et  cepit  ire  cum 
eo  ad  sanctum  Colmanum.  Sed  siluatica  et  implana  via  erat  inter  villam 
eius  et  Lann  °  EIo,  monasterium  sancti  Colmani.  Et  incipiens  ille 
iter  carpere,  cepit  inuocare  adiutorium  per  gratiam  sancti  Colmani. 
Tunc  diuino  nutu  factus  est  ipse  in  excessu  mentis,  et  translatus  cum 
plaustro  breuissimo  interuallo,  nesciens  ipse  quomodo,  usque  ad  os- 
tium  monasterii  sancti  Colmani.  Hoc  ille  narrans,  omnes  gratias' 
Christo  audientes  agebant ;  et  de  eius  testimonio  nonien  sancti 
Colmani  in  illa  regione  celebre  factum  est. 

vi.  In  8  quodam  loco  sanctus  Colmanus  cellam  constituit,  et  com- 
mendauit  illam  quatuor  viris  perfectis  de  monachis  suis,  dicens  eis  : 
'  Manete  in  hoc  loco  ad  seruiendum  Deo.'  Illi  autem  statuerunt 
sibimet  ipsis  valde  modicam  escam  ad  commedendum,  que  non 
valebat  sustinere  corpora  eorum  ad  viuendum.  Inde  tres  seniores 
ex  ipsis  mortui  sunt ;  quartus  autem  vixit  post  eos.  Ad  quem  quidam 
vir  fidelis,  qui  erat  prope,  uenit,  et  suadebat  illi  fratri,  ut  commederet, 
quo  posset  viuere.  Respondit  ei  frater  ille  sanctus,  qui  erat  iuuenis 
etate,  dicens  :  '  Non  aliter  faciam,  nisi  quod  seniores  mei  fecerunt,  ut 
cum  eis  sim  in  regno  Christi ;  mori  enim  mihi  melius  est,  et  esse  cum 
Christo.'  Et  post  paucos  dies  ipse  post  alios  mortuus  est,  et  sepultus. 
Audiens  autem  sanctus  pater  Colmanus  mortem  trium  illorum  pri- 
orum,  perrexit  ad  illum  locum,  ut  saltim  quartum  de  nimio  rigore 
eleuaret.     Set  ille  in  secundo  die  antequam  sanctus  Colmanus  illuc 

•  'Vt  Deus  dederit  materiam.'  Sanctus  ei  dixit :  '  Si  Deus  non  dederit, 
mensuras  de  niue  hac  pro  butiro  facias.'  Vix,  etc.  S,  and  practically  R. 
2  ut  M  T.  ^  nuper  ueniens  et  imperitus  S  ;  ignarus  iacti  R  add.  *  =  S  §  16  ; 
R'  f.  136'',  R'  u.  s.  *  Betanus  T  ;  Baitan  de  genere  Coirpri  S.  ^  Lann 

om.  T.  '  grates  T.  *    =  S  §  3  ^"  ;   R-  f.  140«.     On  ttie  order  of  these 

sections  see  p.  259,  note  2  siipra.  According  to  S  R  the  abstinence  was  not 
voluntary,  but  due  to  a  famine  which  Colman  foresaw  when  he  left  them. 


VITA  SANCTI   COLMANI  261 

veniret,  mortuus  cst,  et  sepultus.  Et  vidcns  sanctus  Colmanus  die 
quo  illuc  pcruenit,  nouum  sepulcrum  illius,  iussit  aperiri ;  et  ait  fratri 
mortuo  :  '  Dico  tibi,  frater,  in  nomine  Domini  mei  lesu  Cliristi,  qui 
suscitauit  Lazarum  quatriduanum  in  sepulcro  fetentem,  surge  et  lo- 
quere  nobiscum.'  Cui  sanctus,  surgens  de  sepulcro,  ait :  '  Pater,  que 
lecisti  mihi .'  fui  in  magna  gloria  et  leticia.  Permitte  mihi  illuc  redire.' 
Cui  sanctus  Colmanus  ait :  '  Fili ',  expecta  mecum  paulisper  in  cor- 
pore,  et  inuenies  iterum  illam  gloriam  et  leticiam.'  Cui  respondit 
frater  :  '  Pater,  noli  hoc  dicere ;  habes  enim  satis  alios  filios  spiri- 
tuales,  set  permitte  mihi  reniigrare.'  Dixit  ei  sanctus  Colmanus  : 
'  Vade,  fili  karissime,  in  pace.'  Et  sic  frater  ille  sanctus  remigrauit 
ad  Christum. 

vii.  In  ^  ipso  loco  aqua  non  erat  prope ;  set  fratres  cum  periculo  et 
magno  labore  per  diu[e]xi '  montis  latera  aquam  humeris  suis 
deferebant.  Inde  fratres  querimoniam  habentes,  sanctus  pater 
Colmanus  misertus  est  illorum  necessitati ;  et  in  nomine  Domini 
baculo  suo  punxit  petram  ante  ostinm  celle  illius  ;  et  ilico  aque  large 
fluxerunt,  que  usque  hodie  non  deficiunt.  De  hoc  fratres  ualde 
gaudentes,  Deo  gratias  egerunt,  et  sanctum  suum  patronum  digno 
honore  magnificabant. 

viii.  Aliquando'  cum  esset  sanctus  Colmanus  in  quodam  loco, 
audiuit  clamorem  militum  in  alta  iubilacione  exultancium  post  occi- 
sionem  inimici  sui  ;  et  suis  fratribus  dixit :  '  Audio  vocem  filii  vite 
inter  eos,  qui  erit  ouis  Christi  gregis.'  Et  venientes  milites  ad  locum 
in  quo  sanctus  Colmanus  erat,  ipse  ait  eis  :  '  Vnusquisque  vestrum 
loquatur  coram  me,  ut  sciam  ouem  Christi  inter  vos.'  Illi  loquentes, 
vir  Dei  ait  vni  militi  eorum,  qui  erat  iuuenis :  '  Fili,  vocatus  es  ad 
Deum.'  Hoc  audiens  Tochnanus'  |  nomine,  dominus  eius,  dixit  ad  f.  130 
sanctum  Colmanum :  '  Meus  est  iste  iuuenis,  et  non  dimittam  eum 
a  milicia  sua  exire'''.  Tunc  sanctus  Colmanus  dixit  illi  iuueni  :  '  Fili, 
elige  modo  vtrum  vis  Christo  seruire,  an  huic  domino  carnali.'  IUe 
respondit  :  'Sequar  te,  domine  abbas,  ad  seruiendum  Christo.'  San- 
ctus  ait  ei :  '  Veni  igitur  nobiscum,  fili.'  Volens  ille  sequi  sanctum  Dei, 
tenuit  eum  dominus  suus  cum  suis;  et  cum  esset  toto'  corpore  re- 
tentus,  anima  eius  egressa  est  a  corpore,  et  cecidit  mortuus  super 
terram.  Hoc  videns  dominus  eius,  timuit  multum,  et  penitens  dixit 
ad  sanctum  Colmanum  :  'Tibi,  vir  sancte,  et  Deo  hunc  et  sua  omnia 
oflero  in  eternum,  et  tu  ora  pro  me,  ne  mihi  malum  contiugat.'  Videns 

1  '  Nosti,  fili,  laminam  illam  auri  uncie  pondus  habentem,  quam  reliqui 
uobiscum  ?  '  IUe  respondit  :  '  Noui  eam,  pater,  et  fixi  eam  inter  paginas  liuius 
libri.'  Tunc  dixit  ei :  '  Vade,'  etc.  S  R.  -  =  S  §4  ;  R-f.  140''.  *  proli.xi  T; 
diuersa  S  ;  de  ymis  conuallibus  R.  <   =  S  §  5  ;  R-  u.  s.  ^  Tocnanus  T ; 

Totan  S ;  Totanus  R.         '  abire  T.  om.  T. 


262  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

vir  Dei  cor  eius  compunctum  penitentia,  dedit  ei  indulgenciam  ;  et 
orans  pro  illo  iuuene,  suscitauit  eum  a  mortuis  coram  omnibus.  Et 
qui  talia  videbant,  firmati  sunt  in  fide  Christiana,  gratias  Deo  agentes. 
Ille  autem  iuuenis  postea  vixit  longo  tempore ',  et  effectus  est  vir 
sanctus  et  perfectus,  et  multas  uirtutes  fecit. 

ix.  QuoDAM '  tempore  erat  penuria  cibi  in  vna  de  cellis  sancti 
Colmani,  in  qua  tunc  ipse  fuit.  Vnus  autem  frater  fidelis  de 
monachis  sancti  exiuit  ad  plebem  suam,  et  inuenit  eam  congregatam 
in  vno  foro,  et  ait  illis  frater  :  '  O  misera  plebs,  superflua  vestra 
venditis,  et  sanctus  Dei  Colmanus  Ela  fame  perit  ^,  cum  suis  monachis, 
et  non  curatis  de  eo  ■•.'  Tunc  plebs  illa  magnam  elymosinam  de 
butyro  et  galmulo  congregauit  in  locum  vnum  coram  fratre  illo,  et 
dixerunt  ei :  '  Frater,  ecce  nostra  elymosina,  set  non  possumus  eam 
modo  ducere  ad  locum ;  quia  equi  nostri,  et  boues,  et  carri  in 
domibus  nostris  sunt.  Et  est  aliud  difficile  nobis ;  nosti  enim  bene 
quod  inimici  nostri  sunt  inter  nos  et  monasterium  vestrum.'  Et 
reliquerunt  eum  ibi  cum  sarcinis  suis.  Ipse  autem  nullum  habens 
humanum  auxilium,  sedit  iuxta  sarcinas  'suas';  et  sompno  eum 
opprimente  °,  dormiuit  interim.  Euigilans  autem  vidit  se  in  ostio 
monasterii  sui  cum  omnibus  sarcinis  suis  fuisse.  Raptus  est  enim 
frater  ille  in  suo  sompno,  et  sua  secum,  a  Deo  usque  ad  monasterium 
suum.  Admiransque  ipse  dixit  ad  se  ipsum :  '  Vtinam  Deus  conce- 
deret,  vt  hoc  non  esset  sompnium.'  lam  adhuc  nesciebat  ille  vbi 
fueraf^.  Sanctus  autem  Colmanus  hec  omnia  videns  spiritu  intra 
septa '  monasterii,  dixit  fratribus  :  '  Ite  cito,  et  intus  adducite  quod 
Deus  per  fratrem  vestrum  vobis  niisit.'  Fratres  autem  afferentes, 
et  scientes  que  contigerant ',  valde  gratulabantur  Deo ;  et  alii  qui 
audierant,  benedicebant  sanctitatem  beati  patris  sui  Colmani. 

X.  HoMo'  quidam  nobilis  cum  cognato  suo  adolescente  uenit  ad 
sanctum  Colmanum  causa  benedicendi ;  et  benedicens  eos  vir  Dei, 
dixit :  '  Hic  adolescens  hodie  sanguine  morietur.'  Inde  ille  nobilis 
et  sui  abierunt  tristes.  Illis  euntibus,  dixit  sanctus  Colmanus  suis: 
'  Video  silicet  illum  iuuenem  usque  ad  senectutem  viuentem.'  Discipuli 
quoque  sancti  senioris  de  hiis  verbis  suis  admirabantur.  [Cumque 
revertere(n)tur  (uiri  illi)  a  sancto  uiro,  ut  irent  ad  domum  suam,] '» in 
medio  videlicet  itenere  sanguis  per  totum  corpus  predicti  iuuenis 
quasi  sudor  sine  vestigio  ulceris  fluit,  et  repente  mortuus  est  ille ; 
reportatumque  est  corpus   eius  gelidum   ad  sanctum  Colmanum,  ut 

1  qui  erat  Colmani  molindinarius  S.  ^    =  S  §  6  ;  R-  u.  s.  '  periit  M. 

*  nam   duo  fratres  .  .  .  fame   perierunt   in  liis  diebus   S  add.  '^  sompnus 

opprimens  eum  T.  "  vere  fuerat  T.  '  cepta  M  T.  '  -rent  m.  pr. 

'"^   -  S  §  7  ;  R>  f.  135"»,  R2  f.  140''.  1»  Both  M  and  T  are  defective  here  ; 

the  words  '  cumque  .  .  .  suam '  are  adapted  from  the  S  text. 


VITA  SANCTI  COLMANI  263 

sepeliretur    apud    eum.     Sciensque    sanctus    Colmanus    se    diuina 
concessione    resuscitaturum  a    morte   illum    iu|uenem,   accessit   adC  130' 
fcretrum,   et  orans  paulisper,  resuscitauit  eum  coram  omnibus,  et 
docuit   eum    in   diuinis   mandatis  ;    et   ille   iuuenis   post   monita  viri 
Dci  fidelis  fuit,  et  in  bona  sencctute '  obiit. 

xi.  Aliquando  '  due  plebes  in  provinchia  Vltorum,  in  regione  silicet 
Ual  n-Araide',  erant  super  ripam  ampnis,  qui  dicitur  Min,  parantes 
sc,  ut  bellarent  invicem.  Tunc  sanctus  Colmanus  ibat  cum  suis  in 
altera  parte  ampnis ;  quidam  enim  ex  illis  videntes  sanctum  Colmanum 
pretereuntem,  rogauerunt  eum  in  Christi  nomine,  ut  veniret  ad  pacem 
perficiendam  inter  plebes.  Alii  autem  forciores,  volentes  malum 
agere,  rapuerunt  rates  fluminis  in  sua  potestate,  ne  sanctus  ueniret 
ad  pacificandum.  Videns  autem  vir  Domini  magnum  periculum 
esse,  suadente  necessitate,  compulsus  intrauit  aquani,  et  signo  sancte 
crucis  se  signans  •*,  coram  omnibus  siccis  pedibus  trans  flumen 
ambulauit.  Illi  autem  homines,  hoc  magnum  et  inconsuetum 
miraculum  videntes,  adheserunt  monitis  sancti  Colmani,  et  pacem 
inter  eos  fecerunt  propter  eum,  gaudentes  in  Christi  mirabilibus ''  per 
sanctos  suos. 

xii.  SiMiLi'  modo  alia  vice  in   partibus   Hybernie  aquilonalibus 

ambulauit  sanctus  Colmanus  siccis  pedibus  trans  flumen  quod  dicitur 

Byr'',  ut  liberaret  miseram  captiuam,  quam  impii  homines  voluerunt 

dampnare   usque   ad    mortem ".      Et    illa    hberata    Dei   gratia,   inde 

sanctus  Dei  ad  domum  ducis  Aedani  filii  Aengussii^  perrexit  cum 

discipuhs  suis,  et  ibi  celebrauit  sanctam  dominicam  diem.  Vidensque 

sanctus    pater    Colmanus    vnum    hominem    in    pauimento    ligna^" 

cedentem,  dixit  vni  de  discipulis  suis :  'Vade,  fili,  et  dic  illi  homini 

a   me,  ut   requiescat  hodie  ab  opere  seruili ;    ecce  enim  dominicus 

dies  est.'     Homo  autem  ille  paruipendens  hec  uerba,  scidit "  adhuc 

ligna;  et  ecce  nutu  Dei,  propter  honorem  viri  sancti,  ferrum  securis 

illius   hominis   fixum  est   in   ligno,  et   manus  eius  circa   manubrium 

siccauerunt;    et   ita  immobiliter   miser   ille'-   stetit.      Videntes    hoc 

habitatores  illius  palacii,  rogauerunt  sanctum  Colmanum  ut  absolueret 

illum  miserum  ;    benedicensque  illum  sanctus   Dei,  iHco  absoluit'', 

et   veniens   ipse   ad   pedes   viri   Dei,  obtulit   se  ei,  et  fecit  sanctus 

Colmanus  illum  monachum,  et  mansit  apud  eum  in  habitu  monachali 

fideliter  usque  ad  obitum  suum'*. 

'  senectute  bona  T.      ^   =  S§8;  R' R- u.s.      '  Del  araide  T.       *  signans  se 
signo  sancte  crucisT.        =  mirabiliT.  '^   =S§§9,ii:  R^  f.  iss*,  R- f.  141  <". 

"  Bir  T  S  ;  om,  R.  '  Here  S  §  10  ;  R'  R-  u.  s.  insert  a  story  how  Colman  in  his 
chariot  crossed  the  River  Daliull  in  flood  as  on  dry  land,  to  release  another 
female  captive.  '  Edani  filii  EngussiT;  Radds  thename  ofthe  place,  Kellmor. 
"*  ligna  in  pauimento  T.  ^'  cedit  T.  '-  ille  miser  T.  "  absolutus  T. 

"  Here  S  §§  12,  13;  R'  f.  134*^,  R''  f.  141''  insert  two  stories:  [o)  how 
St.  Lassar  and  her  nuns  slew  an  animal  for  the  entertainment  of  Colman  and  his 


264  VITAE  SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

xiii.  Latrones'  de  Momenia-  venerunt  ad  fines  NeilP,  vt  inde 
raperent.  Venientes  prope  monasterium  sancti  Colmani,  Land  Eala'', 
rapuerunt  duos  boues  de  armento  fratrum  sancti  viri,  ut  de  eis  ^' 
escas  sibi  pararent.  Cunique  illi "  voluissent  boues  occidere  sancti, 
pedibus  suis  stricti  sunt'  terre,  et  non  potuerunt  ullo  modo  inde 
se  mouere.  Boues  autem  incolumes  ab  eis  ad  sua  reddierunt.  Et 
videntes  homines  'boni'**  latrones  in  tanta  miseria,  cucurrerunt  ad 
sanctum  Colmanum,  et  rogauerunt  eum  pro  illis.  Orante  itaque 
sancto  Colmano,  ilico  illi  soluti  sunt,  et  abierunt  cum  magno  timore 
vacui  de  illa  regione  °. 

xiv.  QuiDAM^"  monachus  de  Britannia  erat  in  monasterio  sancti 
Colmani,  et  quodam  die  ipse  iratus  est"  pro  minima  re  contra  sanctum 
Colmanum  secundum  irascibilem  Brittonum  naturam,  et  surrexit, 
ut  occideret  sanctum  patrem ;  eleuansque  manus  ad  percuciendum, 
f.  130'' arefacte  sunt  manus  eius,  et  stetit  |  ipse  immobilis  extensis  manibus 
sursum,  quasi  statua  lignea,  quovsque  flebiii  rogatu  postulauit  veniam. 
Vidensque  pius  pater  illum  in  tali  cruciatu,  orauit  pro  eo  ;  et  ilico 
solutus  est,  gratias  agens  Deo. 

XV.  Laborans^"  aliquo  die  in  agro  foris  sanctus  pater  Colmanus  cum 
fratribus  suis",  ipse  prostrauit  se  in  terram,  et  interim  fleuit  amare  ; 
et  post  modicum  interuallum  surgens  respexit  celum,  et  tunc  gauisus 
est  subridens.  Interrogantes  autem  discipuli  sui  illum,  dixit  eis 
repente :  '  Vidi  angelos  Dei  descendentes  et  replentes  orbem 
terrarum  ;  et  putabam  quod  dies  iudicii  venit,  et  perterritus  prostraui 
me  in  terram,  et  ideo  fleui.  Surgens  autem  postea  vidi  altare 
aureum  angelorum  manibus  in  celum  leuari,  et  animam  sanctissimam 
pape  Gregorii  sedisse  super  altare ;  et  spatium  inter  celum  et 
terram  lumine  angelorum  repletum  est.  Et  ideo  letus  effectus 
sum.'  Tunc  fratres  incipientes  gaudere,  et  gratias  Deo"  agere,  ait 
illis  sanctus  pater :  '  Filii  karissimi,  ne  sit  vobis  dubium  in  hiis 
omnibus;  completo  anno  hac  die  sanctus  peregrinus  huc  a  Roma 
veniet,  et  annunciabit  vobis  animam  sancti  Gregorii  hac  die  atque 
hac  hora''^  ad  Christum  migrasse.'      In  illo  tempore  vir  sanctus  de 

company,  and  what  befell  two  nuns  who  refused  to  partake  ;  (b)  how  Colman  and 
his  companions  were  saved  from  the  Cacabus  Brecani  (Coire  Brecain)  by  the 
prayers  of  St.  Columba,  who  bade  him  not  go  iuto  exile,  as  he  had  intended, 
but  return  and   teach   his  own    people  ;    cf.   Adamn.   i.   5.  '=8517; 

R^  f.  136'',  R-  {.  141''.  -  Memonia  T,  and  so  always.  '  terram  Miden- 

sium  R.  <  Ela  T.  "  quibus  T.  «  ille  M  T.  '  sunt  ipsi  T. 

*  boni   homines  T.  '  Here  S  §  18,  R'  R'  u.  s.  insert  a  story  how  Colman 

caused  wort  to  ferment  properly.  '"   =  S  §  19  ;  R'  136  "^;  a  leaf  is  lost  in  R^ 

at  this  point.     A  marginal  note  in  M  :  '  Britannorum  colera.*  ''  cum  a 

sancto  .  .  .  increparetur  R.  "  =  S  §  20  ;  R'  u.  s.  "  laborantibus 

manualiter  R.         "  Deo  om.  T.        "  hoc  die  hacque  hora  T. 


VITA  SANCTI   COLMANI  265 

Hibernia  erat  Rome  apud  sanctum  Gregorium  papam,  qui  venit  ad 
Hyberniam,  et  adiuit  sanctum  heremitam,  nomine  Colmanum  Dubh 
Chulynd ',  volens  habitare  cum  eo-.  Et  ait  ei  sanctus  Cohiianus 
Dubh  Chulynn  :  '  Vade,  fih,  ad  sanctum  Colmanum  Eia,  et  esto  cum 
eo  in  vita  sanctissima.  Ego  enim  ipse  non  exissem  ab  lohanne  ad 
Colmanum  Ela,  neque  a  Colmano  ad  lohannem  venissem,  iam  non 
contradicens^  Saluatori,  qui  dixit :  "  Non  surrexit  maior  lohanne^;" 
en  equales  eos  ego  habeo  in  prudentia,  sapiencia  et  castitate. 
Colmanus  quidem  Ela  lohannes  sanctorum  Hybernie  est'.'  Et  ille 
vir  sanctus  veniens  ad  sanctum  Colmanum  Ela,  suscepit  eum  sanctus 
cum  gaudio,  et  ille  narrauit  ei  de  obitu  sancti  Gregorii,  sicut  ipse 
prophetice  antea  predixit. 

xvi.  Fratres  °  sancti  Colmani  estiuo'  tempore  laborantes,  sudorem 
paciebantur  et  sitim,  et  dicebant  ad  invicem  :  '  Labore  et  tribulacionibus 
diuersis  affligimur',  et  nescimus  qualia  sunt  premia  futuri  seculi.' 
Volens  autem  sanctus  pater  Colmanus  consolari  eos  de  regno  Dei,  ait 
illis:  '  Vvltis  videre  regnum  Dei  in  carne  modo?'  Dixerunt  ei : 
'  Vere  volumus,  paten'  Tunc  vir  Dei  benedixit  oculos  eorum,  et 
lucide  gloriam  celi  et  amenitatem  angelorum  viderunt.  Illi  bene- 
dicentes  Deum,  et  gratias  agentes  :  '  Nemini  dixeritis,'  inquit  sanctus 
Colmanus, '  hanc  visionem  in  vita  mea.' 

xvii.  Venerunt'  aliquando  pauperes  ad  sanctum  Colmanum, 
querentes  elimosinam.  Vir  autem  Domini  non  aliud  tunc  habens 
nisi  vas  eneum  quo  capiti  et  manibus  aqua  fundebatur,  dedit  eis  ; 
et  ipsi  gratulanter  accipientes,  abierunt.  Hoc  videns  magister 
hospitalis  '"  narrauit  capcllano  "  sancti  Colmani.  Ipse  uero  magister 
admirans  abiit,  ut  videret  locum,  ubi  fuerat  vas.  Set  inuenit  ibi  a  Deo 
donatum  sancto  Colmano  aliud  vas  simile  priori ;  set  hoc  vas  a  Deo 
datum  melius  multum  erat,  quod  usque  hodie^in  monasterio  sancti 
Colmani  manet.  Et  pro  hoc  dono  sanctus  pater  cum  suis  gratias 
Christo  retulit. 

xviii.  Rediens  ''  aliquando  sanctus  pater  Colmanus  a  sinodo 
sanctorum  ad  monasterium  suum,  invenit  vnum  de  fratribus  mortuum 
hesterno  die,  nomine  Collanum  |  Obedientem.  Ipse  Collanus  propter  f.  131' 
maximam  humilitatem  et  obedientiam  suam  a  fratribus  uocabatur 
Obediens.  Et  pergens  sanctus  Colmanus  ad  locum  vbi  erant  fratres 
circa  corpus,  orauit  silencio  modicum  ;  et  postea  di.xit  coram  fratribus 

1  Dub   Culinn   T  ;    Dub  Cuilinn  S.  '^  cum  eo  om.  M.  *  -dices  T. 

*  Matt.  xi.  II  ;  S.  has  John  the  Evangelist.  '  est  oin.  M.  ^   =  S  §  2i  ; 

R'  u.  s.        '  festiuo  R.         *  nec  satis  sentimus  premia  futura,  presentem  tamen 
laborem  uidemus  S.  '  =  S  §  22  ;  R'  f.  136''.  "  dispensator  fratrum  R. 

"  capto  M  T  ;  it  might  also  be  expanded  '  capitulo  ',  i.  e.  the  chapter  of  monks, 
'2  hodie  manet,  etc.  T.         ''   =  S  §  25  ;  R'  u.  s. 


266  VITAE  SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

ad  mortuum  :  '  Surge,  frater  Obediens,  ad  me.'  Ilico  frater  Collanus 
surrexit  a  morte,  dicens:  '  Rogo  te,  pater  karissime,  in  Cliristi 
nomine,  ut  me  iterum  dimittas  modo  ad  regnum.  Dei  ire  ;  ibi  enim 
requiem  in  gloria  magna  inveni  apud  Deum.'  Audiens  sanctus 
Colmanus  talem  adiuracionem  ab  eo,  concessit  ei  remigrare  ad 
Christum  ;  et  accipiens  ille  sanctum  sacrificium  a  sancto  patre,  in 
pace  requieuit  ^ 

xix.  Erant^  aliquando  in  monasterio  sancti  Colmani  duo  pueri, 
quos  videns  vir  Dei  die  quadam,  vocauit'  ad  se  priorem  et  cellarium' 
monasterii,  et  ait  eis  secrete:  '  Illos  duos  pueros  mando  vobis,  ut  pa- 
scatis  eos  bonis  cibis  cotidie  largiter  secundum  posse  vestrum.'  De 
hoc  illi  admirantes,  prostrauerunt  se  ad  pedes  eius,  rogantes  ut  indi- 
caret  eis  causam  mandati  ilHus.  Sanctus  ait  eis :  '  Surgite  ;  iam 
reuelabo  vobis.  Vnus  ex  illis  filius  perdicionis  est,  et  breui  tempore 
infelicissime  in  seculo  viuet.  Et  ideo  non  prodest  ut  sub  regula  con- 
stringatur,  quia  pena  infernaHs  restat  ei.  Alter  vero  filius  vite  eterne 
est,  et  regni  celestis  particeps  ;  et  longeuus  et  sapiens  erit,  et  sanctus 
Dei,  et  ecclesiarum  Hybernie  adiutor  et  protector  erit ;  et  ipse  a 
iuuentute  sua  castigabit  se  piis  operibus.  Et  ideo  non  debet  graui 
labore  parcimonie  in  sua  puericia  occidi,  quia  multis '  in  senectute 
proficiet.'  Ipse  est  beatissimus  abbas,  cuius  nomen  vocatur  Dimma 
Dub. 

XX.  Alio  *  tempore  quidam  homo,  nomine  Cronanus,  demonio  ob- 
sessus,  qui  sepe  in  ignem  et  aquam  cadebat,  adductus  est  ad  sanctum 
Colmanum,  ut  curaret  eum  ;  cui  sanctus  Colmanus  ait :  '  Cronane,  vis 
ut  demon  a  te  recedat  ? '  Ille  tunc  habens  Dci  nutu  punctum  sensus 
sui,  coram  omnibus  dixit :  'Volo,  Domine.'  Ait  ei  sanctus  :  '  Si  iam 
facies  quod  dicam  tibi,  Sathanas  non  habebit  in  te  potestatem,  set  tu 
illi  dominaberis.'  Ille  dixit :  '  Libenter  faciam.'  Sanctus  Colmanus 
ait  ei :  '  Hec  est  medecina  tua  ;  id  est,  ut  nomen  Domini  lesu  Christi 
precedat  omne  verbum  in  ore  tuo.  Si  Iioc  diligenter  custodias,  demon 
tibi  non  nocebit ;  set  e  contrario  accipies  Spiritum  Sanctum.'  Ille 
homo  custodiens  pium  mandatum  sancti  Colmani,  eflectus  est  vir 
sanctus,  et  multas  virtutes  fecit '. 

xxi.  MoNACHi '  sancti  Colmani  edificauerunt  cellam  in  siccitate 
estatis  in  concursu  duoruin  fluminum.      Set  hyemali  tempore  facta 

'  Here  S  (not  R)  inserts  two  sections,  24,  25  ;  §  24  tells  how  Colman  inflicted 
blindness  on  his  brother,  because  '  palpebre  oculorum  ilhus  latenter  iacintino 
colore,  sicut  moris  est,  depicte  sunt '  ;  §  25  relates  the  same  incidcnt  which 
occurs  Car.  §§  xviii,  xix,  and  this  may  be  the  reason  of  M  T's  omission  here. 
2  =  S  §  26  ;  not  in  R  ;  this  section  is  printed  by  Colgan,  A.  S.  p.  16",  from  thc 
M  T  recension.  ^  invocauit  T.  ■*  yconomum  et  cocum  S.  ^  om.  M. 

"  =  S  §  27  ;  Ri  f.  137".  '  Here  S  §  28  (not  R)  has  a  furthcr  story  about 
St.  Carthach  or  Mochuta.         *  =  S  §  29 ;  R'  u.  s. 


VITA  SANCTI   COLMANI  267 

invndacione  pluuiali,  periclitabatur  cella  ab  aquis.  Monachi  vero 
timentes  impetuni  luei  fluminum,  miserunt  quosdam  ex  ipsis  ad 
sanctum  Colmanum,  ut  indicarent  ei  de  illo  periculo.  Sanctus  iam 
senior  audiens  illos,  ait  eis  :  '  Portate  baculum  meum  vobiscum,  et 
signate  cellam  vestram  bono  spacio  cuspite  eius  contra  flumina,  et 
credo  quod  lues  vobis  postea  non  nocebit.'  Monachi  ita  facientes, 
ab  illo  die  usque  hodie  lues  non  pertransiit  girum  |  baculi  sancti  f.  131  ^" 
Colmani  ad  illam  cellam.  Dei  nutu  flumina  suam  inundacionem  in 
alias  ripas  mittunt. 

xxii.  QuiD.\M '  homo  malus  ampul[l]am  sanctum  Colmani  senioris  - 
furatus  est,  et  duxit  eam  in  provinchiam  Mumenie.  Ille^  post  tempus 
retro  veniens  apprehensus  est  a  militibus  commitis  illius  plebis,  in  qua 
sanctus  senior  Colmanus  habitabat ;  et  duxerunt  illum,  ut  cruci- 
figeretur.  Hoc  audiens  sanctus  senior  Colmanus,  perrexit  ipse  cito 
ut  liberaret  illum.  Milites'  autem  iurantes  firmiter  dixerunt  ad 
sanctum  Dei:  '  Nisi  iste  ampul[l]am  sancti  nostri  monasterii  reddet 
nobis  modo,  morietur  sine  dubio.'  Hoc  audiens  sanctus  Colmanus, 
prostrauit  se  in  terram,  petens  Dei  auxilium.  Et  priusquam  vir  Dei 
oracionem  impleret,qui  stabant  viderunt  ampul[l]am  a  longe  peraera 
volantem  a  regione  Mumenensium,  et  cecidit  in  terram  coram  omnibus 
ante  virum  Dei.  Tunc  clamor  omnium  sanctitatem  sancti  patris 
Colmani  admirantes  in  laudem  Dei  ortus  est.  Et  sic  ille  miser 
liberatus  est  per  pietatem  beatissimi  senioris  Colmani ;  et  solutus 
liber  abiit,  gratias  agens. 

xxiii.  Erat' vir  nobilis  in  regione  Midhi"  sine  sobole,  vxor  enim 
illius  sterilis  erat.  Venit  ille  nobilis  aliquando  ad  sanctum  senem 
Colmanum,  querens  benedictionem  eius  ad  prolem  inveniendam. 
Cui  ait  sanctus  senex  :  '  Vxor  tua  post  annum  pariet  tibi  filium',  et 
ipse  uocabitur  Kiaranus*;  et  post  bonam  senectutem  apud  me 
nionachus  erit.'  Ille  ait  ad  sanctum  Colmanum  :  '  Ecce  ipsum  modo 
ofiero  tibi,  ut  sepeliatur  ipse  et  semen  suum  post  se  apud  te  usque 
ad  finem  seculi.'  Et  ille  filius  Kyaranus  laicus  fidelis,  iustus,  et 
bonus  atque  diues  fuit ',  et  genuit  claram  prolem ;  et  ipse  accipiebat 
sacrum  sacrificium  sollemnibus  diebus  de  manu  sancti  Colmani. 
Quadam  igitur  die  inimici  illius  Kiarani,  scientes  eum  fuisse  cum 
sancto  Colmano,  collegerunt  magnam  '"  turbam,  et  absconderunt  se 
in  via  qua  venturus  erat  ad  domum  suam,  ut  interficerent  eum.  Set 
veniens  Kiaranus  ad  locum  in  quo  erant  insidie  inimicorum,  ipse  et 
sui  apparuerunt  inimicis  clerici  cum  cappis  et  baculis  in  manibus. 

•   =  S  §  30  ;  R'  u.  s.  -  de  siio  crismali  S  add.  '  Quod  cum  audisset 

synodus  monasteriorum, comprehenderunt  furem  illum,  et  duxerunt  ad  mortem  S. 
*  sinodus  autem  dicebat  S.  ^  =  S  §  31  ;  not  in  R.  *  Midi  T.  '  filium 
tibi  T.        *  Keranus  T  ;  and  so  always.        ^  om.  T.        '"  in  magnam  T. 


268  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

Et  videntes  inimici  talem  habitum,  dimiserunt  eos  libere  abisse  sine 
interrogacione.  Benedictio  sancti^  senis  Colmani  hoc  illis  tuta- 
mentum  effecit.  Et  postquam  de  insidiis  Kieranus  cum  suis  ad 
tutum  locum  peruenit,  inimici  viderunt  eos  armatos  milites.  Tunc 
Kieranus  et  sui  iubilabant  in  laudem  Dei,  magnificantes  sanctitatem 
benedictionis  sancti  Colmani.  Illi  autem  inimici  cognoscentes  mira- 
culum  Dei  virtute  per  merita  sancti  Colmani  contigisse,  venerunt  ad 
sanctum  Colmanum,  et  egerunt  penitentiam  coram  eo,  quia  voluerunt 
in  die  sancto  virum  benedictionis  eius  occidere. 

xxiv.  Venit  ^  aliquando  sanctus  senex  Colmanus  ad  regem  Temorie 
'jEdh'  Slane ',  vt  virum  quem  rex  in  vinculis  habebat,  ab  eo  postu- 
laret.  In  illa  hora  in  tempore  estiuo  circa  tertiam  radius  sohs  per 
fenestram  palacii  splendebat  lucide ;  et  ait  rex  sancto  Colmano : 
'  Vere,  abba,  sicut  non  potes  hunc  radium  tenere  per  istam  fenestram, 
sicuti  modo  est,  usque  ad  vesperam,  sole  eunte  suum  cursum  ad 
f.  131 "  occassum,  sic  non  potes  soluere  uel  e"x"'ipere  |  queni  in  vinculis 
teneo.'  Colmanus  regi  respondit,  dicens  :  '  Si  tenuero  ita  radium, 
dabis  mihi  vinctum  ? '  Dixit  ei  rex  :  '  Vtique  dabo  tibi  eum  liberum.' 
Tunc  sanctus  Colmanus  in  Christi  nomine  signauit  radium  ;  et  stetit, 
splendens  ab  oriente  per  fenestram,  vsque  dum  sol  post  vesperam 
in  occidente  occubuit.  Hoc  rex  videns,  admiratus  est  cum  omnibus 
mirabilia  Dei  per  sanctos  suos,  et  tradidit  sancto  seni  Colmano  illuni 
virum  *  liberum  et  absolutum  *,  sicut  promisit ;  et  petiit  bencdi- 
ctionem  viri  sancti  humiliter. 

XXV.  Beatus"  senex  Colmanus  cantabat  cum  suis  fratribus  ympnum 
sanctissimi  Patricii,  arciepiscopi  Hybernie ;  et  beatus  Patricius  ante 
tempus  sancti  Colmani  multis  annis  migrauit  ad  Christum.  Venitque 
sanctus  Patricius  de  celo,  et  stetit  in  medio  fratrum  canentium'  suuni 
ympnum.  Et  videns  sanctus  Colmanus  solus  sanctum  Patricium 
ius[s]it  ter  cantare  ympnum.  Admirantesque  fratres,  vnus  senior  de 
ipsis  dixit  ad  sanctum  Colmanum  :  '  Adsunt  nobis  alia  spiritualia 
cantica  ;  cur  igitur  moramur  in  vno  tota  die?'  Sanctus  Colmanus 
ait  illi :  '  Vere,  beate  senior,  beatissimus  noster  patronus  Patricius 
stabat  in  medio  nostrum  benedicens  nos,  vsque  dum  audiuit  verba 
incrcpacionis  tue  ;  set  tunc  ilico  euanuit  ex  oculis  meis  ;  et  ideo  iussi 
ter  ympnum  cantari.'  Hoc  audiens  ille  senior,  displicuit  sibi,  et 
penitentiam  egit. 

xxvi.  Erat*  quidam  vir  nobilis  et  diues  de  genere  Neill,  cui  ali- 
quando  cecus  filius  natus  est ;  et  ille  homo',  nolens  suum  fihum  habere 

'  sanctissiini  T.  '^  =  S  §  32  ;  R' f.  137^  =>  Temorie  et  Slane  T.  '  om.M. 
^  absolutiim   et  liberum  T.  »   =  S   §  33  ;    R'  u.  s.  '  canensium  T. 

*   =  S  §  34  ;  R'  f.  137''.         '  materque  precepit  S  R. 


VITA   SANCTI   COLMANI  269 

sccum  propter  superbiam,  vni  seruo  de  pueris  suis  precepit,  vt  ilium 
infantem  occideret.  Ille  scruus  ilico  plorans,  infantulum,  ut  proiiceret 
cum  in  paludem  ad  mergendum,  portauit ;  set  omnipotens  Deus 
donauit  illi  infanti  ante  tcmpus  loquelam  suam  ad  ipsum  custo- 
dienduni.  Et  ipse  homini  se  portanti  in  via  dixit  :  '  O  homo,  quo 
vadisP'  Ille  ait :  'Vado  te  occidere.'  Ait  infantulus  :  'Nisi  peni- 
tentiam  egeris,  cito  reucrtens,  modo  moricris.  Viuus  iam  manebo 
ego  vsque  ad '  senectutem  gratia  Dei  per  sanctitatem  beati  Colmani 
Ela,  qui  custodit  me,  cui  alumpnus  et  discipulus  ero.'  Reuersus  ille 
ad  domum,  narrauit  hec  domino,  patri  infantis.  Pater  autem  adhuc 
manens  in  maHcia,  dixit :  '  Fantasma  est,  quod  audisti,  O  serue 
mollis.'  Et  ait  vni  de  ancillis  suis  minanter  :  '  Proiice  illum  infelicem 
in  palude,  ut  mergatur  -.'  Sic  iam  loqu[u]tus '  est  infans  prophetice  ad 
ancillam  sicut  ad  seruum.  Et  illa  timens ',  reuersa  est  ad  dominum 
suum,  narrans  ei  de  infante  sub  iuramento.  Tunc  ille  ait  :  '  Ego  ipse 
lioc  probabo.'  Veniensque  pater  illuc  cum  suis,  infans  asperius 
loqu[u]tus  '  est  ei.  Hoc  audiens  pater,  timuit  et  ipse  magis,  et  dixit : 
'  Ego  propter  te  non  moriar.'  lussitque  illum  reportari  ad  domum, 
et  nutriri,  donec  sanctus  Colmanus  veniret  ad  eum.  Deinde  venit 
sanctus  Colmanus  ad  illum,  et  ilico  dixit  patri  illius :  '  Male  et  stulte 
egisti,  dampnando  scruum  Dei  innocentem  ad  mortem  ;  ipse  enim 
melior  est  tota  prole  tua.'  Tunc  pater  amans  illum,  obtulit  eum 
sancto  Colmano  nutriendum  Deo.  Et  statim  baptizauit  sanctus  |  Col-  f-  131' 
manus  illum  infantem,  dans  ei  nomen  Cheallanum  ^  Postea  docuit 
eum  sacris  scripturis  et  bonis  moribus.  Et  ipse  erat  vir  sanctus  et 
sapiens,  doctor  multorum,  habens  gratiam  coram  Deo  et  hominibus, 
qui  uocatur  Chellanus  cecus". 

xxvii.  Latrones'  aliquando  de  provinchia  Laginensium  rapuerunt 
predam  a  fratribus  qui  erant  in  Cella  que  dicitur  Cluain  Cayn  ',  et 
fratres  nesciebant  vnde  erant  illi  latrones.  Hoc  videns  sanctus  pater 
Colmanus  spiritu,  ilico  venit  ad  illos  fratres,  dicens  eis :  '  Venite 
mecum,  et  ducam  vos  ad  locum  vbi  sunt  latrones  illi  qui  predam 
vestram  rapuerunt.'  Et  pergentes,  invenerunt  latrones  in  orientali 
plaga  Laginensium,  in  regione  Leys '  'vel  Lelas',  silicet  in  castello, 
quod  dicitur  Dun  Salach  '".  Negabantque  latrones  ilii  aspcre  multis 
verbis,  quod  nunquam  illam  predam  rapuerunt.  Tunc  ait  eis  sanctus 
senex  Colmanus :  '  Hodie  satis  negatis,  cras  videbimus  quid  facietis. 

'  oin.  M.  -  mergetur  M  T.  '  locutus  T.  *  Here  R-  resumes  after 

the  lacuna.  '  Chellanum  T.  '  Here  S  §  35  ;  R'  f.  137'',  R*f.  142",  insert 
an  account  how  Colman  renewed  the  contents  of  a  vessel  of  butter  which  had 
been  consumed.  '  =  S  §  36  ;  R^  R^u.s.  '  Chain  T;  Cluon  Cain  S  ;  Cluayn 
Caj'n  R.  In  T  and  M  there  is  a  marginal  note  by  the  original  scribe  :  '  Ista  cella 
Chiain   Cayn  est  iuxta   Dubliniam.'  '  Luigse  S;    Leis  'vel   Lelas '  T. 

'»  Salac  T 


270  VITAE   SANCTORVM   HIBERNIAE 

Relinquite  minas  vestras  et  procacitatem.'  In  sequenti  vero  nocte 
brachia  illorum  in  tumorem  atrum  versa  sunt,  et  viginti  quinque  ex 
ipsis  nimio  dolore  oppressi  sunt.  Crastino  autem  illi  confitentes 
culpam  suam  contra  famulos  Dei,  egerunt  penitentiam ;  et  predam 
diligenter  restituerunt,  petentes  sanitatem  suam.  Et  benedicens 
sanctus  senex  Colmanus  eos  sancto  signo,  ilico  sani  facti  sunt,  et 
glorificabant  Deum  in  sanctis  suis^. 

xxviii.  Aliquando  °  sanctus  senex  Colmanus  venit  ad  ciuitatem 
Cluain  Hyraird '',  et  intrauit  cenobium  sancti  Finniani,  et  inuenit 
fratres  illius  ieiunantes  causa  furti  monstrandi  Dei  gratia ',  quod 
factum  est  apud  eos.  Et  gauisi  sunt  fratres  illi  in  aduentu  sancti ' 
Colmani,  sperantes  furtum  illud  a  Deo  per  illum  ostendendum. 
Quibus  querelantibus,  sanctus  senex  Colmanus  dixit :  'Sit  nobis  et 
vobis,  karissimi  fratres,  vna  eademque  refectio  hac  nocte,  et  cras " 
ostendam  vobis  furtum  vestrum  ;  set  personam,  que  illud  abscondit, 
non  indicabo  vobis,  ne  frater  inde  scandalizetur''.'  Et  totum  factum 
est  ita.  Audientes  et  videntes  talia,  Christo  sanctificatori  sanctorum 
laudes  benedictionis  dederunt  *. 

xxix.  Veniens  "  quodam  tempore  sanctus  pater  Colmanus  ad  mona- 
sterium  sancti  Kieranii"  in  ciuitate  Cluain  meic  Noys",  rogatus  est 
ipse  a  beato  patre  illius  loci  cum  fratribus  suis,  ut  predicaret  clero 
et  populo  in  templo.  Et  accedens  sanctus  senex  Colmanus  ad 
euangelium,  vidit  demonem  iuxta  euangeliuni,  dixitque  fratribus : 
'  Oremus,  fratres.  Ecce  demon  adheret  euangelio,  ut  impediret  opus 
Dei.'  Benedicensque  vir  Dei  locum,  statim  demon  vlulans  fugit. 
Predicante  iam  sanctissimo  sene  Colmano,  mirabilis  compunctio 
corda  illorum  tetigit,  et  lacrimabilis  penitentia  tunc  apparuit  in  eis  ; 
et  per  multum  tempus  in  illa  ciuitate  dies  ille'^  in  vnoquoque  anno" 
festiuus  erat,  donec  defecerunt  illi  qui  audierunt  illam  predicacionem, 
nominantes  illum  diem,  diem  predicacionis  Colmani  Ela. 

XXX.  QuEDAM^*  sancta  virgo,  nomine  Comna^",  venit  ad  sanctum 
Colmanum,  rogans  eum  ut  ueniret  secum  ad  quosdam  cognatos  suos 

1  Here  S  has  four  additional  sections,  37-40,  of  which  38-40  are  also  in 
R^  i\  138*^,  R"  f.  142":  (rt)  how  Colman  handled  a  glowing  stone  from  the 
furnace  ;  (6)  how  Colman  by  prayer  caused  a  tempest,  which  detained  St.  Molua 
at  L3'naliy  ;  (r )  how  Colman  on  his  way  to  Ferns  was  detained  at  St.  Molua's 
monastery  (ClonfertmuUoe)  by  a  fire  which  he  miraculously  cxtinguished ; 
(d)  liow  he  joined  St.  Maedoc  of  Ferns  in  praying  successfully  for  the  soul  of 
Brandub  of  Leinster,  the  loss  of  which  was  inferred  from  the  fact  that  no  grass 
wouldgrowuponhis  grave.  ^  =S§4i;  not  in  R.  ^  IrardT.  '  ieiunantes 
de  causa  hnee  furate  S.  ^  patrisTorff/.  "  cras  lineam  quam  queritis  dabo  .S. 
'  -zatur  M  T.  '  Here  S  §  42  (  not  R)  tells  how  Colman  wrote  a  Psalter  and  the 
Acts  with  miraculous  rapidity  ;  but  on  his  being  interrupted  the  inspiration 
ceased.  '■>   =  S  §  43  ;  not  in  R  ;  veniens  bis  T.  ">  Ker-  T.  ^'  Cloin 

maccu  Nois  S.  1-  illa  M  T.  "  in  fine  anni  S.  "  =  S  §  44  ;  R'  f.  138  ^ 
R"  f.  142  "^.         1°  Canina  S. 


VITA  SANCTI   COLMANI  271 

liberandos,  quos  dux  Corpri '  volebat  redigere  ad  suum  seruicium 
non  recte.  Et  invenerunt  in  via  prepositum  |  ducis  ducentem  illos  f.  132» 
cognatos  ad  ducem.  Erat  petra  multum  nocens  hominibus  ct 
iumentis  in  via  illa  ;  quam  cum  ita  vidisset  sanctus  Colmanus,  iussit 
ei  in  Christi  creatoris  nomine  ire  ad  alium  locum  de  via.  Et  ilico  , 
petra  illa  coram  omni  turba  auolauit  de  uia,  et  stetit  in  loco  a  via 
rcmoto.  IIoc  cum  admiracione  magna  prepossitus-  ille  narrauit 
domino  suo  duci.  Set  tamen  dux  corde  durus  et  immitis  non  audiuit 
.sanctum  Colmanum  se  rogantem  ;  et  repentino  nutu  dux  superbus 
cecus  et  surdus  etTectus  est,  et  nichil  potuit  viderc  uel  audire.  Tunc 
agens  ipse  penitentiam,  dedit  firmam  libertatem  illis  hominibus 
semper.  Videns  sanctus  Colmanus  satisfactionem  illius,  et  populum 
pro  eo  rogantem,  benedixit  oculos  eius  et  aures,  et  ilico  audiuit  et 
vidit.  Et  benedixerunt  omnes  Christum  diuersa  miracula  per  sanctos 
suos  agentem. 

xxxi.  Inde  '  vcnit  sanctus  Colmanus  cum  sancta  illa  uirgine  ad 
cellam  suam  ;  et  inucnit  ibi  cenam  paratam  sibi  apud  iilam  sanctam. 
Set  mouentes  discipuli  incaute  dolium  in  quo  erat  ceruisia',  effu- 
derunt  omnem  liquorem.  Videns  sanctus  Colmanus  inde  beatam 
Comnam  cum  suis  tristem,  iussit  dolium  aqua  impleri ',  et  sibi 
propinari.  Et  ilico  nutu  Dei  illa  aqua  conversa  est  in  optimam 
ceruisiam''.  Hoc  videntes  sancti,  Christo  largitori  omnium  bonorum 
gratias  cum  suis  egerunt. 

x.xxii.  Iter  *  agens  sanctus  Colmanus  in  regionibus  Connacthorum 
vidit  ministerium  angelorum  super  aliquam  petram,  et  frequentabant 
angeli  illam  petram.  Et  interrogans  sanctus  Colmanus  incolas  illius 
terre  de  ipsa  petra,  dixerunt  ci  quod  capud  sancte  puelle  a  gentilibus 
interfecte  super  ipsam  petram  olim  possitum,  guttas  sanguinis  di- 
stillauit ',  et  hoc  fuit  misterium  sanctitatis  eius.  Tunc  illis  uir  Dei  de 
ministerio  angelorum  super  illam  petram  reuelans,  iussit  eam  portari 
ad  ecclesiam  propinquam  ;  et  est  ibi  usque  hodie  in  loco  honorifico 
in  cimiterio ;  et  uocatur  petra  puelle,  per  quam  miracula  Christi 
monstrantur. 

xxxiii.  Alio'  die  pergens  sanctus  Colmanus  in  eadem  prouinchia 
Connachtorum '  errauit  per  deuia;  et  nesciens  quo  iret,  dixit  disci- 
pulis  suis :  '  Cantemus  psalmum  Beaii  iiinnacidali  [iit  via]  ">.'  Et 
cantantes  psalmum,  ilico  invenerunt  viam,  que  duxit  eos  ad  domum 
boni   viri,  misericordis  et   hospitalis,  qui   suscepit  eos   cum   magna 

'   Brandanus  rex,  filius  Carbri  S  R.  -  prepositus  aut  balliuus  regis  R 

=   =  S  9  45;  Rif.  i38<-,  R- f.  142^        <ser-T.       ^  implere  T.       «   =  S  §  46; 
not   in   R.  '  ut  moris  erat   in   illo  tempore   interficere    feminas    S    add. 

«   =  S  §  47  :  R.  u.  s.  s  Connacth-  T.  '»  Ps.  cxviii.  i  ;  M  T  om.  in  via, 

though  the  words  are  clearly  necessary  to  the  sense. 


272  VITAE   SANCTORVM    HIBERNIAE 

caritate,  et  benigne  ministrauit  eis  necessaria.  Et  illa  nocte  vir  ille 
dixit  ad  sanctum  Colmanum  et  ad  discipulos  suos  :  '  O  servi  Dei, 
ecce  ego  cum  senior  sum ',  non  habeo  fratrem  necque  filium,  nisi 
hunc  paraliticum,  cecum,  et  sine  naribus.'  Mane  autem  orans 
sanctus  Colmanus,  interrogauit  si  prope  fons  esset.  Et  dixit  ille 
paterfamilias :  '  Domine,  non  habemus  hic  prope  aquam.'  Ait  ei 
sanctus :  '  lube  terram  prope  fodi,  vbi  volueris  fontem  habere.'  Et 
facta  fossa,  fons  lucidus  erupit.  Aitque  sanctus  Colmanus  illi 
Iiomini :  '  Laua  filium  tuum  in  ipsa  aqua.'  Et  lauato  puero,  validus 
corpore  et  sanus  sensibus  ipse  de  fonte  surrexit.  Hoc  viso,  omnes 
repleti  sunt  gaudio,  tam  propter  aquam,  quam  propter  sanitatem 
pueri  -. 

132 1'  xxxiv.  Quidam'  vir  et  uxor  sua  |  adduxerunt  filium  suum  snrdum 
et  mutum  ad  sanctum  Colmanum,  ut  in  Dei  nomine  curaret  eum. 
Videns  sanctus  Colmanus  illum  puerulum,  dixit  ei :  '  Accede  ad  me, 
fili,  huc*.'  Ille  ilico  audiens,  et  habens^  nutu  diuino  loquelam  per 
sanctitatem  viri  Dei,  respondit,  dicens  :  '  Ego  ad  te  veniam,  domine. 
Omne  enim,  quod  iubes  fieri,  benedictum  est.'  Postea  benedicens 
illuni  vir  Dei,  sanus  rediit  cum  parentibus  suis. 

XXXV.  CuM  °  beatissimus  senex  Colmanus  vita  presenti  huius  seculi 
lassus  esset,  desiderabat  dissolui  corpore,  et  esse  cum  Christo.  Et 
pro  hoc  uoto'  perrexit  ad  ciuitatem  sancti  Finniani'  Cluain  Hyraird ', 
ut  ibi  iuxta  reliquias  beatissimi  patris  Finniani  peticionem  suam 
causa  migrandi  de  hoc  seculo  rogaret.  Dormientibus  igitur  omnibus, 
sanctus  Colmanus  silencio  noctis  solus  perrexit  ad  basilicam,  in 
qua  sanctus  pater  Finnianus  iacuit;  et  stans  ante  illam  ecclesiam 
firmissime  clausam  (raro  enim  pro  magna  re  sanctis  viris  illa 
apperiebatur),  dixit :  '  O  sanctissime  Finniane,  aperi  mihi  conseruo 
tuo  in  Deo.'  Ilico  aperiens  sanctus  Finnianus^"  basilicam,  dixit  ei 
sanctus  Colmanus  humili  prece  :  '  Rogo  te,  pater  sancte,  ut  pro 
me  Dominum  depreceris,  ut  in  hoc  anno  ego  ad  celum  vadam.' 
Sanctus  Finnianus  respondit  ei,  dicens :  '  Precem  tuam  audiuit  Deus  ; 
in  hoc  iam  anno  ad  regnum  Christi  ibis.'  Postea  salutantes  se  inuicem 
sancti,  et  Christo  benedicentes,  sanctus  Colmanus  de  basilica  ad 
hospicium  suum  rediit ;  et  crastino  die  ad  suum  clarum  monaste- 
rium  reuersus  est  gaudens.  Interrogantes  autem"  sancti  seniores 
eum"*  de  hylaritate  sua,  ipse  indicauit  cis  que  diximus  ;  et  imperavit 
eis  ne  cui  dicerent  in  vita  eius. 

'  According  to  S  R  the  whole  faraily  had  died  of  the  plague  '  que  in  hoc 
tempore  erat '.  ^  pueri  om.  T.  ^   ^  S  §  48 ;  Ri  f.  138'^,  R^  f.  142''. 

*  dixit  :  *  Occide,  fih,  vermes  quos  uideris  in  tunica  mea'  S.  ^  habens  oni.  M. 

•^  =  S  §  49  ;  R'  f.  138 '',  R"  f.  142''.  '  votum  T.  '  Fini-  T,  and  so  always. 
"  Irard  T.  '"  uel  ipse  Fynnianus  uel  angelus  eius  R.  "  autem  om.  T. 

'*  eum  sancti  seniores  T. 


VITA  SANCTI   COLMANI  273 

xxxvi.  CuM  '  iam  appropinquasset  tempus  egressionis  sanctissimi 
Colmani  de  hoc  seculo,  signum  celeste  datum  est  ei ;  id  est  crux 
ignita  apparuit  in  aere  supra  cellam  eius.  Videntes  fratres  signum 
ignotum,  timuerunt  multum.  Quibus  ait  sanctus  pater  Colmanus: 
'  Nolitc  tinierc,  filii  mei  ;  hoc  est  iam  signum  exitus  mei.'  Adueniente 
iam  exitus  tempore  beatissimi  patris  nostri,  Colmani  Ela,  et  cum  esset 
ipse  corpore  infirmus,  venit  ad  eum  visitandum  a  sua  ciuitate,  Rathen, 
sanctus  episcopus  Mochuda^,  et  alii  sancti  qui  erant  in  circuitu.  Ait 
eis  sai.ctus  Colmanus  :  '  Scitote,  fratres  karissimi  in  Christo,  quia  hee 
peticiones  sunt  quas  mihi  Dominus  meus  donauit :  videiicet,  ut  qui- 
cumque  fuerit  sepultus  in  leuiciana  reliquiarum  mearum,  resurget  ad 
requiem  sempiternam  ;  et  quicumque  rogauerit  me  in  hora  exitus  sui, 
habeat  uitam  eternam  ;  et  si  quis  diem  obitus  mei  venerauerit,  miseri- 
cordiam  Christi  consequetur^.'  Hiis  dictis,  inter  chorum  sanctorum 
virorum  sanctissimus  senex  Colmanus  vi  Kal.  Octobris*  feliciter  ad 
Christum  emisit  spiritum.  Honore^  digno  in  suo  claro  monasterio, 
Land  Eia,  beatissimum  eius  corpusculum  a  multis  viris  sanctis  humo 
traditum  est. 

xxxvii.  Et  cito  "  post  obitum  sancti  patris  Colmani  per  suassionem 
dyaboli,  pessimi  latrunculi  occiderunt  vnum  de  monachis  eius.  Ipse 
iam  frater  ministrabat  artificibus  edificantibus  ecclesiam  circa  reli- 
quias  sancti  Colmani.  Cum  esset  corpus  iilius  plenum  cruore  ad 
monasterium  ductum,  possuerunt  fratres  baculum  sancti  Colmani 
super  eum  ;  et  statim  ille  surrexit  viuus  et  sanus,  |  et  postea  diebus  f.  132"^ 
pluribus  vixit.  Post  aliquantulum  vero  teinporis  spatium  sanctus 
Colmanus  in  visione  quibusdam'  viris  sanctis  apparuit,  et  precepit  eis, 
ut  reliquie*  sue  eleuarentur  de  sepulcro,  ne  vlterius  absconderentur  in 
terra.  Deinde,  collecta  synodo  sanctorum  de  diuersis  Jocis,  eleuate 
sunt  reliquie  sanctissime  beati  patris  nostri  Colmani,  et  possite  sunt 
cum  magno  honore  a  sanctis  viris  in  ornato  scrinio  post  miracula 
patrata',  multi  in  psalmis  et  ympnis  et  canticis  spiritualibus  laudantes 
et  benedicentes  sanctam  Trinitatem_  Patrem  et  Filium  et  Spiritum 
Sanctum,  cui  est  honor  et  gloria  atque  potestas,  in  secula  seculorum. 
Amen. 

ExPLICIT   VITA   SANCTI   CoLMANI  '" 
ABBATIS 

'   =  S  §  50  ;  R  u.  s.  -  Kartacus  [Karracus  R^]  qui  et  Mocucdu  dicitur  R. 

'  S  and  R  omit  the  first  petition  ;  while  S  gives  as  tlie  third  :   '  et  si  in  hac  in- 
sula  sapientia  defecerit,   inueniatur  hic  sapiens*.  *  ?  Nouembris  T  m.  pr. 

5  honorifice  T.  *=    =    S    5§   51,   52;    K^  138'',    R^  143.  '  quibus   T. 

*  requie  T.  m.  pr,  ^  -ti  T.  '"  Colmani  o»:.  T.     Colmani  Ela,  cuius 

meritis  deleatur  culpa  scriptoris  R-;  no  explicit  in  R'. 


OXFORD 

PRINTED   AT   THE  CLARENDON    PRESS 

BY   HORACE   HART,   M.A. 

PRINTER   TO   THE   UNIVERSITY 


<3^ 


CARI 


UNI* 


^OBARTS 


'HJ^^LmARy 


DECi 


fl  "^non 


BX 

4659 

I7VM7 

1910 

T.l 

C.l 

ROBA 


-'4t:to^ *.  I 


